


Tensor product




Tensor product

In mathematics, the tensor product, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , may be applied in different contexts to vectors, matrices, tensors, vector spaces, algebras, topological vector spaces, and modules, among many other structures or objects. In each case the significance of the symbol is the same: the freest bilinear operation. In some contexts, this product is also referred to as outer product. The term "tensor product" is also used in relation to monoidal categories. The 
 
 
 
  variant of 
 
 
 
  is used in control theory.
Tensor product of vector spaces
The tensor product of two vector spaces

 
  and 
 
 
 
  over a field

 
  is another vector space over 
 
 
 
 . It is denoted , or 
 
 
 
  when the underlying field 
 
 
 
  is understood.
Prerequisite: the free vector space
The definition of 
 
 
 
  requires the notion of the free vector space

 
  on some set

 
 . The elements of the vector space 
 
 
 
  are formal sums of elements of 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in a given field 
 
 
 
 . A formal sum is an expression written in the form of a sum in which no actual arithmetic operations can be carried out. For example 
 
 
 
  is a formal sum, and 
 
 
 
  is a formal sum  with no restrictions on values of 
 
 
 
  (versus the usual case where 
 
 

Addition of formal sums is defined as follows: if 
 
 
 
 ,  cannot be simplified. If 
 
 
 
 , then .
Scalar multiplication of formal sums is defined as follows: If 
 
 
 
  is in the field 
 
 
 
 , then  .
The dimension of the vector space equals the number of elements in 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Given two vector spaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  over a field 
 
 
 
 , the tensor product 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , denoted as 
 
 
 
  is defined as the vector space whose elements and operations are constructed as follows:
From the cartesian product

 
 , the free vector space 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  is formed. The vectors of 
 
 
 
  are then defined to be the equivalence classes of 
 
 
 
 
  under the following equivalence relations:



The operations of 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the map of vector addition 
 
 
 
  and scalar multiplication 
 
 
 
  are defined to be the respective operations  and  from 
 
 
 
 , acting on any representatives


 
  in the involved equivalence classes outputting the one equivalence class of the result.






The result is independent of which representatives of the involved classes have been chosen. In other words, the operations are well-defined.
In other words, the tensor product 
 
 
 
  is defined as the quotient space

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the subspace of 
 
 
 
  consisting of the equivalence class of the zero element, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , under the equivalence relation of above. The following expression explicitly gives the subspace 
 
 
 
 
 :



In the quotient, where 
 
 
 
 
  is mapped to the zero vector, the following equalities,


 
  all hold (unlike in 
 
 
 
 ), which is exactly what is desired. In these latter expressions, the , etc, are images in the quotient of vectors in the free product under the quotient map. Usually, some other notation is employed for them, see below.
Notation
Elements of 
 
 
 
 
  are often referred to as tensors, although this term refers to many other related concepts as well.1 If 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
 , then the equivalence class of 
 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
 , which is called the tensor product of v with w. In physics and engineering, this use of the 
 
 
 
  symbol refers specifically to the outer product operation; the result of the outer product 
 
 
 
  is one of the standard ways of representing the equivalence class 
 
 
 
 .2 An element of 
 
 
 
 
  that can be written in the form 
 
 
 
  is called a pure or simple tensor. In general, an element of the tensor product space is not a pure tensor, but rather a finite linear combination of pure tensors. For example, if  and  are linearly independent, and  and  are also linearly independent, then  cannot be written as a pure tensor. The number of simple tensors required to express an element of a tensor product is called the tensor rank (not to be confused with tensor order, which is the number of spaces one has taken the product of, in this case 2; in notation, the number of indices), and for linear operators or matrices, thought of as 
 
 
 
  tensors (elements of the space ), it agrees with matrix rank.
Dimension
Given bases  and  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively, the tensors  form a basis for 
 
 
 
 
 . The dimension of the tensor product therefore is the product of dimensions of the original spaces; for instance  will have dimension 
 
 
 
 .
Tensor product of linear maps
The tensor product also operates on linear maps between vector spaces. Specifically, given two linear maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  between vector spaces, the tensor product of the two linear maps

 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a linear map


 
  defined by



In this way, the tensor product becomes a bifunctor from the category of vector spaces to itself, covariant in both arguments.3
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both injective, surjective, or continuous then 
 
 
 
 
  is, respectively, injective, surjective, continuous.
By choosing bases of all vector spaces involved, the linear maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be represented by matrices. Then, the matrix describing the tensor product 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker product of the two matrices. For example, if 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  above are all two-dimensional and bases have been fixed for all of them, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are given by the matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, then the tensor product of these two matrices is



The resultant rank is at most 4, and the resultant dimension 16. Here rank denotes the tensor rank (number of requisite indices), while the matrix rank counts the number of degrees of freedom in the resulting array.
A dyadic product is the special case of the tensor product between two vectors of the same dimension.
Universal property
 The tensor product as defined above is a universal property. In this context, this means that the tensor product is uniquely defined, up to isomorphism: there is only one tensor product. In the context of linear algebra and vector spaces, the maps in question are required to be linear maps. The tensor product of vector spaces, as defined above, satisfies the following universal property: there is a bilinear map (i.e., linear in each variable 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) 
 
 
 
  such that given any other vector space 
 
 
 
  together with a bilinear map 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique linear map 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . In this sense, 
 
 
 
  is the most general bilinear map that can be built from 
 
 
 
 . In particular, this implies that any spaces with such a (uniquely defined) tensor product are examples of symmetric monoidal categories, as this is the defining characteristic of the category. Uniqueness of the tensor product means that for any other bilinear map 
 
 
 
  with the above property there is an isomorphism 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  holds.
This characterization can simplify proving statements about the tensor product. For example, the tensor product is symmetric: that is, there is a canonical isomorphism:


 
  To construct, say, a map from left to right, it suffices, by the universal property, to give a bilinear map 
 
 
 
 . This is done by mapping 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Constructing a map in the opposite direction is done similarly, as is checking that the two linear maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are inverse to one another.
Similar reasoning can be used to show that the tensor product is associative, that is, there are natural isomorphisms


 
  Therefore, it is customary to omit the parentheses and write .
Tensor powers and braiding
Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-negative integer. The 
 
 
 
 th tensor power of the vector space 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -fold tensor product of 
 
 
 
  with itself. That is



A permutation

 
  of the set  determines a mapping of the 
 
 
 
 th Cartesian power of 
 
 



 
  defined by



Let


 
  be the natural multilinear embedding of the Cartesian power of 
 
 
 
  into the tensor power of 
 
 
 
 . Then, by the universal property, there is a unique isomorphism


 
  such that



The isomorphism  is called the braiding map associated to the permutation 
 
 
 
 .
Product of tensors
For non-negative integers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  a 
 
 
 
 -tensor on a vector space 
 
 
 
  is an element of


 
  Here  is the dual vector space (which consists of all linear maps

 
  from 
 
 
 
  to the ground field 
 
 
 
 ).
There is a product map, called the (tensor) product of tensors


 
  It is defined by grouping all occurring "factors" 
 
 
 
  together: writing  for an element of 
 
 
 
  and  for elements of the dual space,



Picking a basis of 
 
 
 
  and the corresponding dual basis of , 
 
 
 
  is endowed with a natural basis (this basis is described in the article on Kronecker products). In terms of these bases, the components of a (tensor) product of two (or more) tensors can be computed. For example, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two covariant tensors of rank 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively (i.e. 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 ), then the components of their tensor product are given by


4 Thus, the components of the tensor product of two tensors are the ordinary product of the components of each tensor. Another example: let 
 
 
 
  be a tensor of type 
 
 
 
  with components , and let 
 
 
 
  be a tensor of type 
 
 
 
  with components . Then


 
  and



Relation to dual space
A particular example is the tensor product of some vector space 
 
 
 
  with its dual vector space  (which consists of all linear maps

 
  from 
 
 
 
  to the ground field 
 
 
 
 ). In this case, there is a natural "evaluation" map


 
  which on elementary tensors is defined by


 
  The resulting map


 
  is called tensor contraction (for 
 
 
 
 ).
On the other hand, if 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional, there is a map in the other direction (called coevaluation)


 
  where  is a basis of 
 
 
 
 , and  is its dual basis. The interplay of evaluation and coevaluation map can be used to characterize finite-dimensional vector spaces without referring to bases.5
Tensor product vs. Hom
Given three vector spaces 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  the tensor product is linked to the vector space of all linear maps, as follows:


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the 
 
 
 
 -vector space of all linear maps. This is an example of adjoint functors: the tensor product is "left adjoint" to Hom.
Adjoint representation
The tensor 
 
 
 
  may be naturally viewed as a module for the Lie algebra

 
  by means of the diagonal action: for simplicity let us assume 
 
 
 
 , then, for each 
 
 
 
 ,



where  in  is the transpose of 
 
 
 
 , that is, in terms of the obvious pairing on ,


 
 .
There is a canonical isomorphism 
 
 
 
  given by



Under this isomorphism, every 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  may be first viewed as an endomorphism of 
 
 
 
  and then viewed as an endomorphism of 
 
 
 
 . In fact it is the adjoint representation

 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
Tensor products of modules over a ring
The tensor product of two modules

 
  and 
 
 
 
  over a commutative ring

 
  is defined in exactly the same way as the tensor product of vector spaces over a field:


 
  where now 
 
 
 
  is the free 
 
 
 
 -module generated by the cartesian product and 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -module generated by the same relations as above.
More generally, the tensor product can be defined even if the ring is non-commutative (
 
 
 
 ). In this case 
 
 
 
  has to be a right-
 
 
 
 -module and 
 
 
 
  is a left-
 
 
 
 -module, and instead of the last two relations above, the relation


 
  is imposed. If 
 
 
 
  is non-commutative, this is no longer an 
 
 
 
 -module, but just an abelian group.
The universal property also carries over, slightly modified: the map  defined by 
 
 
 
 
  is a middle linear map (referred to as "the canonical middle linear map".6); that is,7 it satisfies:



The first two properties make 
 
 
 
  a bilinear map of the abelian group

 
 . For any middle linear map 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , a unique group homomorphism 
 
 
 
  of  satisfies 
 
 
 
 , and this property determines 
 
 
 
  within group isomorphism. See the main article for details.
Computing the tensor product
For vector spaces, the tensor product 
 
 
 
  is quickly computed since bases of 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  immediately determine a basis of 
 
 
 
 , as was mentioned above. For modules over a general (commutative) ring, not every module is free. For example, 
 
 
 
  is not a free abelian group (= 
 
 
 
 -module). The tensor product with 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  More generally, given a presentation of some 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
 , that is, a number of generators  together with relations 
 
 
 
 , with , the tensor product can be computed as the following cokernel:


 
  Here  and the map is determined by sending some 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
 th copy of  to  (in ). Colloquially, this may be rephrased by saying that a presentation of 
 
 
 
  gives rise to a presentation of . This is referred to by saying that the tensor product is a right exact functor. It is not in general left exact, that is, given an injective map of 
 
 
 
 -modules , the tensor product


 
  is not usually injective. For example, tensoring the (injective) map given by multiplication with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  yields the zero map 
 
 
 
 , which is not injective. Higher Tor functors measure the defect of the tensor product being not left exact. All higher Tor functors are assembled in the derived tensor product.
Tensor product of algebras
Let 
 
 
 
  be a commutative ring. The tensor product of 
 
 
 
 -modules applies, in particular, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are 

 
 -algebras. In this case, the tensor product  is an 
 
 
 
 -algebra itself by putting


 
  For example,



A particular example is when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are fields containing a common subfield 
 
 
 
 . The tensor product of fields is closely related to Galois theory: if, say, 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is some irreducible polynomial with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 , the tensor product can be calculated as


 
  where now 
 
 
 
  is interpreted as the same polynomial, but with its coefficients regarded as elements of 
 
 
 
 . In the larger field 
 
 
 
 , the polynomial may become reducible, which brings in Galois theory. For example, if 
 
 
 
  is a Galois extension of 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  is isomorphic (as an 
 
 
 
 -algebra) to the .
Other examples of tensor products
Tensor product of sheaves of modules
Tensor product of Hilbert spaces
Topological tensor product
Tensor product of graded vector spaces
Tensor product of quadratic forms
Tensor product of multilinear maps
Given multilinear maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  their tensor product is the multilinear function



Tensor product of graphs
It should be mentioned that, though called "tensor product", this is not a tensor product of graphs in the above sense; actually it is the category-theoretic product in the category of graphs and graph homomorphisms. However it is actually the Kronecker tensor product of the adjacency matrices of the graphs. Compare also the section Tensor product of linear maps above.
Monoidal categories
A general context for tensor product is that of a monoidal category.
Applications
Exterior and symmetric algebra
Two notable constructions in linear algebra can be constructed as quotients of the tensor product: the exterior algebra and the symmetric algebra. For example, given a vector space V, the exterior product


 
  is defined as


 
  Note that when V's underlying field does not have characteristic 2, then this definition is equivalent to


 
  The image of 
 
 
 
  in the exterior product is usually denoted 
 
 
 
  and satisfies, by construction, 
 
 
 
 . Similar constructions are possible for 
 
 
 
  (n factors), giving rise to 
 
 
 
 , the n-th exterior power of V. The latter notion is the basis of differential n-forms.
The symmetric algebra is constructed in a similar manner:


 
  That is, in the symmetric algebra two adjacent vectors (and therefore all of them) can be interchanged. The resulting objects are called symmetric tensors.
Tensor product of line bundles
Tensor product in programming
Array programming languages
Array programming languages may have this pattern built in. For example, in APL the tensor product is expressed as 
 
 
 
  (for example 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ). In J the tensor product is the dyadic form of */ (for example a */ b or ' a */ b */ c').
Note that J's treatment also allows the representation of some tensor fields, as a and b may be functions instead of constants. This product of two functions is a derived function, and if a and b are differentiable, then a */ b is differentiable.
However, these kinds of notation are not universally present in array languages. Other array languages may require explicit treatment of indices (for example, MATLAB), and/or may not support higher-order functions such as the Jacobian derivative (for example, Fortran/APL).
See also

Dyadic product
Extension of scalars
Multilinear subspace learning
Tensor algebra
Tensor contraction
Topological tensor product
Monoidal category

Notes
References



.





"
Category:Binary operations Category:Bilinear operators



See Tensor or Tensor (intrinsic definition).
This similar to how the engineering use of "
 
 
 
 " specifically returns the remainder, one of the many elements of the $\pmod n$ equivalence class.

Analogous formulas also hold for contravariant tensors, as well as tensors of mixed variance. Although in many cases such as when there is an inner product defined, the distinction is irrelevant.
See Compact closed category.






