


Borsuk–Ulam theorem




Borsuk–Ulam theorem

In mathematics, the Borsuk–Ulam theorem (BUT), states that every continuous function from an n-sphere into Euclidean n-space maps some pair of antipodal points to the same point. Here, two points on a sphere are called antipodal if they are in exactly opposite directions from the sphere's center.
Formally: if 
 
 
 
  is continuous then there exists an 
 
 
 
  such that
 
 
 
 .
The case 
 
 
 
  can be illustrated by saying that there always exist a pair of opposite points on the earth's equator with the same temperature. The same is true for any circle. This assumes the temperature varies continuously.
The case 
 
 
 
  is often illustrated by saying that at any moment, there is always a pair of antipodal points on the Earth's surface with equal temperatures and equal barometric pressures.
BUT has several equivalent statements in terms of odd functions. Recall that 
 
 
 
  is the n-sphere and 
 
 
 
  is the n-ball:

If 
 
 
 
  is a continuous odd function, then there exists an 
 
 
 
  such that
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a continuous function which is odd on 
 
 
 
  (the boundary of 
 
 
 
 ), then there exists an 
 
 
 
  such that
 
 
 
 .

History
According to , the first historical mention of the statement of BUT appears in . The first proof was given by , where the formulation of the problem was attributed to Stanislaw Ulam. Since then, many alternative proofs have been found by various authors, as collected by .
Equivalent statements
The following statements are equivalent to BUT.1
With odd functions
A function 
 
 
 
  is called odd (aka antipodal or antipode-preserving) if for every 
 
 

 
 .
BUT is equivalent to the following statement: A continuous odd function from an n-sphere into Euclidean n-space has a zero. PROOF:

If BUT is correct, then it is specifically correct for odd functions, and for an odd function, 
 
 
 
  iff 
 
 
 
 . Hence every odd continuous function has a zero.
For every continuous function 
 
 
 
 , the following function is continuous and odd
 
 
 
 . If every odd continuous function has a zero, then 
 
 
 
  has a zero, and there, 
 
 
 
 . Hence BUT is correct.

With retractions
Define a retraction as a function 
 
 
 
 .
BUT is equivalent to the following claim: there is no continuous odd retraction.
PROOF: If BUT is correct, then every continuous odd function from 
 
 
 
  must include 0 in its range. However, 
 
 
 
  so there cannot be a continuous odd function whose range is 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, if BUT is incorrect, then there is a continuous odd function 
 
 
 
  with no zeroes. Then we can construct another odd function 
 
 
 
  by:



since 
 
 
 
  has no zeroes, 
 
 
 
  is well-defined and continuous. Thus we have a continuous odd retraction.
Proofs
1-dimensional case
The 1-dimensional case can easily be proved using the intermediate value theorem (IVT).
Let 
 
 
 
  be an odd real-valued function on a circle. Pick an arbitrary 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  then we are done. Otherwise, w.l.o.g. 
 
 
 
 . But 
 
 
 
 . Hence, by the IVT there is a point 
 
 
 
  between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on which 
 
 
 
 .
General case - algebraic topology proof
BUT can be proved by the stronger statement that every odd function 
 
 
 
  has odd degree.
Assume by contradiction that there exists a continuous odd retraction 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to the equator. 
 
 
 
  is also odd and thus has non-zero degree.
By construction, 
 
 
 
  extends to the whole upper hemisphere of 
 
 
 
 , and as such is null-homotopic . A null-homotopic map has degree zero, contradicting our only assumption, namely that 
 
 
 
  exists.
General case - combinatorial proof
BUT can be proved from Tucker's lemma. 2 34
Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous odd function. Because g is continuous on a compact domain, it is uniformly continuous. Therefore, for every 
 
 
 
 , there is a 
 
 
 
  such that, for every two points of 
 
 
 
  which are within 
 
 
 
  of each other, their images under g are within 
 
 
 
  of each other.
Define a triangulation of 
 
 
 
  with edges of length at most 
 
 
 
 . Label each vertex 
 
 
 
  of the triangulation with a label 
 
 
 
  in the following way:

The absolute value of the label is the index of the coordinate with the highest absolute value of g

 
 .
The sign of the label is the sign of g, so that
 
 
 
 .

Because g is odd, the labeling is also odd
 
 
 
 . Hence, by Tucker's lemma, there are two adjacent vertices 
 
 
 
  with opposite labels. Assume w.l.o.g. that the labels are 
 
 
 
 . By definition of l, this means that in both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , coordinate #1 is the largest coordinate; in 
 
 
 
  this coordinate is positive while in 
 
 
 
  it is negative. By the construction of the triangulation, the distance between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is at most 
 
 
 
 ; this means that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are bounded by 
 
 
 
 .
The above is true for every 
 
 
 
 ; hence there must be a point u in which 
 
 
 
 .
Corollaries

No subset of Rn is homeomorphic to Sn.
The Ham sandwich theorem: For any compact sets A1, ..., An in Rn we can always find a hyperplane dividing each of them into two subsets of equal measure.

Equivalent results
Above we showed how to prove BUT from Tucker's lemma. The converse is also true: it is possible to prove Tucker's lemma from BUT. Therefore, these two theorems are equivalent. 
Generalizations
1. In the original BUT, the domain of the function f is the unit n-sphere (the boundary of the unit n-ball). In general, it is true also when the domain of f is the boundary of any open bounded symmetric subset of Rn containing the origin (Here, symmetric means that if x is in the subset then -x is also in the subset).5
2. Consider the function A which maps a point to its antipodal point: A(x)=-x. Note that A(A(x))=x. The original BUT claims that there is a point x in which f(A(x))=f(x). In general, this is true also for every function A for which A(A(x))=x.6 However, in general this is not true for other functions A.7
See also

Topological combinatorics
Necklace splitting problem
Kakutani's theorem (geometry)
Isovariant

Notes
References







"
Category:Algebraic topology Category:Combinatorics Category:Continuous mappings Category:Theorems in topology



↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩




