


Borel measure




Borel measure

In mathematics, specifically in measure theory, a Borel measure on a topological space is a measure that is defined on all open sets (and thus on all Borel sets).1 Some authors require additional restrictions on the measure, as described below.
Formal definition
Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space, and let 
 
 
 
  be the smallest σ-algebra that contains the open sets of X; this is known as the σ-algebra of Borel sets. A Borel measure is any measure μ defined on the σ-algebra of Borel sets.2 Some authors require in addition that μ(C) \mathbb R with its usual topology is a locally compact Hausdorff space, hence we can define a Borel measure on it. In this case, 
 
 
 
  is the smallest σ-algebra that contains the open intervals of 
 
 
 
 . While there are many Borel measures μ, the choice of Borel measure which assigns 
 
 
 
 
  for every interval 
 
 
 
  is sometimes called "the" Borel measure on 
 
 
 
 . In practice, even "the" Borel measure is not the most useful measure defined on the σ-algebra of Borel sets; indeed, the Lebesgue measure

 
  is an extension of "the" Borel measure which possesses the crucial property that it is a complete measure (unlike the Borel measure). To clarify, when one says that the Lebesgue measure 
 
 
 
  is an extension of the Borel measure 
 
 
 
 
 , it means that every Borel-measurable set E is also a Lebesgue-measurable set, and the Borel measure and the Lebesgue measure coincide on the Borel sets (i.e., 
 
 
 
  for every Borel measurable set).
Applications
Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral
The Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral is the ordinary Lebesgue integral with respect to a measure known as the Lebesgue–Stieltjes measure, which may be associated to any function of bounded variation on the real line. The Lebesgue–Stieltjes measure is a regular Borel measure, and conversely every regular Borel measure on the real line is of this kind.3
Laplace transform
One can define the Laplace transform of a finite Borel measure μ on the real line by the Lebesgue integral4



An important special case is where μ is a probability measure or, even more specifically, the Dirac delta function. In operational calculus, the Laplace transform of a measure is often treated as though the measure came from a distribution function f. In that case, to avoid potential confusion, one often writes



where the lower limit of 0− is shorthand notation for



This limit emphasizes that any point mass located at 0 is entirely captured by the Laplace transform. Although with the Lebesgue integral, it is not necessary to take such a limit, it does appear more naturally in connection with the Laplace–Stieltjes transform.
Hausdorff dimension and Frostman's lemma
Given a Borel measure μ on a metric space X such that μ(X) > 0 and μ(B(x, r)) ≤ rs holds for some constant s > 0 and for every ball B(x, r) in X, then the Hausdorff dimension dimHaus(X) ≥ s. A partial converse is provided by Frostman's lemma:5
Lemma: Let A be a Borel subset of Rn, and let s > 0. Then the following are equivalent:

Hs(A) > 0, where Hs denotes the s-dimensional Hausdorff measure.
There is an (unsigned) Borel measure μ satisfying μ(A) > 0, and such that








holds for all x ∈ Rn and r > 0.
 

Cramér–Wold theorem
The Cramér–Wold theorem in measure theory states that a Borel probability measure on 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined by the totality of its one-dimensional projections.6 It is used as a method for proving joint convergence results. The theorem is named after Harald Cramér and Herman Ole Andreas Wold.
References
Further reading


.




External links

Borel measure at Encyclopedia of Mathematics

"
Category:Measures (measure theory)



D. H. Fremlin, 2000. Measure Theory. Torres Fremlin.




K. Stromberg, 1994. Probability Theory for Analysts. Chapman and Hall.




