


Absolute value




Absolute value

 In mathematics, the absolute value (or modulus) 
 
 
 
  of a real number 
 
 
 
  is the non-negative value of 
 
 
 
 
  without regard to its sign. Namely, 
 
 
 
  for a positive 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  for a negative 
 
 
 
  (in which case 
 
 
 
 
  is positive), and 
 
 
 
 . For example, the absolute value of 3 is 3, and the absolute value of −3 is also 3. The absolute value of a number may be thought of as its distance from zero.
Generalisations of the absolute value for real numbers occur in a wide variety of mathematical settings. For example, an absolute value is also defined for the complex numbers, the quaternions, ordered rings, fields and vector spaces. The absolute value is closely related to the notions of magnitude, distance, and norm in various mathematical and physical contexts.
Terminology and notation
In 1806, Jean-Robert Argand introduced the term module, meaning unit of measure in French, specifically for the complex absolute value,12 and it was borrowed into English in 1866 as the Latin equivalent modulus.3 The term absolute value has been used in this sense from at least 1806 in French4 and 1857 in English.5 The notation 
 
 
 
 , with a vertical bar on each side, was introduced by Karl Weierstrass in 1841.6 Other names for absolute value include numerical value7 and magnitude.8
The same notation is used with sets to denote cardinality; the meaning depends on context.
Definition and properties
Real numbers
For any real number 
 
 
 
  the absolute value or modulus of 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
 
  (a vertical bar on each side of the quantity) and is defined as9



As can be seen from the above definition, the absolute value of 
 
 
 
  is always either positive or zero, but never negative.
From an analytic geometry point of view, the absolute value of a real number is that number's distance from zero along the real number line, and more generally the absolute value of the difference of two real numbers is the distance between them. Indeed, the notion of an abstract distance function in mathematics can be seen to be a generalisation of the absolute value of the difference (see "Distance" below).
Since the square root notation without sign represents the positive square root, it follows that










(1)





which is sometimes used as a definition of absolute value of real numbers.10
The absolute value has the following four fundamental properties:










(2)

Non-negativity







(3)

Positive-definiteness







(4)

Multiplicativeness







(5)

Subadditivity





Other important properties of the absolute value include:










(6)

Idempotence (the absolute value of the absolute value is the absolute value)







(7)

Evenness (reflection symmetry of the graph)







(8)

Identity of indiscernibles (equivalent to positive-definiteness)







(9)

Triangle inequality (equivalent to subadditivity)





 
  (if 
 
 
 
 )

(10)

Preservation of division (equivalent to multiplicativeness)







(11)

Reverse triangle inequality (equivalent to subadditivity)





Two other useful properties concerning inequalities are:





 
  or 
 
 

These relations may be used to solve inequalities involving absolute values. For example:

























Absolute value is used to define the absolute difference, the standard metric on the real numbers.
Complex numbers
(Figure)
The absolute value of a complex number 
 
 
 
  is the distance 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to the origin. It is also seen in the picture that 
 
 
 
  and its complex conjugate 
 
 
 
 
  have the same absolute value.

Since the complex numbers are not ordered, the definition given above for the real absolute value cannot be directly generalised for a complex number. However the geometric interpretation of the absolute value of a real number as its distance from 0 can be generalised. The absolute value of a complex number is defined as its distance in the complex plane from the origin using the Pythagorean theorem. More generally the absolute value of the difference of two complex numbers is equal to the distance between those two complex numbers.
For any complex number



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real numbers, the absolute value or modulus of 
 
 
 
  is denoted 
 
 
 
 
  and is given by11



When the imaginary part 
 
 
 
  is zero this is the same as the absolute value of the real number 
 
 
 
 .
When a complex number 
 
 
 
  is expressed in polar form as



with 
 
 
 
  and θ real, its absolute value is


 
 .
The absolute value of a complex number can be written in the complex analogue of equation (1) above as:



where 
 
 
 
  is the complex conjugate of 
 
 
 
 
 . Notice that, contrary to equation (1):


 
 .
The complex absolute value shares all the properties of the real absolute value given in equations (2)–(11) above.
Since the positive reals form a subgroup of the complex numbers under multiplication, we may think of absolute value as an endomorphism of the multiplicative group of the complex numbers.12
Absolute value function
  The real absolute value function is continuous everywhere. It is differentiable everywhere except for 
 
 
 
  = 0. It is monotonically decreasing on the interval 
 
 
 
  and monotonically increasing on the interval 
 
 
 
 . Since a real number and its opposite have the same absolute value, it is an even function, and is hence not invertible.
Both the real and complex functions are idempotent.
It is a piecewise linear, convex function.
Relationship to the sign function
The absolute value function of a real number returns its value irrespective of its sign, whereas the sign (or signum) function returns a number's sign irrespective of its value. The following equations show the relationship between these two functions:


 
  or


 
  and for 
 
 
 
 ,



Derivative
The real absolute value function has a derivative for every 
 
 
 
 , but is not differentiable at 
 
 
 
 
 . Its derivative for 
 
 
 
  is given by the step function1314



The subdifferential of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  is the interval 
 
 
 
 
 .15
The complex absolute value function is continuous everywhere but complex differentiable nowhere because it violates the Cauchy–Riemann equations.16
The second derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  is zero everywhere except zero, where it does not exist. As a generalised function, the second derivative may be taken as two times the Dirac delta function.
Antiderivative
The antiderivative (indefinite integral) of the absolute value function is



where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary constant of integration.
Distance
The absolute value is closely related to the idea of distance. As noted above, the absolute value of a real or complex number is the distance from that number to the origin, along the real number line, for real numbers, or in the complex plane, for complex numbers, and more generally, the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers is the distance between them.
The standard Euclidean distance between two points



and



in Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -space is defined as:



This can be seen to be a generalisation of 
 
 
 
 , since if 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real, then by equation (1),



While if



and



are complex numbers, then
































The above shows that the "absolute value" distance for the real numbers or the complex numbers, agrees with the standard Euclidean distance they inherit as a result of considering them as the one and two-dimensional Euclidean spaces respectively.
The properties of the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers: non-negativity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry and the triangle inequality given above, can be seen to motivate the more general notion of a distance function as follows:
A real valued function 
 
 
 
  on a set 
 
 
 
 
  is called a metric (or a distance function) on 
 
 
 
 , if it satisfies the following four axioms:17










Non-negativity







Identity of indiscernibles







Symmetry







Triangle inequality





Generalizations
Ordered rings
The definition of absolute value given for real numbers above can be extended to any ordered ring. That is, if 
 
 
 
  is an element of an ordered ring R, then the absolute value of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is defined to be:18



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the additive inverse of 
 
 
 
 , and 0 is the additive identity element.
Fields
The fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers given in (2)–(5) above, can be used to generalise the notion of absolute value to an arbitrary field, as follows.
A real-valued function 
 
 
 
  on a field 
 
 
 
  is called an absolute value (also a modulus, magnitude, value, or valuation)19 if it satisfies the following four axioms:










Non-negativity







Positive-definiteness







Multiplicativeness







Subadditivity or the triangle inequality





Where 0 denotes the additive identity element of 
 
 
 
 . It follows from positive-definiteness and multiplicativeness that 
 
 
 
 , where 1 denotes the multiplicative identity element of 
 
 
 
 
 . The real and complex absolute values defined above are examples of absolute values for an arbitrary field.
If 
 
 
 
  is an absolute value on 
 
 
 
 , then the function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , defined by 
 
 
 
 
 , is a metric and the following are equivalent:



 
  satisfies the ultrametric inequality 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .




 
  is bounded in R.




 
  for every 
 
 





 
 
  for all 
 
 





 
  for all 
 
 


An absolute value which satisfies any (hence all) of the above conditions is said to be non-Archimedean, otherwise it is said to be Archimedean.20
Vector spaces
Again the fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers can be used, with a slight modification, to generalise the notion to an arbitrary vector space.
A real-valued function on a vector space 
 
 
 
  over a field 
 
 
 
 
 , represented as 

, is called an absolute value, but more usually a norm, if it satisfies the following axioms:
For all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 ,










Non-negativity







Positive-definiteness







Positive homogeneity or positive scalability







Subadditivity or the triangle inequality





The norm of a vector is also called its length or magnitude.
In the case of Euclidean space , the function defined by



is a norm called the Euclidean norm. When the real numbers 
 
 
 
  are considered as the one-dimensional vector space , the absolute value is a norm, and is the 
 
 
 
 -norm (see Lp space) for any 
 
 
 
 . In fact the absolute value is the "only" norm on , in the sense that, for every norm 
 
 
 
 
  on , 
 
 
 
 . The complex absolute value is a special case of the norm in an inner product space. It is identical to the Euclidean norm, if the complex plane is identified with the Euclidean plane .
Notes
References

Bartle; Sherbert; Introduction to real analysis (4th ed.), John Wiley & Sons, 2011 ISBN 978-0-471-43331-6.
Nahin, Paul J.; An Imaginary Tale; Princeton University Press; (hardcover, 1998). ISBN 0-691-02795-1.
Mac Lane, Saunders, Garrett Birkhoff, Algebra, American Mathematical Soc., 1999. ISBN 978-0-8218-1646-2.
Mendelson, Elliott, Schaum's Outline of Beginning Calculus, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2008. ISBN 978-0-07-148754-2.
O'Connor, J.J. and Robertson, E.F.; "Jean Robert Argand".
Schechter, Eric; Handbook of Analysis and Its Foundations, pp. 259–263, [http://books.google.com/books?id=eqUv3Bcd56EC&pg;;=PA259 "Absolute Values"], Academic Press (1997) ISBN 0-12-622760-8.

External links





"
Category:Special functions Category:Real numbers Category:Norms (mathematics)



Oxford English Dictionary, Draft Revision, June 2008↩
Nahin, O'Connor and Robertson, and functions.Wolfram.com.; for the French sense, see Littré, 1877↩

Lazare Nicolas M. Carnot, Mémoire sur la relation qui existe entre les distances respectives de cinq point quelconques pris dans l'espace, p. 105 [http://books.google.com/books?id=YyIOAAAAQAAJ&pg;;=PA105 at Google Books]↩
James Mill Peirce, A Text-book of Analytic Geometry [http://books.google.com/books?id=RJALAAAAYAAJ&pg;;=PA42 at Google Books]. The oldest citation in the 2nd edition of the Oxford English Dictionary is from 1907. The term absolute value is also used in contrast to relative value.↩
Nicholas J. Higham, Handbook of writing for the mathematical sciences, SIAM. ISBN 0-89871-420-6, p. 25↩


Mendelson, [http://books.google.com/books?id=A8hAm38zsCMC&pg;;=PA2 p. 2].↩
, p. A5↩
↩
.↩
Weisstein, Eric W. Absolute Value. From MathWorld – A Wolfram Web Resource.↩
Bartel and Sherbert, p. 163↩
Peter Wriggers, Panagiotis Panatiotopoulos, eds., New Developments in Contact Problems, 1999, ISBN 3-211-83154-1, [http://books.google.com/books?id=tiBtC4GmuKcC&pg;;=PA31 p. 31–32]↩

These axioms are not minimal; for instance, non-negativity can be derived from the other three: 
 
 
 
 .↩
Mac Lane, [http://books.google.com/books?id=L6FENd8GHIUC&pg;;=PA264 p. 264].↩
Shechter, [http://books.google.com/books?id=eqUv3Bcd56EC&pg;;=PA260 p. 260]. This meaning of valuation is rare. Usually, a valuation is the logarithm of the inverse of an absolute value↩
Shechter, [http://books.google.com/books?id=eqUv3Bcd56EC&pg;;=PA260 pp. 260–261].↩




