


Gaussian beam




Gaussian beam

  In optics, a Gaussian beam is a beam of electromagnetic radiation whose transverse electric field and intensity (irradiance) distributions are well approximated by Gaussian functions. Many lasers emit beams that approximate a Gaussian profile, in which case the laser is said to be operating on the fundamental transverse mode, or "TEM00 mode" of the laser's optical resonator. When refracted by a diffraction-limited lens, a Gaussian beam is transformed into another Gaussian beam (characterized by a different set of parameters), which explains why it is a convenient, widespread model in laser optics.
The mathematical function that describes the Gaussian beam is a solution to the paraxial form of the Helmholtz equation. The solution, in the form of a Gaussian function, represents the complex amplitude of the beam's electric field. The electric field and magnetic field together propagate as an electromagnetic wave. A description of just one of the two fields is sufficient to describe the properties of the beam.
The behavior of the field of a Gaussian beam as it propagates is described by a few parameters such as the spot size, the radius of curvature, and the Gouy phase.1
Other solutions to the paraxial form of the Helmholtz equation exist. Solving the equation in Cartesian coordinates leads to a family of solutions known as the Hermite–Gaussian modes, while solving the equation in cylindrical coordinates leads to the Laguerre–Gaussian modes.23 For both families, the lowest-order solution describes a Gaussian beam, while higher-order solutions describe higher-order transverse modes in an optical resonator. 
Mathematical form
The Gaussian beam is a transverse electromagnetic (TEM) mode.4 A mathematical expression for its complex electric field amplitude can be found by solving the paraxial Helmholtz equation, yielding5



where6


 
  is the radial distance from the center axis of the beam,


 
  is the axial distance from the beam's narrowest point (the "waist"),


 
  is the imaginary unit (for which 
 
 
 
 ),


 
  is the wave number (in radians per meter),


 
 ,


 
  is the radius at which the field amplitude and intensity drop to 1/e and 1/e2 of their axial values, respectively,


 
  is the waist size,


 
  is the radius of curvature of the beam's wavefronts, and


 
  is the Gouy phase shift, an extra contribution to the phase that is seen in Gaussian beams. Additionally, the field has a time dependence factor 
 
 
 
  that has been suppressed in the above expression.
The corresponding time-averaged intensity (or irradiance) distribution is



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the intensity at the center of the beam at its waist. The constant 
 
 
 
  is the characteristic impedance of the medium in which the beam is propagating. For free space, 
 
 
 
 .
Beam parameters
The geometry and behavior of a Gaussian beam are governed by a set of beam parameters, which are defined in the following sections.
Beam width or spot size
(Figure)
Gaussian beam width w(z) as a function of the distance z along the beam. w0: beam waist; b: depth of focus; zR: Rayleigh range; 
 
 
 
 : total angular spread

For a Gaussian beam propagating in free space, the spot size (radius) w(z) will be at a minimum value w0 at one place along the beam axis, known as the beam waist. For a beam of wavelength λ at a distance z along the beam from the beam waist, the variation of the spot size is given by7



where the origin of the z-axis is defined, without loss of generality, to coincide with the beam waist, and where8



is called the Rayleigh range.
Rayleigh range and confocal parameter
At a distance from the waist equal to the Rayleigh range zR, the width w of the beam is9



The distance between these two points is called the confocal parameter or depth of focus of the beam:



Radius of curvature
R(z) is the radius of curvature of the wavefronts comprising the beam. Its value as a function of position is10



Beam divergence
The parameter 
 
 
 
  increases linearly with 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . This means that far from the waist, the beam is cone-shaped. The angle between the straight line 
 
 
 
  and the central axis of the beam (
 
 
 
 ) is called the divergence of the beam. It is given by11



The total angular spread of the beam far from the waist is then given by



Because the divergence is inversely proportional to the spot size, a Gaussian beam that is focused to a small spot spreads out rapidly as it propagates away from that spot. To keep a laser beam very well collimated, it must have a large diameter. This relationship between beam width and divergence is due to diffraction. Non-Gaussian beams also exhibit this effect, but a Gaussian beam is a special case where the product of width and divergence is the smallest possible.
Since the gaussian beam model uses the paraxial approximation, it fails when wavefronts are tilted by more than about 30° from the axis of the beam.12 From the above expression for divergence, this means the Gaussian beam model is valid only for beams with waists larger than about 
 
 
 
 .
Laser beam quality is quantified by the beam parameter product (BPP). For a Gaussian beam, the BPP is the product of the beam's divergence and waist size 
 
 
 
 . The BPP of a real beam is obtained by measuring the beam's minimum diameter and far-field divergence, and taking their product. The ratio of the BPP of the real beam to that of an ideal Gaussian beam at the same wavelength is known as M2 ("M squared"). The M2 for a Gaussian beam is one. All real laser beams have M2 values greater than one, although very high quality beams can have values very close to one.
The numerical aperture of a Gaussian beam is defined to be 
 
 
 
 , where n is the index of refraction of the medium through which the beam propagates. This means that the Rayleigh range is related to the numerical aperture by



Gouy phase
The on-axis longitudinal phase delay or Gouy phase of the beam is13



The Gouy phase shift14 indicates that as a Gaussian beam passes through a waist, it acquires an additional phase shift of π, in addition to the usual 
 
 
 
  phase shift that would be expected from a plane wave.15
Complex beam parameter
Information about the spot size and radius of curvature of a Gaussian beam can be encoded in the complex beam parameter, 
 
 
 
 :1617



The reciprocal 
 
 
 
  shows the relationship between 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  explicitly:18



The complex beam parameter plays a key role in the analysis of Gaussian beam propagation, and especially in the analysis of optical resonator cavities using ray transfer matrices.
The amplitude, u, of a potentially elliptical or astigmatic beam can be written as the product



where


 
 ,


 
 , and


 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the complex beam parameters for the x and y directions.
For the common case of circular symmetry, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , which yields19



Power and intensity
Power through an aperture
The power P passing through a circle of radius r in the transverse plane at position z is20



where



is the total power transmitted by the beam.
For a circle of radius 
 
 
 
 , the fraction of power transmitted through the circle is



Similarly, about 90 percent of the beam's power will flow through a circle of radius 
 
 
 
 , 95 percent through a circle of radius 
 
 
 
 , and 99 percent through a circle of radius 
 
 
 
 .21
Peak and average intensity
The peak intensity at an axial distance 
 
 
 
  from the beam waist is calculated using L'Hôpital's rule as the limit of the enclosed power within a circle of radius 
 
 
 
 
 , divided by the area of the circle 
 
 
 
 :



The peak intensity is thus exactly twice the average intensity, obtained by dividing the total power by the area within the radius 
 
 
 
 .
Derivation
The Gaussian beam formalism begins with the wave equation for an electromagnetic field in free space or in a homogeneous dielectric medium:22


 
  where 
 
 
 
  may stand for any one of the six field components 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 . The Gaussian beam formalism proceeds by writing down a solution of the form23


 
  where it is assumed that the beam is sufficiently collimated along the 
 
 
 
  axis that 
 
 
 
  may be neglected. Substituting this solution into the wave equation above yields the paraxial approximation to the wave equation:24



Solving this differential equation yields an infinite set of functions, of which the Gaussian beam is the lowest-order solution or mode.
Higher-order modes
Gaussian beams are just one possible solution to the paraxial wave equation. Various other sets of orthogonal solutions are used for modelling laser beams. In the general case, if a complete basis set of solutions is chosen, any real laser beam can be described as a superposition of solutions from this set. The design of the laser determines which basis set of solutions is most useful. In some cases the output of a laser may closely approximate a single higher-order mode. Hermite-Gaussian modes are particularly common, since many laser systems have Cartesian reflection symmetry in the plane perpendicular to the beam's propagation direction.
Hermite-Gaussian modes
 Hermite-Gaussian modes are a convenient description for the output of lasers whose cavity design is not radially symmetric, but rather has a distinction between horizontal and vertical. In terms of the previously defined complex 
 
 
 
  parameter, the amplitude distribution in the 
 
 
 
 -plane is proportional to


 
  where the function 
 
 
 
  is the Hermite polynomial of order 
 
 
 
  (physicists' form, i.e. 
 
 
 
 ), and the asterisk indicates complex conjugation. For the case 
 
 
 
  the equation yields a Gaussian transverse distribution.
For two-dimensional rectangular coordinates one constructs a function 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  has the same form as 
 
 
 
 . Mathematically this property is due to the separation of variables applied to the paraxial Helmholtz equation for Cartesian coordinates.25
Hermite-Gaussian modes are typically designated "TEMmn", where m and n are the polynomial indices in the x and y directions. A Gaussian beam is thus TEM00.
The Gouy phase of a TEMmn mode is stronger than that of the TEM00 mode by a factor 1 + n + m.26 The off-axis phase shift is different.27
Laguerre-Gaussian modes
thumb|right|upright=1.5|The intensity profiles of twelve Laguerre-Gaussian modes If the problem is cylindrically symmetric, the natural solutions of the paraxial wave equation are Laguerre-Gaussian modes.28 They are written in cylindrical coordinates using Laguerre polynomials


29
where 
 
 
 
  are the generalized Laguerre polynomials, the radial index 
 
 
 
  and the azimuthal index is 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is an appropriate normalization constant; 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are beam parameters defined above.
Ince-Gaussian modes
In elliptic coordinates, one can write the higher-order modes using Ince polynomials. The even and odd Ince-Gaussian modes are given by 30


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the radial and angular elliptic coordinates defined by






 
  are the even Ince polynomials of order 
 
 
 
  and degree 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the ellipticity parameter. The Hermite-Gaussian and Laguerre-Gaussian modes are a special case of the Ince-Gaussian modes for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively.
Hypergeometric-Gaussian modes
There is another important class of paraxial wave modes in polar coordinates in which the complex amplitude is proportional to a confluent hypergeometric function.
These modes have a singular phase profile and are eigenfunctions of the photon orbital angular momentum. The intensity profile is characterized by a single brilliant ring with a singularity at its center, where the field amplitude vanishes. The amplitude is written in terms of the dimensionless radial coordinate 
 
 
 
  and the dimensionless longitudinal coordinate 
 
 
 
 .31



where 
 
 
 
  is integer, 
 
 
 
  is real valued, 
 
 
 
  is the gamma function and 
 
 
 
  is a confluent hypergeometric function.
Some subfamilies of hypergeometric-Gaussian (HyGG) modes can be listed as the modified Bessel-Gaussian modes, the modified exponential Gaussian modes, and the modified Laguerre–Gaussian modes.
The set of hypergeometric-Gaussian modes is overcomplete and is not an orthogonal set of modes. In spite of its complicated field profile, HyGG modes have a very simple profile at the pupil plane (
 
 
 
 ):



See Optical vortex, which explains that the outcoming wave from a pitch-fork hologram is a sub-family of HyGG modes. The HyGG profile while beam propagates along 
 
 
 
  has a dramatic change and it is not a stable mode below the Rayleigh range.
See also

Bessel beam
Tophat beam
Laser beam profiler

Notes


References








Chapter 5, "Optical Beams," pp. 267.


Chapter 3, "Beam Optics," pp. 80–107.

Chapter 16.



External links

Gaussian Beam Propagation - IDEX Optics & Photonics Technical Guide
Gaussian Beam Optics Tutorial, Newport

"
Category:Laser science Category:Electromagnetic radiation



Svelto, pp. 153–5.↩
Siegman, p. 642.↩
probably first considered by Goubau and Schwering (1961).↩
Svelto, p. 158.↩







Siegman (1986) p. 630.↩

↩

Siegman, pp. 638–40.↩
Garg, pp. 165–168.↩

See Siegman (1986) p. 639. Eq. 29↩
Melles Griot. Gaussian Beam Optics↩

Svelto, pp. 148–9.↩


Siegman (1986), p645, eq. 54↩

↩

↩
Bandres and Gutierrez-Vega (2004)↩
Karimi et. al (2007)↩




