   Brightness      Brightness   (Figure)  Decreasing brightness with depth (underwater photo as example)   Brightness is an attribute of visual perception in which a source appears to be radiating or reflecting light . 1 In other words, brightness is the perception elicited by the luminance of a visual target. This is a subjective attribute/property of an object being observed and one of the color appearance parameters of color appearance models . Brightness refers to an absolute term and should not be confused with Lightness . 2  Terminology  The adjective bright derives from an Old English beorht with the same meaning via metathesis giving Middle English briht . The word is from a Common Germanic * , ultimately from a PIE root with a closely related meaning, * "white, bright". "Brightness" was formerly used as a synonym for the photometric term luminance and (incorrectly) for the radiometric term radiance . As defined by the US Federal Glossary of Telecommunication Terms ( FS-1037C ), "brightness" should now be used only for non-quantitative references to physiological sensations and perceptions of light. 3  A given target luminance can elicit different perceptions of brightness in different contexts; see, for example, White's illusion .  In the RGB color space , brightness can be thought of as the arithmetic mean  μ of the red, green, and blue color coordinates (although some of the three components make the light seem brighter than others, which, again, may be compensated by some display systems automatically): 4      μ  =    R  +  G  +  B   3       μ      R  G  B   3     \mu={R+G+B\over 3}     Brightness is also a color coordinate in the HSB or HSV color space (hue, saturation , and brightness or value).  With regard to stars , brightness is quantified as apparent magnitude and absolute magnitude .  Brightness is, at least in some respects, the antonym of darkness .  Brightness of sounds  The term "brightness" is also used in discussions of sound timbres , in a rough analogy with visual brightness. Timbre researchers consider brightness to be one of the perceptually strongest distinctions between sounds, 5 and formalize it acoustically as an indication of the amount of high-frequency content in a sound, using a measure such as the spectral centroid .  See also   Luma (video)  Luminance (relative)  Luminosity   Notes  External links   Poynton's Color FAQ   hu:Világosság "  Category:Vision  Category:Photometry     Merriam-Webster.com Merriam-Webster Dictionary definition of bright ↩  1 Brightness vs. Lightness ↩  “ Brightness ” in Federal Standard 1037C, the Federal Glossary of Telecommunication Terms (1996) ↩  What are HSB and HLS? , Charles Poynton: "The usual formulation of HSB and HLS compute so-called "lightness" or "brightness" as ( R + G + B )/3. This computation conflicts badly with the properties of colour vision, as it computes yellow to be about six times more intense than blue with the same "lightness" value (say L = 50)." ↩  D. Wessel, Timbre space as a musical control structure , Computer Music Journal, 3 (1979), pp. 45–52. ↩     