


Reflectance




Reflectance

(Figure)
Spectral reflectance curves for aluminium (Al), silver (Ag), and gold (Au) metal mirrors at normal incidence.

Reflectance of the surface of a material is its effectiveness in reflecting radiant energy. It is the fraction of incident electromagnetic power that is reflected at an interface. The reflectance spectrum or spectral reflectance curve is the plot of the reflectance as a function of wavelength.
Mathematical definitions
Hemispherical reflectance
Hemispherical reflectance of a surface, denoted R, is defined as1


 
  where

Φer is the radiant flux reflected by that surface;
Φei is the radiant flux received by that surface.

Spectral hemispherical reflectance
Spectral hemispherical reflectance in frequency and spectral hemispherical reflectance in wavelength of a surface, denoted Rν and Rλ respectively, are defined as2





 
  where

Φe,νr is the spectral radiant flux in frequency reflected by that surface;
Φe,νi is the spectral radiant flux in frequency received by that surface;
Φe,λr is the spectral radiant flux in wavelength reflected by that surface;
Φe,λi is the spectral radiant flux in wavelength received by that surface.

Directional reflectance
Directional reflectance of a surface, denoted RΩ, is defined as3


 
  where

Le,Ωr is the radiance reflected by that surface;
Le,Ωi is the radiance received by that surface.

Spectral directional reflectance
Spectral directional reflectance in frequency and spectral directional reflectance in wavelength of a surface, denoted Rν,Ω and Rλ,Ω respectively, are defined as4





 
  where

Le,Ω,νr is the spectral radiance in frequency reflected by that surface;
Le,Ω,νi is the spectral radiance received by that surface;
Le,Ω,λr is the spectral radiance in wavelength reflected by that surface;
Le,Ω,λi is the spectral radiance in wavelength received by that surface.

Reflectivity
  For homogeneous and semi-infinite (see halfspace) materials, reflectivity is the same as reflectance. Reflectivity is the square of the magnitude of the Fresnel reflection coefficient,5 which is the ratio of the reflected to incident electric field;6 as such the reflection coefficient can be expressed as a complex number as determined by the Fresnel equations for a single layer, whereas the reflectance is always a positive real number.
For layered and finite media, according to the CIE, reflectivity is distinguished from reflectance by the fact that reflectivity is a value that applies to thick reflecting objects.7 When reflection occurs from thin layers of material, internal reflection effects can cause the reflectance to vary with surface thickness. Reflectivity is the limit value of reflectance as the sample becomes thick; it is the intrinsic reflectance of the surface, hence irrespective of other parameters such as the reflectance of the rear surface. Another way to interpret this is that the reflectance is the fraction of electromagnetic power reflected from a specific sample, while reflectivity is a property of the material itself, which would be measured on a perfect machine if the material filled half of all space.8
Surface type
Going back to the fact that reflectance is a directional property, most surfaces can be divided into those that give specular reflection and those that give diffuse reflection:

for specular surfaces, such as glass or polished metal, reflectance will be nearly zero at all angles except at the appropriate reflected angle; that is, reflected radiation will follow a different path from incident radiation for all cases other than radiation normal to the surface;
for diffuse surfaces, such as matte white paint, reflectance is uniform; radiation is reflected in all angles equally or near-equally. Such surfaces are said to be Lambertian.

Most real objects have some mixture of diffuse and specular reflective properties.
Water reflectance
(Figure)
Reflectance of smooth water at  (refractive index 1.333).

Reflection occurs when light moves from a medium with one index of refraction into a second medium with a different index of refraction.
Specular reflection from a body of water is calculated by the Fresnel equations.9 Fresnel reflection is directional and therefore does not contribute significantly to albedo which is primarily diffuse reflection.
A real water surface may be wavy. Reflectance assuming a flat surface as given by the Fresnel equations can be adjusted to account for waviness.
Grating efficiency
The generalization of reflectance to a diffraction grating, which disperses light by wavelength, is called diffraction efficiency.
Applications
Reflectance is an important concept in the fields of optics, solar thermal energy, telecommunication and radar.
SI radiometry units
See also

Bidirectional reflectance distribution function
Emissivity
Lambert's cosine law
Transmittance
Sun path
Light Reflectance Value
Albedo

References
External links

Reflectivity of metals (chart).
Reflectance Data.

"
Category:Physical quantities Category:Radiometry







E. Hecht (2001). Optics (4th ed.). Pearson Education. ISBN 0-8053-8566-5.

CIE International Lighting Vocabulary
Palmer and Grant, The Art of Radiometry
Ottaviani, M. and Stamnes, K. and Koskulics, J. and Eide, H. and Long, S.R. and Su, W. and Wiscombe, W., 2008: 'Light Reflection from Water Waves: Suitable Setup for a Polarimetric Investigation under Controlled Laboratory Conditions''. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 25 (5), 715--728.




