


Bernoulli's inequality




Bernoulli's inequality

 In real analysis, Bernoulli's inequality (named after Jacob Bernoulli) is an inequality that approximates exponentiations of 1 + x.
The inequality states that



for every integer r ≥ 0 and every real number x ≥ −1. If the exponent r is even, then the inequality is valid for all real numbers x. The strict version of the inequality reads



for every integer r ≥ 2 and every real number x ≥ −1 with x ≠ 0.
Bernoulli's inequality is often used as the crucial step in the proof of other inequalities. It can itself be proved using mathematical induction, as shown below.
History
Jacob Bernoulli first published the inequality in his treatise “Positiones Arithmeticae de Seriebus Infinitis” (Basel, 1689), where he used the inequality often.1
According to Joseph E. Hofmann, Über die Exercitatio Geometrica des M. A. Ricci (1963), p. 177, the inequality is actually due to Sluse in his Mesolabum (1668 edition), Chapter IV "De maximis & minimis".2
Proof of the inequality
For r = 0,



is equivalent to 1 ≥ 1 which is true as required.
Now suppose the statement is true for r = k:



Then it follows that



However, as 1 + (k + 1)x + kx2 ≥ 1 + (k + 1)x (since kx2 ≥ 0), it follows that (1 + x)k + 1 ≥ 1 + (k + 1)x, which means the statement is true for r = k + 1 as required.
By induction we conclude the statement is true for all r ≥ 0.
Generalization
The exponent r can be generalized to an arbitrary real number as follows: if x > −1, then



for r ≤ 0 or r ≥ 1, and



for 0 ≤ r ≤ 1.
This generalization can be proved by comparing derivatives. Again, the strict versions of these inequalities require x ≠ 0 and r ≠ 0, 1.
Related inequalities
The following inequality estimates the r-th power of 1 + x from the other side. For any real numbers x, r > 0, one has



where e = 2.718.... This may be proved using the inequality (1 + 1/k)k  t\geq 1  and 
 
 
 
  is:



This can be proved (for integer t) by using the formula for geometric series: (using y=1-x)


 
  or equivalently 
 
 

Proof for rational case
An "elementary" proof can be given using the fact that geometric mean of positive numbers is less than arithmetic mean
First assume 
 
 

By comparing Arithmetic and Geometric mean of 
 
 
 
  numbers (
 
 
 
  occurs 
 
 
 
  times):



we get



or equivalently



This proves inequality for 
 
 
 
  case.
For 
 
 
 
  case, let 
 
 
 
  As 
 
 
 
  we get with 
 
 
 
 ,



This proves inequality for 
 
 
 
  case.
As these inequalities are true for all rational numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , they are also true for all real numbers, which follows from a density argument of the rationals in the reals, and the fact that the functions involved are continuous.
Notes
References





External links


Bernoulli Inequality by Chris Boucher, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.

Paper “Some Equivalent Forms of Bernoulli’s Inequality: A Survey“

"
Category:Inequalities



mathematics - First use of Bernoulli's inequality and its name - History of Science and Mathematics Stack Exchange





