


Binomial theorem




Binomial theorem

 In elementary algebra, the binomial theorem (or binomial expansion) describes the algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial. According to the theorem, it is possible to expand the power  into a sum involving terms of the form , where the exponents 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are nonnegative integers with 
 
 
 
 
 , and the coefficient

 
  of each term is a specific positive integer depending on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For example,



The coefficient 
 
 
 
 
  in the term of  is known as the binomial coefficient

 
  or 
 
 
 
  (the two have the same value). These coefficients for varying 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be arranged to form Pascal's triangle. These numbers also arise in combinatorics, where 
 
 
 
 
  gives the number of different combinations of 
 
 
elements that can be chosen from an 
 
 
 
 -element set.
History
Special cases of the binomial theorem were known from ancient times. The 4th century B.C. Greek mathematician Euclid mentioned the special case of the binomial theorem for exponent 2.12 There is evidence that the binomial theorem for cubes was known by the 6th century in India.34
Binomial coefficients, as combinatorial quantities expressing the number of ways of selecting k objects out of n without replacement, were of interest to the ancient Hindus. The earliest known reference to this combinatorial problem is the Chandaḥśāstra by the Hindu lyricist Pingala (c. 200 B.C.), which contains a method for its solution.5 The commentator Halayudha from the 10th century A.D. explains this method using what is now known as Pascal's triangle.6 By the 6th century A.D., the Hindu mathematicians probably knew how to express this as a quotient 
 
 
 
 ,7 and a clear statement of this rule can be found in the 12th century text Lilavati by Bhaskara.8
The binomial theorem as such can be found in the work of 11th-century Arabian mathematician Al-Karaji, who described the triangular pattern of the binomial coefficients.9 He also provided a mathematical proof of both the binomial theorem and Pascal's triangle, using a primitive form of mathematical induction.10 The Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam was probably familiar with the formula to higher orders, although many of his mathematical works are lost.11 The binomial expansions of small degrees were known in the 13th century mathematical works of Yang Hui12 and also Chu Shih-Chieh.13 Yang Hui attributes the method to a much earlier 11th century text of Jia Xian, although those writings are now also lost.14
In 1544, Michael Stifel introduced the term "binomial coefficient" and showed how to use them to express 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 
 , via "Pascal's triangle".15 Blaise Pascal studied the eponymous triangle comprehensively in the treatise Traité du triangle arithmétique (1653). However, the pattern of numbers was already known to the European mathematicians of the late Renaissance, including Stifel, Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia, and Simon Stevin.16 Isaac Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem, valid for any rational exponent.1718
Statement of the theorem
According to the theorem, it is possible to expand any power of x + y into a sum of the form


 
  where each 
 
 
 
  is a specific positive integer known as a binomial coefficient. (When an exponent is zero, the corresponding power expression is taken to be 1 and this multiplicative factor is often omitted from the term. Hence one often sees the right side written as 
 
 
 
 .) This formula is also referred to as the binomial formula or the binomial identity. Using summation notation, it can be written as


 
  The final expression follows from the previous one by the symmetry of x and y in the first expression, and by comparison it follows that the sequence of binomial coefficients in the formula is symmetrical. A simple variant of the binomial formula is obtained by substituting 1 for y, so that it involves only a single variable. In this form, the formula reads


 
  or equivalently



Examples
 The most basic example of the binomial theorem is the formula for the square of :



The binomial coefficients 1, 2, 1 appearing in this expansion correspond to the second row of Pascal's triangle (Note that the top is row 0). The coefficients of higher powers of  correspond to later rows of the triangle:


 
 
  Notice that

the powers of x go down until it reaches 0 (
 
 
 
 ), starting value is n (the n in 
 
 
 
 .)
the powers of y go up from 0 (
 
 
 
 ) until it reaches n (also the n in 
 
 
 
 .)
the nth row of the Pascal's Triangle will be the coefficients of the expanded binomial.
for each line, the number of products (i.e. the sum of the coefficients) is equal to 
 
 
 
 .
for each line, the number of product groups is equal to 
 
 
 
 .

The binomial theorem can be applied to the powers of any binomial. For example,



For a binomial involving subtraction, the theorem can be applied as long as the opposite of the second term is used. This has the effect of changing the sign of every other term in the expansion:



Another useful example is that of the expansion of the following square roots:






Sometimes it may be useful to expand negative exponents when 
 
 
 
 :



Geometric explanation
 For positive values of a and b, the binomial theorem with n = 2 is the geometrically evident fact that a square of side  can be cut into a square of side a, a square of side b, and two rectangles with sides a and b. With n = 3, the theorem states that a cube of side  can be cut into a cube of side a, a cube of side b, three a×a×b rectangular boxes, and three a×b×b rectangular boxes.
In calculus, this picture also gives a geometric proof of the derivative

19 if one sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  interpreting b as an infinitesimal change in a, then this picture shows the infinitesimal change in the volume of an n-dimensional hypercube, 
 
 
 
  where the coefficient of the linear term (in 
 
 
 
 ) is 
 
 
 
  the area of the n faces, each of dimension 
 
 



 
  Substituting this into the definition of the derivative via a difference quotient and taking limits means that the higher order terms – 
 
 
 
  and higher – become negligible, and yields the formula 
 
 
 
  interpreted as

"the infinitesimal change in volume of an n-cube as side length varies is the area of n of its 
 
 
 
 -dimensional faces".
 

If one integrates this picture, which corresponds to applying the fundamental theorem of calculus, one obtains Cavalieri's quadrature formula, the integral 
 
 
 
  – see proof of Cavalieri's quadrature formula for details.20 
The binomial coefficients
The coefficients that appear in the binomial expansion are called binomial coefficients. These are usually written 
 
 
 
 , and pronounced “n choose k”.
Formulae
The coefficient of xn−kyk is given by the formula


 
 ,
which is defined in terms of the factorial function n!. Equivalently, this formula can be written



with k factors in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction. Note that, although this formula involves a fraction, the binomial coefficient 
 
 
 
  is actually an integer.
Combinatorial interpretation
The binomial coefficient 
 
 
 
  can be interpreted as the number of ways to choose k elements from an n-element set. This is related to binomials for the following reason: if we write (x + y)n as a product


 
  then, according to the distributive law, there will be one term in the expansion for each choice of either x or y from each of the binomials of the product. For example, there will only be one term xn, corresponding to choosing x from each binomial. However, there will be several terms of the form xn−2y2, one for each way of choosing exactly two binomials to contribute a y. Therefore, after combining like terms, the coefficient of xn−2y2 will be equal to the number of ways to choose exactly 2 elements from an n-element set.
Proofs
Combinatorial proof
Example
The coefficient of xy2 in



equals 
 
 
 
  because there are three x,y strings of length 3 with exactly two y's, namely,



corresponding to the three 2-element subsets of { 1, 2, 3 }, namely,



where each subset specifies the positions of the y in a corresponding string.
General case
Expanding (x + y)n yields the sum of the 2 n products of the form e1e2 ... e n where each e i is x or y. Rearranging factors shows that each product equals xn−kyk for some k between 0 and n. For a given k, the following are proved equal in succession:

the number of copies of xn − kyk in the expansion
the number of n-character x,y strings having y in exactly k positions
the number of k-element subsets of { 1, 2, ..., n}


 
  (this is either by definition, or by a short combinatorial argument if one is defining 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 ).

This proves the binomial theorem.
Inductive proof
Induction yields another proof of the binomial theorem. When n = 0, both sides equal 1, since x0 = 1 and 
 
 
 
 . Now suppose that the equality holds for a given n; we will prove it for n + 1. For j, k ≥ 0, let [ƒ(x, y)] j,k denote the coefficient of xjyk in the polynomial ƒ(x, y). By the inductive hypothesis, (x + y)n is a polynomial in x and y such that [(x + y)n] j,k is 
 
 
 
  if j + k = n, and 0 otherwise. The identity



shows that (x + y)n+1 also is a polynomial in x and y, and



since if j + k = n + 1, then (j − 1) + k = n and j + (k − 1) = n. Now, the right hand side is



by Pascal's identity.21 On the other hand, if j +k ≠ n + 1, then (j – 1) + k ≠ n and j +(k – 1) ≠ n, so we get 0 + 0 = 0. Thus



which is the inductive hypothesis with n + 1 substituted for n and so completes the inductive step.
Generalisations
Newton's generalised binomial theorem
Around 1665, Isaac Newton generalised the formula to allow real exponents other than nonnegative integers. In addition, the formula can be generalised to complex exponents. In this generalisation, the finite sum is replaced by an infinite series. In order to do this, one needs to give meaning to binomial coefficients with an arbitrary upper index, which cannot be done using the above formula with factorials; however factoring out (n − k)! from numerator and denominator in that formula, and replacing n by r which now stands for an arbitrary number, one can define



where 
 
 
 
  is the Pochhammer symbol here standing for a falling factorial. Then, if x and y are real numbers with |x| > |y|,22 and r is any complex number, one has


 
 
  When r is a nonnegative integer, the binomial coefficients for k > r are zero, so (2) specializes to (1), and there are at most r + 1 nonzero terms. For other values of r, the series (2) has infinitely many nonzero terms, at least if x and y are nonzero.
This is important when one is working with infinite series and would like to represent them in terms of generalised hypergeometric functions.
Taking r = −s leads to a useful formula:



Further specializing to s = 1 yields the geometric series formula.
Generalisations
Formula (2) can be generalised to the case where x and y are complex numbers. For this version, one should assume |x| > |y|23 and define the powers of x + y and x using a holomorphic branch of log defined on an open disk of radius |x| centered at x.
Formula (2) is valid also for elements x and y of a Banach algebra as long as xy = yx, x is invertible, and ||y/x|| (x_1 + x_2 + \cdots + x_m)^n
= \sum_{k_1+k_2+\cdots +k_m = n} {n \choose k_1, k_2, \ldots, k_m}
x_1^{k_1} x_2^{k_2} \cdots x_m^{k_m}. 
where the summation is taken over all sequences of nonnegative integer indices k1 through km such that the sum of all ki is n. (For each term in the expansion, the exponents must add up to n). The coefficients 
 
 
 
  are known as multinomial coefficients, and can be computed by the formula



Combinatorially, the multinomial coefficient 
 
 
 
  counts the number of different ways to partition an n-element set into disjoint subsets of sizes k1, ..., km.
 The multi-binomial theorem
It is often useful when working in more dimensions, to deal with products of binomial expressions. By the binomial theorem this is equal to



This may be written more concisely, by multi-index notation, as



Applications
Multiple-angle identities
For the complex numbers the binomial theorem can be combined with De Moivre's formula to yield multiple-angle formulas for the sine and cosine. According to De Moivre's formula,


 
  Using the binomial theorem, the expression on the right can be expanded, and then the real and imaginary parts can be taken to yield formulas for cos(nx) and sin(nx). For example, since


 
  De Moivre's formula tells us that


 
  which are the usual double-angle identities. Similarly, since


 
  De Moivre's formula yields


 
  In general,


 
  and



Series for e
The number e is often defined by the formula



Applying the binomial theorem to this expression yields the usual infinite series for e. In particular:



The kth term of this sum is



As n → ∞, the rational expression on the right approaches one, and therefore



This indicates that e can be written as a series:



Indeed, since each term of the binomial expansion is an increasing function of n, it follows from the monotone convergence theorem for series that the sum of this infinite series is equal to e.
Derivative of the power function
In finding the derivative of the power function, f(x) = xn, by using the definition of derivative, the expansion of (x + h)n is employed.
Nth derivative of a product
To indicate the formula for the derivative of order n of the product of two functions, the formula of the binomial theorem is used symbolically.24
The binomial theorem in abstract algebra
Formula (1) is valid more generally for any elements x and y of a semiring satisfying xy = yx. The theorem is true even more generally: alternativity suffices in place of associativity.
The binomial theorem can be stated by saying that the polynomial sequence { 1, x, x2, x3, ... } is of binomial type.
In popular culture

The binomial theorem is mentioned in the Major-General's Song in the comic opera The Pirates of Penzance.
Professor Moriarty is described by Sherlock Holmes as having written a treatise on the binomial theorem.

See also

Binomial approximation
Binomial distribution
Binomial inverse theorem
Binomial probability
Binomial series
Combination
Multinomial theorem
Negative binomial distribution
Pascal's triangle
Stirling's approximation

Notes
References





External links


Binomial Theorem by Stephen Wolfram, and "Binomial Theorem (Step-by-Step)" by Bruce Colletti and Jeff Bryant, Wolfram Demonstrations Project, 2007.

"
Category:Factorial and binomial topics Category:Theorems in algebra Category:Articles containing proofs



Binomial Theorem
The Story of the Binomial Theorem by J. L. Coolidge, The American Mathematical Monthly 56:3 (1949), pp. 147–157
Binomial Theorem



Biggs, N. L. The roots of combinatorics. Historia Math. 6 (1979), no. 2, 109--136. (Reviewer: J. Dieudonne'.) SC: 05-03 (01A15 01A20 01A25 01A30 01A32 01A40 01A45), MR: 80h:05003.









Bourbaki: History of mathematics



Binomial theorem - inductive proofs
This is to guarantee convergence. Depending on r, the series may also converge sometimes when |x| = |y|.






