


Borel–Cantelli lemma




Borel–Cantelli lemma
In [[probability theory]], the '''Borel–Cantelli
 lemma''' is a theorem about sequences of events. In general, it is a result in measure theory.  It is named after Émile Borel and Francesco Paolo Cantelli, who gave statement to the lemma in the first decades of the 20th century.12  A related result, sometimes called the second Borel–Cantelli lemma, is a partial converse of the first Borel–Cantelli lemma.  The lemma states that, under certain conditions, an event will either occur with probability zero or with probability one.  As such, it is the best-known of a class of similar theorems, known as zero-one laws. Other examples include the Kolmogorov 0-1 law and the Hewitt–Savage zero-one law.
Statement of lemma for probability spaces
Let (En) be a sequence of events in some probability space. The Borel–Cantelli lemma states:3

If the sum of the probabilities of the En is finite
 










then the probability that infinitely many of them occur is 0, that is,
 









Here, "lim sup" denotes limit supremum of the sequence of events, and each event is a set of outcomes. That is, lim sup En is the set of outcomes that occur infinitely many times within the infinite sequence of events (En). Explicitly,



The theorem therefore asserts that if the sum of the probabilities of the events En is finite, then the set of all outcomes that are "repeated" infinitely many times must occur with probability zero. Note that no assumption of independence is required.
Example
Suppose (Xn) is a sequence of random variables with Pr(Xn = 0) = 1/n2 for each n. The probability that Xn = 0 occurs for infinitely many n is equivalent to the probability of the intersection of infinitely many [Xn = 0] events. The intersection of infinitely many such events is a set of outcomes common to all of them. However, the sum ∑Pr(Xn = 0) converges to π2/6 ≈ 1.645 n = 0 occurring for infinitely many n is 0. Almost surely (i.e., with probability 1), Xn is nonzero for all but finitely many n.
Proof 4
Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of events in some probability space. Consider the random variable


 
  where, for any event 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function of 
 
 
 
  written in Iverson bracket notation:


 
 .
The random variable 
 
 
 
  is equal to the number of non-negative integers 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is true. By Markov's inequality,


 
  where, for any random variable 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  denotes the expected value of 
 
 
 
 . (By linearity and the definition of the expected value,


 
 .)
Taking the supremum of both sides with respect to 
 
 
 
  gives


 
 .
Define the limiting random variable 
 
 
 
 . Note that the sequence 
 
 
 
  is monotone, i.e., 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
 . Then the hypotheses of Lebesgue's monotone convergence theorem hold for the sequence of indicator functions 
 
 
 
 , whereby


 
 . Thus


 
 .
By hypothesis, 
 
 
 
  is finite. Taking the infimum of both sides with respect to 
 
 
 
  therefore yields


 
 .
Consider the logical identity


 
 . Then since measures are monotone functions,


 
 . Conclude


 
  from which the identity follows via 
 
 
 
 .
Alternative proof 5
Let (En) be a sequence of events in some probability space and suppose that the sum of the probabilities of the En is finite. That is suppose:


 
  Now we can examine the series by examining the elements in the series. We can order the sequence such that the smaller the element is, the later it would come in the sequence. That is :-


 
  As the series converges, we must have that



as 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity. Therefore :



Therefore it follows that



General measure spaces
For general measure spaces, the Borel–Cantelli lemma takes the following form:

Let μ be a (positive) measure on a set X, with σ-algebra F, and let (An) be a sequence in F. If
 










then
 









Converse result
A related result, sometimes called the second Borel–Cantelli lemma, is a partial converse of the first Borel–Cantelli lemma. The lemma states: If the events En are independent and the sum of the probabilities of the En diverges to infinity, then the probability that infinitely many of them occur is 1. That is:


If 
 
 
 
  and the events 
 
 
 
  are independent, then 
 
 




The assumption of independence can be weakened to pairwise independence, but in that case the proof is more difficult.
Example
The infinite monkey theorem is a special case of this lemma.
The lemma can be applied to give a covering theorem in Rn. Specifically , if Ej is a collection of Lebesgue measurable subsets of a compact set in Rn such that



then there is a sequence Fj of translates



such that



apart from a set of measure zero.
Proof6
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  and the events 
 
 
 
  are independent. It is sufficient to show the event that the En's did not occur for infinitely many values of n has probability 0. This is just to say that it is sufficient to show that



Noting that:



it is enough to show
 
 
 
 . Since the 
 
 
 
  are independent:



This completes the proof. Alternatively, we can see 
 
 
 
  by taking negative the logarithm of both sides to get:



Since −log(1 − x) ≥ x for all x > 0, the result similarly follows from our assumption that 
 
 

Counterpart
Another related result is the so-called counterpart of the Borel–Cantelli lemma. It is a counterpart of the Lemma in the sense that it gives a necessary and sufficient condition for the limsup to be 1 by replacing the independence assumption by the completely different assumption that 
 
 
 
  is monotone increasing for sufficiently large indices. This Lemma says:
Let 
 
 
 
  be such that 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  denote the complement of 
 
 
 
 . Then the probability of infinitely many 
 
 
 
  occur (that is, at least one 
 
 
 
  occurs) is one if and only if there exists a strictly increasing sequence of positive integers 
 
 
 
  such that



This simple result can be useful in problems such as for instance those involving hitting probabilities for stochastic process with the choice of the sequence 
 
 
 
  usually being the essence.
See also

Lévy's zero-one law
Kuratowski convergence
Infinite monkey theorem

References



.

.

.
Durrett, Rick. "Probability: Theory and Examples." Duxbury advanced series, Third Edition, Thomson Brooks/Cole, 2005.

External links

Planet Math Proof Refer for a simple proof of the Borel Cantelli Lemma

"
Category:Theorems in measure theory Category:Probability theorems Category:Covering lemmas Category:Lemmas



E. Borel, "Les probabilités dénombrables et leurs applications arithmetiques" Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo (2) 27 (1909) pp. 247–271.
F.P. Cantelli, "Sulla probabilità come limite della frequenza", Atti Accad. Naz. Lincei 26:1 (1917) pp.39–45.








