


Fusor




Fusor

thumb|upright=1.5|A homemade fusor.1
A fusor is a device that uses an electric field to heat ions to conditions suitable for nuclear fusion. The machine has a voltage between two metal cages inside a vacuum. Positive ions fall down this voltage drop, building up speed. If they collide in the center, they can fuse. This is a type of Inertial electrostatic confinement device.
A Farnsworth–Hirsch fusor is the most common type of fusor.2 This design came from work by Philo T. Farnsworth (in 1964) and Robert L. Hirsch in 1967.34 A variant of fusor had been proposed previously by William Elmore, James L. Tuck, and Ken Watson at the Los Alamos National Laboratory5 though they never built the machine.
Fusors have been built by various institutions. These include academic institutions such as the University of Wisconsin–Madison,6 the Massachusetts Institute of Technology7 and government entities, such as the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran and the Turkish Atomic Energy Authority.89 Fusors have also been developed commercially, as sources for neutrons by DaimlerChrysler Aerospace10 and as a method for generating medical isotopes.111213 Fusors have also become very popular for hobbyists and amateurs. A growing number of amateurs have performed nuclear fusion using simple fusor machines.141516171819
Mechanism
For every volt that an ion of ±1 charge is accelerated across, it gains 11,604 kelvins in temperature. For example, a typical magnetic confinement fusion plasma is 15 keV, or ≈ 174 megakelvins. An ion with a charge of one can reach this temperature by being accelerated across a fifteen thousand volt drop. In fusors, the voltage drop is made with a wire cage. Because most of the ions fall into the wires of the cage, fusors suffer from high conduction losses. Hence, no fusor has ever come close to break-even energy output.
(Figure)
This is an illustration of the basic mechanism of fusion in fusors. (1) The fusor contains two concentric wire cages. The cathode is inside the anode. (2) Positive ions are attracted to the inner cathode. They fall down the voltage drop. The electric field does work on the ions heating them to fusion conditions. (3) The ions miss the inner cage. (4) The ions collide in the center and may fuse.20

History
thumb|upright=1.0| - fusor — Image from Farnsworths patent, on 4 June 1968, This device has an inner cage to make the field, and four ion guns on the outside. The fusor was originally conceived by Philo T. Farnsworth, better known for his pioneering work in television. In the early 1930s, he investigated a number of vacuum tube designs for use in television, and found one that led to an interesting effect. In this design, which he called the "multipactor", electrons moving from one electrode to another were stopped in mid-flight with the proper application of a high-frequency magnetic field. The charge would then accumulate in the center of the tube, leading to high amplification. Unfortunately it also led to high erosion on the electrodes when the electrons eventually hit them, and today the multipactor effect is generally considered a problem to be avoided.
What particularly interested Farnsworth about the device was its ability to focus electrons at a particular point. One of the biggest problems in fusion research is to keep the hot fuel from hitting the walls of the container. If this is allowed to happen, the fuel cannot be kept hot enough for the fusion reaction to occur. Farnsworth reasoned that he could build an electrostatic plasma confinement system in which the "wall" fields of the reactor were electrons or ions being held in place by the multipactor. Fuel could then be injected through the wall, and once inside it would be unable to escape. He called this concept a virtual electrode, and the system as a whole the fusor.
Design
Farnsworth's original fusor designs were based on cylindrical arrangements of electrodes, like the original multipactors. Fuel was ionized and then fired from small accelerators through holes in the outer (physical) electrodes. Once through the hole they were accelerated towards the inner reaction area at high velocity. Electrostatic pressure from the positively charged electrodes would keep the fuel as a whole off the walls of the chamber, and impacts from new ions would keep the hottest plasma in the center. He referred to this as inertial electrostatic confinement, a term that continues to be used to this day.
Work at Farnsworth Television labs
All of this work had taken place at the Farnsworth Television labs, which had been purchased in 1949 by ITT Corporation, as part of its plan to become the next RCA. However, a fusion research project was not regarded as immediately profitable. In 1965, the board of directors started asking Geneen to sell off the Farnsworth division, but he had his 1966 budget approved with funding until the middle of 1967. Further funding was refused, and that ended ITT's experiments with fusion.
Things changed dramatically with the arrival of Robert Hirsch, and the introduction of the modified Hirsch-Meeks fusor patent. New fusors based on Hirsch's design were first constructed between 1964 and 1967.21 Hirsch published his design in a paper in 1967. His design included ion beams to shoot ions into the vacuum chamber.22
The team then turned to the AEC, then in charge of fusion research funding, and provided them with a demonstration device mounted on a serving cart that produced more fusion than any existing "classical" device. The observers were startled, but the timing was bad; Hirsch himself had recently revealed the great progress being made by the Soviets using the tokamak. In response to this surprising development, the AEC decided to concentrate funding on large tokamak projects, and reduce backing for alternative concepts.
Recent developments
In the early 1980s, disappointed by the slow progress on "big machines", a number of physicists took a fresh look at alternative designs. George H. Miley at the University of Illinois picked up on the fusor and re-introduced it into the field. A low but steady interest in the fusor has persisted since. An important development was the successful commercial introduction of a fusor-based neutron generator. From 2006 until his death in 2007, Robert W. Bussard gave talks on a reactor similar in design to the fusor, now called the polywell, that he stated would be capable of useful power generation.23 Most recently, the fusor has gained popularity among amateurs, who choose them as home projects due to their relatively low space, money, and power requirements. An online community of "fusioneers", The Open Source Fusor Research Consortium, or Fusor.net, is dedicated to reporting developments in the world of fusors and aiding other amateurs in their projects. The site includes forums, articles and papers done on the fusor, including Farnsworth's original patent, as well as Hirsch's patent of his version of the invention.24
Fusion in fusors
Basic fusion
(Figure)
This is a plot of the cross section of different fusion reactions.

Nuclear fusion refers to reactions in which lighter nuclei are combined to become heavier nuclei. This process changes mass into energy which in may be captured to provide fusion power. Many types of atoms can be fused. The easiest to fuse are deuterium and tritium. This happens when the ions have to have a temperature of at least 4 keV (kiloelectronvolts) or about 45 million kelvins. The second easiest reaction is fusing deuterium with itself. Because this gas is cheaper, it is the fuel commonly used by amateurs. The ease of doing a fusion reaction is measured by its cross section.25
Net power
At such conditions, the atoms are ionized and make a plasma. The energy generated by fusion, inside a hot plasma cloud can be found with the following equation.26



where:



 
  is the fusion power density (energy per time per volume),
n is the number density of species A or B (particles per volume),


 
  is the product of the collision cross-section σ (which depends on the relative velocity) and the relative velocity of the two species v, averaged over all the particle velocities in the system, and


 
  is the energy released by a single fusion reaction.

This equation shows that energy varies with the temperature, density, speed of collision, and fuel used. To reach net power, fusion reactions have to occur fast enough to make up for energy losses. Any power plant using fusion will hold in this hot cloud. Plasma clouds lose energy through conduction and radiation.27 Conduction is when ions, electrons or neutrals touch a surface and leak out. Energy is lost with the particle. Radiation is when energy leaves the cloud as light. Radiation increases as the temperature rises. To get net power from fusion, you must overcome these losses. This leads to an equation for power output.



where:

η, efficiency

John Lawson used this equation to estimate some conditions for net power28 based on a Maxwellian cloud.29 This is the Lawson criterion. Fusors typically suffer from conduction losses due to the wire cage being in the path of the recirculating plasma.
In fusors
In the original fusor design, several small particle accelerators, essentially TV tubes with the ends removed, inject ions at a relatively low voltage into a vacuum chamber. In the Hirsch version of the fusor, the ions are produced by ionizing a dilute gas in the chamber. In either version there are two concentric spherical electrodes, the inner one being charged negatively with respect to the outer one (to about 80 kV). Once the ions enter the region between the electrodes, they are accelerated towards the center.
In the fusor, the ions are accelerated to several keV by the electrodes, so heating as such is not necessary (as long as the ions fuse before losing their energy by any process). Whereas 45 megakelvins is a very high temperature by any standard, the corresponding voltage is only 4 kV, a level commonly found in such devices as neon lights and televisions. To the extent that the ions remain at their initial energy, the energy can be tuned to take advantage of the peak of the reaction cross section or to avoid disadvantageous (for example neutron-producing) reactions that might occur at higher energies.
Various attempts have been made at increasing deuterium ionization rate, including heaters within "ion-guns", (similar to the "electron gun" which forms the basis for old-style television display tubes), as well as magnetron type devices, (which are the power sources for microwave ovens), which can enhance ion formation using high-voltage electro-magnetic fields. Any method which increases ion density (within limits which preserve ion mean-free path), or ion energy, can be expected to enhance the fusion yield, typically measured in the number of neutrons produced per second.
The ease with which the ion energy can be increased appears to be particularly useful when "high temperature" fusion reactions are considered, such as proton-boron fusion, which has plentiful fuel, requires no radioactive tritium, and produces no neutrons in the primary reaction.
Common considerations
Modes of operation
thumb|upright=1.5|Farnsworth–Hirsch fusor during operation in so called "star mode" characterized by "rays" of glowing plasma which appear to emanate from the gaps in the inner grid.
Fusors have at least two modes of operation (possibly more): Star Mode and Halo Mode. Halo mode is characterized by a broad symmetric glow, with one or two electron beams exiting the structure. There is little fusion.30 The halo mode occurs in higher pressure tanks, and as the vacuum improves, the device transitions to star mode. Star mode appears as bright beams of light emanating from the device center.31
Power density
Because the electric field made by the cages is negative, it cannot simultaneously trap both positively charged ions and negative electrons. Hence, there must be some regions of charge accumulation, which will result in an upper limit on the achievable density. This could place an upper limit on the machine's power density, which may keep it too low for power production.
Thermalization of the ion velocities
When they first fall into the center of the fusor, the ions will all have the same energy, but the velocity distribution will rapidly approach a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution. This would occur through simple Coulomb collisions in a matter of milliseconds, but beam-beam instabilities will occur orders of magnitude faster still. In comparison, any given ion will require a few minutes before undergoing a fusion reaction, so that the monoenergetic picture of the fusor, at least for power production, is not appropriate. One consequence of the thermalization is that some of the ions will gain enough energy to leave the potential well, taking their energy with them, without having undergone a fusion reaction.
Electrodes
(Figure)
Image showing a different grid design

There are a number of unsolved challenges with the electrodes in a fusor power system. To begin with, the electrodes cannot influence the potential within themselves, so it would seem at first glance that the fusion plasma would be in more or less direct contact with the inner electrode, resulting in contamination of the plasma and destruction of the electrode. However, the majority of the fusion tends to occur in microchannels formed in areas of minimum electric potential,32 seen as visible "rays" penetrating the core. These form because the forces within the region correspond to roughly stable "orbits". Approximately 40% of the high energy ions in a typical grid operating in star mode may be within these microchannels.33 Nonetheless, grid collisions remain the primary energy loss mechanism for Farnsworth-Hirsch fusors. Complicating issues is the challenge in cooling the central electrode; any fusor producing enough power to run a power plant seems destined to also destroy its inner electrode. As one fundamental limitation, any method which produces a neutron flux that is captured to heat a working fluid will also bombard its electrodes with that flux, heating them as well.
Attempts to resolve these problems include Bussard's Polywell system, D. C. Barnes' modified Penning trap approach, and the University of Illinois's fusor which retains grids but attempts to more tightly focus the ions into microchannels to attempt to avoid losses. While all three are Inertial electrostatic confinement (IEC) devices, only the last is actually a "fusor".
Radiation
Nonrelativistic particles will radiate energy as light when they change speed.34 This loss rate can be estimated using the Larmor formula. Inside a fusor there is a cloud of ions and electrons. These particles will accelerate or decelerate as they move about. These changes in speed make the cloud lose energy as light. The radiation from a fusor can (at least) be in the visible, ultraviolet and X-ray spectrum, depending on the type of fusor used. These changes in speed can be due to electrostatic interactions between particles (ion to ion, ion to electron, electron to electron). This is referred to bremsstrahlung radiation, and is common in fusors. Changes in speed can also be due to interactions between the particle and the electric field. Since there are no magnetic fields, fusors emit no Cyclotron radiation at slow speeds, or synchrotron radiation at high speeds.
In Fundamental limitations on plasma fusion systems not in thermodynamic equilibrium, Todd Rider argues that a quasineutral isotropic plasma will lose energy due to Bremsstrahlung at a rate prohibitive for any fuel other than D-T (or possibly D-D or D-He3). This paper is not applicable to IEC fusion, as a quasineutral plasma cannot be contained by an electric field, which is a fundamental part of IEC fusion. However, in an earlier paper, "A general critique of inertial-electrostatic confinement fusion systems", Rider addresses the common IEC devices directly, including the fusor. In the case of the fusor the electrons are generally separated from the mass of the fuel isolated near the electrodes, which limits the loss rate. However, Rider demonstrates that practical fusors operate in a range of modes that either lead to significant electron mixing and losses, or alternately lower power densities. This appears to be a sort of catch-22 that limits the output of any fusor-like system.
Commercial Applications




Production source





Neutrons



Energy



Mass



Electric charge



Spin



Neutron Source
The fusor has been demonstrated as a viable neutron source. Typical fusors cannot reach fluxes as high as nuclear reactor or particle accelerator sources, but are sufficient for many uses. Importantly, the neutron generator easily sits on a benchtop, and can be turned off at the flick of a switch. A commercial fusor was developed as a non-core business within DaimlerChrysler Aerospace - Space Infrastructure, Bremen between 1996 and early 2001.35 After the project was effectively ended, the former project manager established a company which is called NSD-Fusion.36 To date, the highest neutron flux achieved by a fusor-like device has been 3 × 1011 neutrons per second with the deuterium-deuterium fusion reaction.37
Medical isotopes
Commercial startups have used the neutron fluxes generated by fusors to generate Mo-99, an isotope used for medical care.3839
Fusor examples
Professional
Fusors have been theoretically studied at multiple institutions, including: Kyoto University,40 and Kyushu University.41 Researchers meet annually at the US-Japan Workshop on Inertial Electrostatic Confinement Fusion. Listed here, are actual machines built.

Tokyo Institute of Technology42 has four IEC devices of different shapes: a spherical machine, a cylindrical device, a co-axial double cylinder and a magnetically assisted device.43
University of Wisconsin-Madison A group at Wisconsin-Madison has been running a very large, funded, fusor program since 1991.44
Turkish Atomic Energy Authority In 2013 this team built a 30 cm fusor at the Saraykoy Nuclear Research and Training center in Turkey. This fusor can reach 85 Kv and do deuterium fusion, producing  neutrons per second.45
University of Illinois Dr. George Miley's team at the fusion studies laboratory has built a ~25 cm fusor which has produced  neutrons using deuterium gas.46
Atomic Energy Organization of Iran Researchers at Shahid Beheshti University in Iran have built a 60 cm diameter fusor which can produce  neutrons per second at 140 kilovolts using deuterium gas.47
Los Alamos National Laboratory In the late nineties, researchers purposed48 and built a fusor-like system for oscillating plasma, inside a fusor. This device is known as the Periodically Oscillating Plasma Sphere or POPS.49
Massachusetts Institute of Technology For his doctoral thesis in 2007, Carl Dietrich built a fusor and studied its potential use in spacecraft propulsion.50 In addition, Tom McGuire did his thesis5152 on fusors with multiple cages and ion guns.
ITT Corporation Hirschs original machine was a 17.8 cm diameter machine with 150 Kv voltage drop across it.53 This machine used ion beams.
Phoenix Nuclear Labs Has developed a commercial neutron source based off a fusor, achieving  neutrons per second with the deuterium-deuterium fusion reaction.54

Amateur
(Figure)
Taylor Wilson presenting fusor work to Barack Obama, February 7, 2012

A number of amateurs have built working fusors and detected neutrons. Many fusor enthusiasts connect on forums55 and message boards online. Below are some examples of working fusors.

Richard Hull Since the late nineties, Richard Hull has built several fusors in his home in Richmond, Virginia.56 In March 1999, he achieved a neutron rate of  neutrons per second.57 Hull maintains a list of amateurs who have gotten neutrons from fusors.
Carl Greninger Founded the North West Nuclear Consortium,58 an organization in Washington state which teaches a class of a dozen high school students nuclear engineering principles using a 60 kV fusor.59
Taylor Wilson Taylor Wilson is the youngest person to build a working fusor, at age 14.6061
Nathan Schmidt is the second person at age fourteen to build a working fusor. The project was carried out autonomously at the University of Northern Iowa Physics Department under the supervision of the now head of the department Dr. Paul Shand.
Matthew Honickman Was a high school student who built a working fusor in his basement in Rochester, New York.62
Michael Li In 2003, Michael Li built a fusor and won second place63 in the US's Intel Science Talent Search winning a $75,000 college scholarship.64
Mark Suppes A web designer for Gucci in Brooklyn New York, built a working fusor on a path to building the first amateur Polywell.6566
Thiago David Olson Built a 40 kV fusor at age 17, in his home in Rochester, Michigan and placed second in the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair in 2007.676869
Andrew Seltzman Has built several fusors70 with neutrons detected in 2008.71 He is now a graduate student working on plasma physics at the University of Wisconsin–Madison.
Conrad Farnsworth of Newcastle, Wyoming produced fusion in 2011 at 177273 and used this to win a regional and state science fair.

Patents

Bennett, W. H., , February 1964. (Thermonuclear power)
P.T. Farnsworth, , June 1966 (Electric discharge — Nuclear interaction)
P.T. Farnsworth, . June 1968 (Method and apparatus)
Hirsch, Robert, . September 1970 (Apparatus)
Hirsch, Robert, . September 1970 (Generating apparatus — Hirsch/Meeks)
Hirsch, Robert, . October 1970 (Lithium-Ion source)
Hirsch, Robert, . April 1972 (Reduce plasma leakage)
P.T. Farnsworth, . May 1972 (Electrostatic containment)
R.W. Bussard, "Method and apparatus for controlling charged particles", , May 1989 (Method and apparatus — Magnetic grid fields).
R.W. Bussard, "Method and apparatus for creating and controlling nuclear fusion reactions", , November 1992 (Method and apparatus — Ion acoustic waves).

See also

Coulomb barrier
Polywell
Taylor Wilson
Phoenix Nuclear Labs
Philo Farnsworth
Inertial electrostatic confinement
Robert L. Hirsch
Helium-3 - possible fuel
Lawson criterion
Robert W. Bussard
List of plasma (physics) articles
Thiago David Olson
High beta fusion reactor

References
Further reading

Reducing the Barriers to Fusion Electric Power; G. L. Kulcinski and J. F. Santarius, October 1997 Presented at "Pathways to Fusion Power", submitted to Journal of Fusion Energy, vol. 17, No. 1, 1998. (Abstract in PDF)
Robert L. Hirsch, "Inertial-Electrostatic Confinement of Ionized Fusion Gases", Journal of Applied Physics, v. 38, no. 7, October 1967
Irving Langmuir, Katharine B. Blodgett, "Currents limited by space charge between concentric spheres" Physical Review, vol. 24, No. 1, pp49–59, 1924
R. A. Anderl, J. K. Hartwell, J. H. Nadler, J. M. DeMora, R. A. Stubbers, and G. H. Miley, Development of an IEC Neutron Source for NDE, 16th Symposium on Fusion Engineering, eds. G. H. Miley and C. M. Elliott, IEEE Conf. Proc. 95CH35852, IEEE Piscataway, New Jersey, 1482–1485 (1996).
"On the Inertial-Electrostatic Confinement of a Plasma" William C. Elmore, James L. Tuck, Kenneth M. Watson, The Physics of Fluids v. 2, no 3, May–June, 1959


R. P. Ashley, G. L. Kulcinski, J.F. Santarius, S. Krupakar Murali, G. Piefer; IEEE Publication 99CH37050, pg. 35-37, 18th Symposium on Fusion Engineering, Albuquerque NM, 25–29 October 1999.

G. L. Kulcinski, Progress in Steady State Fusion of Advanced Fuels in the University of Wisconsin IEC Device, March 2001
Fusion Reactivity Characterization of a Spherically Convergent Ion Focus, T.A. Thorson, R.D. Durst, R.J. Fonck, A.C. Sontag, Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 38, No. 4. p. 495, April 1998. (abstract)
Convergence, Electrostatic Potential, and Density Measurements in a Spherically Convergent Ion Focus, T. A. Thorson, R. D. Durst, R. J. Fonck, and L. P. Wainwright, Phys. Plasma, 4:1, January 1997.
R. W. Bussard and L. W. Jameson, "Inertial-Electrostatic Propulsion Spectrum: Airbreathing to Interstellar Flight", Journal of Propulsion and Power, v 11, no 2. The authors describe the proton — Boron 11 reaction and its application to ionic electrostatic confinement.
R. W. Bussard and L. W. Jameson, "Fusion as Electric Propulsion", Journal of Propulsion and Power, v 6, no 5, September–October, 1990 (This is the same Bussard who conceived the Bussard Ramjet widely used in science-fiction for interstellar rocketry)
Todd H. Rider, "A general critique of inertial-electrostatic confinement fusion systems", M.S. thesis at MIT, 1994.
Todd H. Rider, [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995PhDT........45R "Fundamental limitations on plasma fusion systems not in thermodynamic equilibrium"], Ph. D. thesis at MIT, 1995.
Todd H. Rider, [http://scitation.aip.org/getabs/servlet/GetabsServlet?prog=normal&id;;=PHPAEN000004000004001039000001&idtype;=cvips&gifs;=yes "Fundamental limitations on plasma fusion systems not in thermodynamic equilibrium"] Physics of Plasmas, April 1997, Volume 4, Issue 4, pp. 1039–1046.
Could Advanced Fusion Fuels Be Used with Today's Technology?; J.F. Santarius, G.L. Kulcinski, L.A. El-Guebaly, H.Y. Khater, January 1998 [presented at Fusion Power Associates Annual Meeting, 27–29 August 1997, Aspen CO; Journal of Fusion Energy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 1998, p. 33].
R. W. Bussard and L. W. Jameson, "From SSTO to Saturn's Moons, Superperformance Fusion Propulsion for Practical Spaceflight", 30th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, 27–29 June 1994, AIAA-94-3269
Robert W. Bussard presentation video to Google Employees — Google TechTalks, 9 November 2006.
"The Advent of Clean Nuclear Fusion: Super-performance Space Power and Propulsion", Robert W. Bussard, Ph.D., 57th International Astronautical Congress, 2–6 October 2006.

External links

David, Schneider, "Fusion from Television?". American Scientist, July–August
University of Wisconsin-Madison IEC homepage
RTFTechnologies.org IEC Fusion Reactor Detailed IEC reactor construction information
Mr. Fusion — Blog of an experimenter
Neutrons for sale — New Scientist article
Fusion Experiments Show Nuclear Power's Softer Side — Wired article
Various Patents and Articles Related to Fusion, IEC, ICC and Plasma Physics
How a Small Vacuum System and a Bit of Basketweaving Will Get You a Working Inertial-Electrostatic Confinement Neutron Source
Description of Bussard's "aneutronic" boron version
Fusor.net Forum for hobbyist fusor builders
NSD-Fusion
North West Nuclear Consortium teaches high school students fusors
The Farnsworth Fusor at the Farnsworth Chronicles (farnovision.com)
How-to: Making A Fusor in 60 minutes

"
Category:Fusion power Category:Neutron sources Category:Fusion reactors Category:American inventions Category:Plasma physics



blogspot.com - Will's Amateur Science and Engineering: Fusion Reactor's First Light!, Feb 2010 (from [http://www.tidbit77.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2010-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max;;=2011-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results;=14 blog])↩
↩
Robert L. Hirsch, "Inertial-Electrostatic Confinement of Ionized Fusion Gases", Journal of Applied Physics, v. 38, no. 7, October 1967↩
P. T. Farnsworth (private communication, 1964)↩
"On the Inertial Electrostatic Confinement of a Plasma" William Elmore, James Tuck and Ken Watson, The Physics of Fluids, January 30, 1959↩
Ion Flow and Fusion Reactivity, Characterization of a Spherically convergent ion Focus. PhD Thesis, Dr. Timothy A Thorson, Wisconsin-Madison 1996.↩
Improving Particle Confinement in Inertial electrostatic Fusion for Spacecraft Power and Propulsion. Dr. Carl Dietrich, PhD Thesis, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2007↩
"Preliminary Results of Experimental Studies from Low Pressure Inertial Electrostatic Confinement Device" Journal of Fusion Energy, May 23, 2013↩
"Experimental Study of the Iranian Inertial Electrostatic Confinement Fusion Device as a Continuous Neutron Generator" V. Damideh, A. Sadighzadeh, Koohi, Aslezaeem, Heidarnia, Abdollahi, Journal of Fusion Energy, June 11, 2011↩

"Phoenix Nuclear Labs meets neutron production milestone", PNL press release May 1, 2013, Ross Radel, Evan Sengbusch↩
http://shinemed.com/products/, SHINE Medical Technologies, accessed 1-20-2014↩
http://www.nsd-fusion.com↩
Hull, Richard. "The Fusor List." The Open Source Fusor Research Consortium II - Download Complete Thread. 58. http://fusor.net/board/viewtopic.php?t=13&f;;=7&sid;=4d8521abbea0401b7c9ee0d4a6b09d6e#p512, 24 Apr. 2013.↩
http://discovermagazine.com/2010/extreme-universe/18-do-it-yourself-basement-fusion "How to Build a $1000 Fusion Reactor in Your Basement" Discovery Magazine March 2010↩
http://spectrum.ieee.org/energy/nuclear/fusion-on-a-budget "Fusion on a Budget" IEEE Specturm March 2009↩
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10385853 "Extreme DIY: Building a homemade nuclear reactor in NYC" BBC June 2010↩
http://robofusor.aditl.com/ "THE HAYLETT NUCLEAR FUSION PROJECT" Accessed 9/15/2014↩
http://www.cnet.com/news/13-year-old-builds-working-nuclear-fusion-reactor/ "13-year-old builds working nuclear fusion reactor" CNET news, March 2014↩
"Ion flow and fusion reactivity characterization of a spherically convergent ion focus" Thesis work, Tim Thorson, December 1996, The University of Wisconsin–Madison↩


"The Advent of Clean Nuclear Fusion: Super-performance Space Power and Propulsion", Robert W. Bussard, Ph.D., 57th International Astronautical Congress, October 2–6, 2006↩
fusor.net↩
"Development of the indirect drive approach to inertial confinement fusion and the target physics basis for ignition and gain" John Lindl, Physics of Plasma, 1995↩
"Some Criteria for a Power producing thermonuclear reactor" John Lawson, Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Hanvell, Berks, 2 November 1956↩



Thorson, Timothy A. Ion Flow and Fusion Reactivity Characterization of a Spherically Convergent Ion Focus. Thesis. Wisconsin Madison, 1996. Madison: University of Wisconsin, 1996. Print.↩

↩
http://www.mr-fusion.hellblazer.com/pdfs/study-of-ion-microchannels-and-iec-grid-effects-using-simion-code.pdf↩
J. Larmor, "On a dynamical theory of the electric and luminiferous medium", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 190, (1897) pp. 205–300 (Third and last in a series of papers with the same name)↩
↩




"Beam optics in inertial electrostatic confinement fusion", Review of Scientific instruments, Masami Ohnishi, Chikara Hoshino, Kiyoshi Yoshikawa, Kai Masuda, and Yasushi Yamamoto, VOLUME 71, NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2000↩
"Ion distribution function and radial profile of neutron production rate in spherical inertial electrostatic confinement plasmas" H. Matsuura, T. Takaki, K. Funakoshi, Y. Nakao, K. Kudo, Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 40, No. 12, 2000↩

"Overview of IEC Research at Tokyo Tech." Eiki Hotta, 15th annual US-Japan IEC workshop, October 7, 2013↩
R.P. Ashley, G.L. Kulcinski, J.F. Santarius, S.K. Murali, G. Piefer, 18th IEEE/NPSS Symposium on Fusion Engineering, IEEE #99CH37050, (1999)↩
"Preliminary Results of Experimental Studies from Low Pressure Inertial Electrostatic Confinement Device", A. S. B, Y. A, A. A, Journal of Fusion Energy, May 2013↩
"A portable neutron/tunable X-ray source based on inertial electrostatic confinement", Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, A 422 (1999) 16-20↩
"Experimental Study of the Iranian Inertial Electrostatic Confinement Fusion Device as a Continuous Neutron Generator" V. Damideh, Journal of Fusion Energy, June 11, 2011↩
"Stable, thermal equilibrium, large-amplitude, spherical plasma oscillations in electrostatic confinement devices", DC Barnes and Rick Nebel, PHYSICS OF PLASMAS VOLUME 5, NUMBER 7 JULY 1998↩
"Equilibrium and low-frequency stability of a uniform density, collisionless, spherical Vlasov system", D C Barnes, L Chacon and J M Finn, Physics Of Plasmas Volume 9, Number 11 November 2002↩
"Improving Particle Confinement in Inertial Electrostatic Fusion for Spacecraft Power and Propulsion" SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF AERONAUTICS AND ASTRONAUTICS, Carl Dietrich, February 2007↩
"Improved Lifetimes and Synchronization Behavior in Multi-grid Inertial Electrostatic Confinement Fusion Devices", Feb 2007, MIT, DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN AERONAUTICS AND ASTRONAUTICS↩
"Numerical Predictions of Enhanced Ion Confinement in a Multi-grid IEC Device", McGuire, Sedwick, 44th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit 21–23 July 2008, Hartford, Connecticut↩


http://www.fusor.net/↩
"Living with a nuclear reactor" The Wall Street Journal, interview with Sam Schechner, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJL3RQ4I-iE↩
"The Neutron Club", Richard Hull, Accessed 6-9-2011, http://prometheusfusionperfection.com/category/fusor/↩
http://lobby.nwnc.us.com/_layouts/15/start.aspx#/SitePages/Home.aspx↩
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KbeAcFy3ErM↩
Dutton, Judy. "Teen Nuclear Scientist Fights Terror", CNN.com, 1 September 2011. Retrieved 2011-09-03.↩
TED2012. "Taylor Wilson: Yup, I built a nuclear fusion reactor". TED.com. Retrieved 2013-04-14.↩
"Building Electronics is teen's favorite leisure activity" Democrat and Chronicle, Ashwin Verghese, Jan 6th 2010↩
Michael Li, Resume, Accessed 2013, http://www.princeton.edu/bcf/phd/students/link/Tianhui%20Michael%20Li.pdf↩
http://prometheusfusionperfection.com/?s=Hull↩
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jvkoklpubiw, Mark Suppes Presentation at Wired 2012, October 2012↩
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Etlb43suCoc↩
Teen builds basement nuclear reactor, Popular Science↩
Stephen Ornes: Radioactive Boy Scout, Discover Magazine, March 2007↩
"Neutron Activation Analysis Using an Inertial Electrostatic Confinement Fusion Reactor," Thiago David Olson of Stoney Creek High School, Rochester Hills, Michigan AVS Newsletter, Fall 2007, page 3, 2007 Intel 58th International Science and Engineering Fair (ISEF)↩
http://www.rtftechnologies.org/physics.htm↩
http://www.rtftechnologies.org/physics/fusor-mark3-test-runs.htm↩
http://trib.com/lifestyles/home-and-garden/teen-makes-nuclear-reactor-in-dad-s-shed/article_e9576aa3-9df4-550a-9778-29c4843104ed.html↩
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/02/04/conrad-farnsworth-builds-nuclear-fusion-reactor-garage_n_2616998.html↩




