


Alternating group




Alternating group

In mathematics, an alternating group is the group of even permutations of a finite set. The alternating group on the set {1,...,n} is called the alternating group of degree n, or the alternating group on n letters and denoted by An or Alt(n).
Basic properties
For , the group An is the commutator subgroup of the symmetric group Sn with index 2 and has therefore n!/2 elements. It is the kernel of the signature group homomorphism  explained under symmetric group.
The group An is abelian if and only if  and simple if and only if  or . A5 is the smallest non-abelian simple group, having order 60, and the smallest non-solvable group.
The group A4 has a Klein four-group V as a proper normal subgroup, namely the identity and the double transpositions  and maps to , from the sequence . In Galois theory, this map, or rather the corresponding map , corresponds to associating the Lagrange resolvent cubic to a quartic, which allows the quartic polynomial to be solved by radicals, as established by Lodovico Ferrari.
Conjugacy classes
As in the symmetric group, the conjugacy classes in An consist of elements with the same cycle shape. However, if the cycle shape consists only of cycles of odd length with no two cycles the same length, where cycles of length one are included in the cycle type, then there are exactly two conjugacy classes for this cycle shape .
Examples:

the two permutations (123) and (132) are not conjugates in A3, although they have the same cycle shape, and are therefore conjugate in S3
the permutation (123)(45678) is not conjugate to its inverse (132)(48765) in A8, although the two permutations have the same cycle shape, so they are conjugate in S8.

Automorphism group












































































For , except for , the automorphism group of An is the symmetric group Sn, with inner automorphism group An and outer automorphism group Z2; the outer automorphism comes from conjugation by an odd permutation.
For n = 1 and 2, the automorphism group is trivial. For  the automorphism group is Z2, with trivial inner automorphism group and outer automorphism group Z2.
The outer automorphism group of A6 is the Klein four-group , and is related to the outer automorphism of S6. The extra outer automorphism in A6 swaps the 3-cycles (like (123)) with elements of shape 32 (like (123)(456)).
Exceptional isomorphisms
There are some exceptional isomorphisms between some of the small alternating groups and small groups of Lie type, particularly projective special linear groups. These are:

A4 is isomorphic to PSL2(3)1 and the symmetry group of chiral tetrahedral symmetry.
A5 is isomorphic to PSL2(4), PSL2(5), and the symmetry group of chiral icosahedral symmetry. (See2 for an indirect isomorphism of  using a classification of simple groups of order 60, and here for a direct proof).
A6 is isomorphic to PSL2(9) and PSp4(2)'
A8 is isomorphic to PSL4(2)

More obviously, A3 is isomorphic to the cyclic group Z3, and A0, A1, and A2 are isomorphic to the trivial group (which is also  for any q).
Examples S4 and A4



(Figure)
Cayley table of the symmetric group S4

 The odd permutations are colored:
Transpositions in green and 4-cycles in orange


   
(Figure)
Cayley table of the alternating group A4
 Elements: The even permutations (the identity, eight 3-cycles and three double-transpositions (double transpositions in boldface))

 Subgroups:










Cycle graphs




 A3=Z3, (order 3)




 S3=Dih3, (order 6)



Subgroups
A4 is the smallest group demonstrating that the converse of Lagrange's theorem is not true in general: given a finite group G and a divisor d of |G|, there does not necessarily exist a subgroup of G with order d: the group , of order 12, has no subgroup of order 6. A subgroup of three elements (generated by a cyclic rotation of three objects) with any additional element generates the whole group.
Group homology
The group homology of the alternating groups exhibits stabilization, as in stable homotopy theory: for sufficiently large n, it is constant. However, there are some low-dimensional exceptional homology. Note that the homology of the symmetric group exhibits similar stabilization, but without the low-dimensional exceptions (additional homology elements).
H1: Abelianization
The first homology group coincides with abelianization, and (since 
 
 
 
  is perfect, except for the cited exceptions) is thus:


 
  for 
 
 
 
 ;


 
 ;


 
 ;


 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
This is easily seen directly, as follows. 
 
 
 
  is generated by 3-cycles – so the only non-trivial abelianization maps are 
 
 
 
  since order 3 elements must map to order 3 elements – and for 
 
 
 
  all 3-cycles are conjugate, so they must map to the same element in the abelianization, since conjugation is trivial in abelian groups. Thus a 3-cycle like (123) must map to the same element as its inverse (321), but thus must map to the identity, as it must then have order dividing 2 and 3, so the abelianization is trivial.
For 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is trivial, and thus has trivial abelianization. For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  one can compute the abelianization directly, noting that the 3-cycles form two conjugacy classes (rather than all being conjugate) and there are non-trivial maps 
 
 
 
  (in fact an isomorphism) and 
 
 

H2: Schur multipliers
The Schur multipliers of the alternating groups An (in the case where n is at least 5) are the cyclic groups of order 2, except in the case where n is either 6 or 7, in which case there is also a triple cover. In these cases, then, the Schur multiplier is (the cyclic group) of order 6.3 These were first computed in .


 
  for 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  for 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  for 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
Notes
References





External links




"
Category:Finite groups Category:Permutation groups



Robinson (1996), [ p. 78]






