


Interval (mathematics)




Interval (mathematics)

In mathematics, an (real) interval is a set of real numbers with the property that any number that lies between two numbers in the set is also included in the set. For example, the set of all numbers 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
  is an interval which contains 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , as well as all numbers between them. Other examples of intervals are the set of all real numbers 
 
 
 
 , the set of all negative real numbers, and the empty set.
Real intervals play an important role in the theory of integration, because they are the simplest sets whose "size" or "measure" or "length" is easy to define. The concept of measure can then be extended to more complicated sets of real numbers, leading to the Borel measure and eventually to the Lebesgue measure.
Intervals are central to interval arithmetic, a general numerical computing technique that automatically provides guaranteed enclosures for arbitrary formulas, even in the presence of uncertainties, mathematical approximations, and arithmetic roundoff.
Intervals are likewise defined on an arbitrary totally ordered set, such as integers or rational numbers. The notation of integer intervals is considered in the special section below.
Notations for intervals
The interval of numbers between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , including 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , is often denoted 
 
 
 
 . The two numbers are called the endpoints of the interval. In countries where numbers are written with a decimal comma, a semicolon may be used as a separator, to avoid ambiguity.
Including or excluding endpoints
To indicate that one of the endpoints is to be excluded from the set, the corresponding square bracket can be either replaced with a parenthesis, or reversed. Both notations are described in International standard ISO 31-11. Thus, in set builder notation,


 
 :

empty
 
 

degenerate
 
 

proper and bounded:
 
open:
closed
 
 

left-closed, right-open:
left-open, right-closed:


left-bounded and right-unbounded:
 
left-open
 
 

left-closed
 
 



left-unbounded and right-bounded:
 
right-open:
right-closed
 
 



unbounded at both ends
 
 


Intervals of the extended real line
In some contexts, an interval may be defined as a subset of the extended real numbers, the set of all real numbers augmented with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In this interpretation, the notations 
 
 
 
  , 
 
 
 
  , 
 
 
 
  , and 
 
 
 
  are all meaningful and distinct. In particular, 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of all ordinary real numbers, while 
 
 
 
  denotes the extended reals.
This choice affects some of the above definitions and terminology. For instance, the interval 
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
  is closed in the realm of ordinary reals, but not in the realm of the extended reals.
Properties of intervals
The intervals are precisely the connected subsets of 
 
 
 
 . It follows that the image of an interval by any continuous function is also an interval. This is one formulation of the intermediate value theorem.
The intervals are also the convex subsets of 
 
 
 
 . The interval enclosure of a subset 
 
 
 
  is also the convex hull of 
 
 
 
 .
The intersection of any collection of intervals is always an interval. The union of two intervals is an interval if and only if they have a non-empty intersection or an open end-point of one interval is a closed end-point of the other (e.g., 
 
 
 
 ).
If 
 
 
 
  is viewed as a metric space, its open balls are the open bounded sets 
 
 
 
 , and its closed balls are the closed bounded sets 
 
 
 
 .
Any element 
 
 
 
  of an interval 
 
 
 
  defines a partition of 
 
 
 
  into three disjoint intervals 
 
 
1, 
 
 
2, 
 
 
3: respectively, the elements of 
 
 
 
  that are less than 
 
 
 
 , the singleton 
 
 
 
 , and the elements that are greater than 
 
 
 
 . The parts 
 
 
1 and 
 
 
3 are both non-empty (and have non-empty interiors) if and only if 
 
 
 
  is in the interior of 
 
 
 
 . This is an interval version of the trichotomy principle.
Dyadic intervals
A dyadic interval is a bounded real interval whose endpoints are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are integers. Depending on the context, either endpoint may or may not be included in the interval.
Dyadic intervals have the following properties:

The length of a dyadic interval is always an integer power of two.
Each dyadic interval is contained in exactly one dyadic interval of twice the length.
Each dyadic interval is spanned by two dyadic intervals of half the length.
If two open dyadic intervals overlap, then one of them is a subset of the other.

The dyadic intervals consequently have a structure that reflects that of an infinite binary tree.
Dyadic intervals are relevant to several areas of numerical analysis, including adaptive mesh refinement, multigrid methods and wavelet analysis. Another way to represent such a structure is p-adic analysis (for 
 
 
 
 ).1
Generalizations
Multi-dimensional intervals
In many contexts, an 

 
 -dimensional interval is defined as a subset of 
 
 
 
  that is the Cartesian product of 
 
 
 
  intervals, 
 
 
 
 , one on each coordinate axis.
For 
 
 
 
 , this generally defines a rectangle whose sides are parallel to the coordinate axes; for 
 
 
 
 , it defines an axis-aligned rectangular box.
A facet of such an interval 
 
 
 
  is the result of replacing any non-degenerate interval factor 
 
 
 
  by a degenerate interval consisting of a finite endpoint of 
 
 
 
 . The faces of 
 
 
 
  comprise 
 
 
 
  itself and all faces of its facets. The corners of 
 
 
 
  are the faces that consist of a single point of 
 
 
 
 .
Complex intervals
Intervals of complex numbers can be defined as regions of the complex plane, either rectangular or circular.2
Topological algebra
Intervals can be associated with points of the plane and hence regions of intervals can be associated with regions of the plane. Generally, an interval in mathematics corresponds to an ordered pair (x,y) taken from the direct product R × R of real numbers with itself. Often it is assumed that y > x. For purposes of mathematical structure, this restriction is discarded,3 and "reversed intervals" where y − x ( R \oplus R, +, \times) has two ideals, { [x,0] : x ∈ R } and { [0,y] : y ∈ R }. The identity element of this algebra is the condensed interval [1,1]. If interval [x,y] is not in one of the ideals, then it has multiplicative inverse [1/x, 1/y]. Endowed with the usual topology, the algebra of intervals forms a topological ring. The group of units of this ring consists of four quadrants determined by the axes, or ideals in this case. The identity component of this group is quadrant I.
Every interval can be considered a symmetric interval around its midpoint. In a reconfiguration published in 1956 by M Warmus, the axis of "balanced intervals" [x, −x] is used along with the axis of intervals [x,x] that reduce to a point. Instead of the direct sum $R \oplus R$, the ring of intervals has been identified4 with the split-complex number plane by M. Warmus and D. H. Lehmer through the identification

z = (x + y)/2 + j (x − y)/2.
 

This linear mapping of the plane, which amounts of a ring isomorphism, provides the plane with a multiplicative structure having some analogies to ordinary complex arithmetic, such as polar decomposition.
See also

Inequality
Interval graph
Interval finite element

References

T. Sunaga, "Theory of interval algebra and its application to numerical analysis", In: Research Association of Applied Geometry (RAAG) Memoirs, Ggujutsu Bunken Fukuy-kai. Tokyo, Japan, 1958, Vol. 2, pp. 29–46 (547-564); reprinted in Japan Journal on Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2009, Vol. 26, No. 2-3, pp. 126–143.

External links

A Lucid Interval by Brian Hayes: An American Scientist article provides an introduction.
Interval Notation Basics
Interval computations website
Interval computations research centers
Interval Notation by George Beck, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.


"
Category:Sets of real numbers Category:Order theory Category:Topology




Complex interval arithmetic and its applications, Miodrag Petković, Ljiljana Petković, Wiley-VCH, 1998, ISBN 978-3-527-40134-5
Kaj Madsen (1979) Review of "Interval analysis in the extended interval space" by Edgar Kaucher from Mathematical Reviews
D. H. Lehmer (1956) Review of "Calculus of Approximations" from Mathematical Reviews




