


Multivariate random variable




Multivariate random variable

In mathematics, probability, and statistics, a multivariate random variable or random vector is a list of mathematical variables each of whose value is unknown, either because the value has not yet occurred or because there is imperfect knowledge of its value. The individual variables in a random vector are grouped together because there may be correlations among them — often they represent different properties of an individual statistical unit (e.g. a particular person, event, etc.). Normally each element of a random vector is a real number.
Random vectors are often used as the underlying implementation of various types of aggregate random variables, e.g. a random matrix, random tree, random sequence, random process, etc.
More formally, a multivariate random variable is a column vector

 
  (or its transpose, which is a row vector) whose components are scalar-valued random variables on the same probability space

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the sample space, 
 
 
 
  is the sigma-algebra (the collection of all events), and 
 
 
 
  is the probability measure (a function returning each event's probability).
Probability distribution
Every random vector gives rise to a probability measure on 
 
 
 
  with the Borel algebra as the underlying sigma-algebra. This measure is also known as the joint probability distribution, the joint distribution, or the multivariate distribution of the random vector.
The distributions of each of the component random variables 
 
 
 
  are called marginal distributions. The conditional probability distribution of 
 
 
 
  given 
 
 
 
  is the probability distribution of 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  is known to be a particular value.
Operations on random vectors
Random vectors can be subjected to the same kinds of algebraic operations as can non-random vectors: addition, subtraction, multiplication by a scalar, and the taking of inner products.
Similarly, a new random vector 
 
 
 
  can be defined by applying an affine transformation 
 
 
 
  to a random vector 
 
 
 
 :


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
  matrix and 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
  column vector.
If 
 
 
 
  is invertible and the probability density of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , then the probability density of 
 
 
 
  is


 
 .
Expected value, covariance, and cross-covariance
The expected value or mean of a random vector 
 
 
 
  is a fixed vector 
 
 
 
  whose elements are the expected values of the respective random variables.
The covariance matrix (also called the variance-covariance matrix) of an 
 
 
 
  random vector is an 
 
 
matrix whose 
 
 
 
  element is the covariance between the 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  random variables. The covariance matrix is the expected value, element by element, of the 
 
 
 
  matrix computed as

 
 , where the superscript T refers to the transpose of the indicated vector:



By extension, the cross-covariance matrix between two random vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  having 
 
 
 
  elements and 
 
 
 
  having 
 
 
 
  elements) is the 
 
 
 
  matrix



where again the indicated matrix expectation is taken element-by-element in the matrix. The cross-covariance matrix 
 
 
 
  is simply the transpose of the matrix 
 
 
 
 .
Further properties
Expectation of a quadratic form
One can take the expectation of a quadratic form in the random vector X as follows:1



where C is the covariance matrix of X and tr refers to the trace of a matrix — that is, to the sum of the elements on its main diagonal (from upper left to lower right). Since the quadratic form is a scalar, so is its expectation.
Proof: Let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
  random vector with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
  non-stochastic matrix.
Based on the formula of the covariance, then if we call 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we see that:



Hence



which leaves us to show that



This is true based on the fact that one can cyclically permute matrices when taking a trace without changing the end result (e.g.: trace(AB) = trace(BA)).
We see that



And since



is a fixed number, then



trivially. Using the permutation we get:



and by plugging this into the original formula we get:



Expectation of the product of two different quadratic forms
One can take the expectation of the product of two different quadratic forms in a zero-mean Gaussian random vector X as follows:2



where again C is the covariance matrix of X. Again, since both quadratic forms are scalars and hence their product is a scalar, the expectation of their product is also a scalar.
Applications
Portfolio theory
In portfolio theory in finance, an objective often is to choose a portfolio of risky assets such that the distribution of the random portfolio return has desirable properties. For example, one might want to choose the portfolio return having the lowest variance for a given expected value. Here the random vector is the vector r of random returns on the individual assets, and the portfolio return p (a random scalar) is the inner product of the vector of random returns with a vector w of portfolio weights — the fractions of the portfolio placed in the respective assets. Since p = wTr, the expected value of the portfolio return is wTE(r) and the variance of the portfolio return can be shown to be wTCw, where C is the covariance matrix of r.
Regression theory
In linear regression theory, we have data on n observations on a dependent variable y and n observations on each of k independent variables xj. The observations on the dependent variable are stacked into a column vector y; the observations on each independent variable are also stacked into column vectors, and these latter column vectors are combined into a matrix X of observations on the independent variables. Then the following regression equation is postulated as a description of the process that generated the data:



where β is a postulated fixed but unknown vector of k response coefficients, and e is an unknown random vector reflecting random influences on the dependent variable. By some chosen technique such as ordinary least squares, a vector 
 
 
 
  is chosen as an estimate of β, and the estimate of the vector e, denoted 
 
 
 
 , is computed as



Then the statistician must analyze the properties of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , which are viewed as random vectors since a randomly different selection of n cases to observe would have resulted in different values for them.
References
de:Zufallsvariable#Mehrdimensionale Zufallsvariable pl:Zmienna losowa#Uogólnienia"
Category:Probability theory Category:Multivariate statistics Category:Algebra of random variables



Kendrick, David, Stochastic Control for Economic Models, McGraw-Hill, 1981.↩





