


Codomain




Codomain

(Figure)
A function 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The smaller oval inside 
 
 
 
 
  is the image of 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is the codomain of 
 
 
 
 .

In mathematics, the codomain or target set of a function is the set

 
  into which all of the output of the function is constrained to fall. It is the set 
 
 
 
 
  in the notation 
 
 
 
 . The codomain is also sometimes referred to as the range but that term is ambiguous as it may also refer to the image.
The codomain is part of a function 
 
 
 
  if it is defined as described in 1954 by Nicolas Bourbaki,1 namely a triple 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  a functional subset2 of the Cartesian product

 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the set of first components of the pairs in 
 
 
 
  (the domain). The set 
 
 
 
  is called the graph of the function. The set of all elements of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  ranges over the elements of the domain

 
 , is called the image of 
 
 
 
 . In general, the image of a function is a subset of its codomain. Thus, it may not coincide with its codomain. Namely, a function that is not surjective has elements 
 
 
 
  in its codomain for which the equation 
 
 
 
  does not have a solution.
An alternative definition of function by Bourbaki [Bourbaki, op. cit., p. 77], namely as just a functional graph, does not include a codomain and is also widely used.3 For example in set theory it is desirable to permit the domain of a function to be a proper class

 
 
 , in which case there is formally no such thing as a triple 
 
 
 
 . With such a definition functions do not have a codomain, although some authors still use it informally after introducing a function in the form 
 
 
 
 .45678
Examples
For a function



defined by


 
 , or equivalently 
 
 
 
 
 ,
the codomain of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , but 
 
 
 
  does not map to any negative number. Thus the image of 
 
 
 
  is the set 
 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., the interval

 
 .
An alternative function 
 
 
 
  is defined thus:






While 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  map a given 
 
 
 
  to the same number, they are not, in this view, the same function because they have different codomains. A third function 
 
 
 
  can be defined to demonstrate why:



The domain of 
 
 
 
 
  must be defined to be 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .
The compositions are denoted


 
 ,


 
 .
On inspection, 
 
 
 
 
  is not useful. It is true, unless defined otherwise, that the image of 
 
 
 
  is not known; it is only known that it is a subset of 
 
 
 
 . For this reason, it is possible that 
 
 
 
 , when composed with 
 
 
 
 , might receive an argument for which no output is defined – negative numbers are not elements of the domain of 
 
 
 
 
 , which is the square root function.
Function composition therefore is a useful notion only when the codomain of the function on the right side of a composition (not its image, which is a consequence of the function and could be unknown at the level of the composition) is the same as the domain of the function on the left side.
The codomain affects whether a function is a surjection, in that the function is surjective if and only if its codomain equals its image. In the example, 
 
 
 
  is a surjection while 
 
 
 
  is not. The codomain does not affect whether a function is an injection.
A second example of the difference between codomain and image is demonstrated by the linear transformations between two vector spaces – in particular, all the linear transformations from 
 
 
 
  to itself, which can be represented by the 
 
 
matrices with real coefficients. Each matrix represents a map with the domain 
 
 
 
 
  and codomain 
 
 
 
 . However, the image is uncertain. Some transformations may have image equal to the whole codomain (in this case the matrices with rank

 
 ) but many do not, instead mapping into some smaller subspace (the matrices with rank 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ). Take for example the matrix 
 
 
 
 
  given by


 
  which represents a linear transformation that maps the point 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The point 
 
 
 
  is not in the image of 
 
 
 
 , but is still in the codomain since linear transformations from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  are of explicit relevance. Just like all 
 
 
 
  matrices, 
 
 
 
  represents a member of that set. Examining the differences between the image and codomain can often be useful for discovering properties of the function in question. For example, it can be concluded that 
 
 
 
  does not have full rank since its image is smaller than the whole codomain.
See also

Range (mathematics)
Domain of a function
Surjective function
Injective function
Bijection

Notes
References








"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Basic concepts in set theory




A set of pairs is functional iff no two distinct pairs have the same first component [Bourbaki, op. cit., p. 76]
, [ pages 10–11]
, [ quote 1], [ quote 2]
, [ page 8]
Mac Lane, in , [ page 232]
, [ page 91]
, [ page 89]




