


Cumulative distribution function




Cumulative distribution function

(Figure)
Cumulative Distribution Function for the normal distribution

In probability theory and statistics, the cumulative distribution function (CDF), or just distribution function, describes the probability that a real-valued random variable X with a given probability distribution will be found to have a value less than or equal to x. In the case of a continuous distribution, it gives the area under the probability density function from minus infinity to x. Cumulative distribution functions are also used to specify the distribution of multivariate random variables.
Definition
The cumulative distribution function of a real-valued random variable X is the function given by



where the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable X takes on a value less than or equal to x. The probability that X lies in the semi-closed interval (a, b], where a  \operatorname{P}(a 
In the definition above, the "less than or equal to" sign, "≤", is a convention, not a universally used one (e.g. Hungarian literature uses "X as follows:



In the case of a random variable X which has distribution having a discrete component at a value b,



If FX is continuous at b, this equals zero and there is no discrete component at b.
Properties
(Figure)
From top to bottom, the cumulative distribution function of a discrete probability distribution, continuous probability distribution, and a distribution which has both a continuous part and a discrete part.

Every cumulative distribution function F is non-decreasing and right-continuous, which makes it a càdlàg function. Furthermore,



Every function with these four properties is a CDF, i.e., for every such function, a random variable can be defined such that the function is the cumulative distribution function of that random variable.
If X is a purely discrete random variable, then it attains values x1, x2, ... with probability pi = P(xi), and the CDF of X will be discontinuous at the points xi and constant in between:



If the CDF F of a real valued random variable X is continuous, then X is a continuous random variable; if furthermore F is absolutely continuous, then there exists a Lebesgue-integrable function f(x) such that



for all real numbers a and b. The function f is equal to the derivative of F almost everywhere, and it is called the probability density function of the distribution of X.
Examples
As an example, suppose 
 
 
 
  is uniformly distributed on the unit interval [0, 1]. Then the CDF of 
 
 
 
  is given by



Suppose instead that 
 
 
 
  takes only the discrete values 0 and 1, with equal probability. Then the CDF of 
 
 
 
  is given by



Derived functions
Complementary cumulative distribution function (tail distribution)
Sometimes, it is useful to study the opposite question and ask how often the random variable is above a particular level. This is called the complementary cumulative distribution function (ccdf) or simply the tail distribution or exceedance, and is defined as



This has applications in statistical hypothesis testing, for example, because the one-sided p-value is the probability of observing a test statistic at least as extreme as the one observed. Thus, provided that the test statistic, T, has a continuous distribution, the one-sided p-value is simply given by the ccdf: for an observed value t of the test statistic



In survival analysis, 
 
 
 
  is called the survival function and denoted 
 
 
 
 , while the term reliability function is common in engineering.

Properties


For a non-negative continuous random variable having an expectation, Markov's inequality states that1










As 
 
 
 
 , and in fact 
 
 
 
  provided that 
 
 
 
  is finite.


Proof: Assuming X has a density function f, for any 
 
 
:


\mathbb E(X) = \int_0^\infty xf(x)dx \geq \int_0^c xf(x)dx + c\int_c^\infty f(x)dx 

Then, on recognizing 
 
 
 
  and rearranging terms,
 
 :


0 \leq c\bar F(c) \leq \mathbb E(X) - \int_0^c x f(x)dx \to 0 \text{ as } c \to \infty 

as claimed.
 

Folded cumulative distribution
 While the plot of a cumulative distribution often has an S-like shape, an alternative illustration is the folded cumulative distribution or mountain plot, which folds the top half of the graph over,23 thus using two scales, one for the upslope and another for the downslope. This form of illustration emphasises the median and dispersion (the mean absolute deviation from the median) of the distribution or of the empirical results.
Inverse distribution function (quantile function)
If the CDF F is strictly increasing and continuous then 
 
 
 
  is the unique real number 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . In such a case, this defines the inverse distribution function or quantile function.
Unfortunately, the distribution does not, in general, have an inverse. One may define, for 
 
 
 
 , the generalized inverse distribution function: 




Example 1: The median is 
 
 
 
 .
Example 2: Put 
 
 
 
 . Then we call 
 
 
 
  the 95th percentile.

The inverse of the cdf can be used to translate results obtained for the uniform distribution to other distributions. Some useful properties of the inverse cdf are:



 
  is nondecreasing








 
  if and only if 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  has a 
 
 
 
  distribution then 
 
 
 
  is distributed as 
 
 
 
 . This is used in random number generation using the inverse transform sampling-method.
If 
 
 
 
  is a collection of independent 
 
 
 
 -distributed random variables defined on the same sample space, then there exist random variables 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is distributed as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with probability 1 for all 
 
 
 
 .

Multivariate case
When dealing simultaneously with more than one random variable the joint cumulative distribution function can also be defined. For example, for a pair of random variables X,Y, the joint CDF 
 
 
 
  is given by



where the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable X takes on a value less than or equal to x and that Y takes on a value less than or equal to y.
Every multivariate CDF is:

Monotonically non-decreasing for each of its variables
Right-continuous for each of its variables.





 
  and 
 
 


Use in statistical analysis
The concept of the cumulative distribution function makes an explicit appearance in statistical analysis in two (similar) ways. Cumulative frequency analysis is the analysis of the frequency of occurrence of values of a phenomenon less than a reference value. The empirical distribution function is a formal direct estimate of the cumulative distribution function for which simple statistical properties can be derived and which can form the basis of various statistical hypothesis tests. Such tests can assess whether there is evidence against a sample of data having arisen from a given distribution, or evidence against two samples of data having arisen from the same (unknown) population distribution.
Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Kuiper's tests
The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is based on cumulative distibution functions and can be used to test to see whether two empirical distributions are different or whether an empirical distribution is different from an ideal distribution. The closely related Kuiper's test is useful if the domain of the distribution is cyclic as in day of the week. For instance Kuiper's test might be used to see if the number of tornadoes varies during the year or if sales of a product vary by day of the week or day of the month.
See also

Descriptive statistics
Distribution fitting

References
External links



"
Category:Theory of probability distributions










