


Imaginary unit




Imaginary unit

 The term imaginary unit or unit imaginary number refers to a solution to the equation  −1}}. As a convention, the solution is usually denoted 

. Since there is no real number with this property, it extends the real numbers, and under the assumption that the familiar properties of addition and multiplication (namely closure, associativity, commutativity and distributivity) continue to hold for this extension, the complex number system is generated by including it.
Imaginary numbers are an important mathematical concept, which extends the real number system 
 
 
 
  to the complex number system 
 
 
 
 , which in turn provides at least one root for every nonconstant polynomial

 
  (see Algebraic closure and Fundamental theorem of algebra). The term "imaginary" is used because there is no real number having a negative square.
There are two complex square roots of 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , just as there are two complex square roots of every real number other than zero, which has one double square root.
In contexts where 
 
 
 
  is ambiguous or problematic, 
 
 
 
  or the Greek 

 is sometimes used (see ). In the disciplines of electrical engineering and control systems engineering, the imaginary unit is often denoted by 
 
 
 
  instead of 
 
 
 
 , because 
 
 
 
  is commonly used to denote electric current.
For the history of the imaginary unit, see .
Definition




The powers of 
 
 

  return cyclic values:







 
  (repeats the pattern
  from blue area)













































 
  (repeats the pattern
  from the blue area)



The imaginary number 
 
 
 
  is defined solely by the property that its square is −1:



With 
 
 
 
  defined this way, it follows directly from algebra that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both square roots of −1.
Although the construction is called "imaginary", and although the concept of an imaginary number may be intuitively more difficult to grasp than that of a real number, the construction is perfectly valid from a mathematical standpoint. Real number operations can be extended to imaginary and complex numbers by treating 
 
 
 
  as an unknown quantity while manipulating an expression, and then using the definition to replace any occurrence of  with −1. Higher integral powers of 
 
 
 
  can also be replaced with 
 
 
 
 , 1, 
 
 
 
 , or −1:









Similarly, as with any non-zero real number:



As a complex number, 
 
 
 
  is represented in rectangular form as 
 
 
 
 , having a unit imaginary component and no real component (i.e., the real component is zero). In polar form, 
 
 
 
  is represented as , having an absolute value (or magnitude) of 1 and an argument (or angle) of π/2. In the complex plane (also known as the Cartesian plane), 
 
 
 
  is the point located one unit from the origin along the imaginary axis (which is at a right angle to the real axis).


 
  and 
 
 

Being a quadratic polynomial with no multiple root, the defining equation  −1}} has two distinct solutions, which are equally valid and which happen to be additive and multiplicative inverses of each other. More precisely, once a solution 
 
 
 
  of the equation has been fixed, the value 
 
 
 
 , which is distinct from 
 
 
 
 , is also a solution. Since the equation is the only definition of 
 
 
 
 , it appears that the definition is ambiguous (more precisely, not well-defined). However, no ambiguity results as long as one or other of the solutions is chosen and labelled as "
 
 
 
 ", with the other one then being labelled as 
 
 
 
 . This is because, although 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not quantitatively equivalent (they are negatives of each other), there is no algebraic difference between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Both imaginary numbers have equal claim to being the number whose square is −1. If all mathematical textbooks and published literature referring to imaginary or complex numbers were rewritten with 
 
 
 
  replacing every occurrence of 
 
 
 
  (and therefore every occurrence of 
 
 
 
  replaced by 
 
 
 
 ), all facts and theorems would continue to be equivalently valid. The distinction between the two roots 
 
 
 
  of  0}} with one of them labelled with a minus sign is purely a notational relic; neither root can be said to be more primary or fundamental than the other, and neither of them is "positive" or "negative".
The issue can be a subtle one. The most precise explanation is to say that although the complex field, defined as , (see complex number) is unique up to isomorphism, it is not unique up to a unique isomorphism — there are exactly 2 field automorphisms of  which keep each real number fixed: the identity and the automorphism sending 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . See also Complex conjugate and Galois group.
A similar issue arises if the complex numbers are interpreted as 2 × 2 real matrices (see matrix representation of complex numbers), because then both


 
      and     
 
 

are solutions to the matrix equation



In this case, the ambiguity results from the geometric choice of which "direction" around the unit circle is "positive" rotation. A more precise explanation is to say that the automorphism group of the special orthogonal group SO (2, 
 
 
 
 ) has exactly 2 elements — the identity and the automorphism which exchanges "CW" (clockwise) and "CCW" (counter-clockwise) rotations. See orthogonal group.
All these ambiguities can be solved by adopting a more rigorous definition of complex number, and explicitly choosing one of the solutions to the equation to be the imaginary unit. For example, the ordered pair (0, 1), in the usual construction of the complex numbers with two-dimensional vectors.
Proper use
The imaginary unit is sometimes written 
 
 
 
  in advanced mathematics contexts (as well as in less advanced popular texts). However, great care needs to be taken when manipulating formulas involving radicals. The notation is reserved either for the principal square root function, which is only defined for real 
 
 
 
 , or for the principal branch of the complex square root function. Attempting to apply the calculation rules of the principal (real) square root function to manipulate the principal branch of the complex square root function will produce false results:


 
     (incorrect).
Attempting to correct the calculation by specifying both the positive and negative roots only produces ambiguous results:


 
    (ambiguous).
Similarly:


 
     (incorrect).
The calculation rules


 
  and


 
  are only valid for real, non-negative values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
These problems are avoided by writing and manipulating 
 
 
 
 , rather than expressions like 
 
 
 
 . For a more thorough discussion, see Square root and Branch point.
Properties
Square roots
 The square root of 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as either of two complex numbersTo find such a number, one can solve the equation

 i}}


where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real parameters to be determined, or equivalently

 i}}.
 

Because the real and imaginary parts are always separate, we regroup the terms:

 0 + i}}


and by equating coefficients, real part and real coefficient of imaginary part separately, we get a system of two equations:

 0}}



 
 .
 

Substituting 
 
 
 
  into the first equation, we get

 0}}

 1/4x2}}

 1}}


Because 
 
 
 
  is a real number, this equation has two real solutions for 
 
 
 
 : 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Substituting either of these results into the equation 
 
 
 
  in turn, we will get the corresponding result for 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the square roots of 
 
 
 
  are the numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
(University of Toronto Mathematics Network: What is the square root of i? URL retrieved March 26, 2007.)



Indeed, squaring the right-hand side gives



This result can also be derived with Euler's formula



by substituting 
 
 
 
 , giving



Taking the square root of both sides gives



which, through application of Euler's formula to 
 
 
 
 , gives



Similarly, the square root of 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as either of two complex numbers using Euler's formula:



by substituting 
 
 
 
 , giving



Taking the square root of both sides gives



which, through application of Euler's formula to 
 
 
 
 , gives



Multiplying the square root of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  also gives:



Multiplication and division
Multiplying a complex number by 
 
 
 
 
  gives:


 
  (This is equivalent to a 90° counter-clockwise rotation of a vector about the origin in the complex plane.)
Dividing by 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to multiplying by the reciprocal of 
 
 
 
 :



Using this identity to generalize division by 
 
 
 
 
  to all complex numbers gives:


 
  (This is equivalent to a 90° clockwise rotation of a vector about the origin in the complex plane.)
Powers
The powers of 
 
 
 
  repeat in a cycle expressible with the following pattern, where 
 
 
 
  is any integer:












This leads to the conclusion that



where mod represents the modulo operation. Equivalently:





 
 
  raised to the power of 
 
 

Making use of Euler's formula,  is



where 
 
 
 
 , the set of integers.
The principal value (for 
 
 
 
 ) is  or approximately 0.207879576...1
Factorial
The factorial of the imaginary unit 
 
 
 
 
  is most often given in terms of the gamma function evaluated at 
 
 
 
 :



Also,


2
Other operations
Many mathematical operations that can be carried out with real numbers can also be carried out with 
 
 
 
 , such as exponentiation, roots, logarithms, and trigonometric functions. However, it should be noted that all of the following functions are complex multi-valued functions, and it should be clearly stated which branch of the Riemann surface the function is defined on in practice. Listed below are results for the most commonly chosen branch.
A number raised to the 
 
 
 
 
  power is:



The  root of a number is:



The imaginary-base logarithm of a number is:


 
  As with any complex logarithm, the log base 
 
 
 
  is not uniquely defined.
The cosine of 
 
 
 
 
  is a real number:



And the sine of 
 
 
 
  is purely imaginary:



Alternative notations

In electrical engineering and related fields, the imaginary unit is often denoted by 
 
 
 
  to avoid confusion with electric current as a function of time, traditionally denoted by 
 
 
 
 
  or just 
 
 
 
 . The Python programming language also uses 
 
 
 
  to mark the imaginary part of a complex number. MATLAB associates both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with the imaginary unit, although 
 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is preferable, for speed and improved robustness.3
Some texts use the Greek letter iota (
 
 
 
 ) for the imaginary unit, to avoid confusion, especially with index and subscripts.
Each of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  is an imaginary unit in the quaternions. In bivectors and biquaternions an additional imaginary unit 
 
 
 
  is used.

Matrices
When 2 × 2 real matrices m are used for a source, and the number one (1) is identified with the identity matrix, and minus one (−1) with the negative of the identity matrix, then there are many solutions to m2 = −1. In fact, there are many solutions to m2 = +1 and m2 = 0 also. Any such m can be taken as a basis vector, along with 1, to form a planar algebra.
See also

Complex plane
Imaginary number
Multiplicity (mathematics)
Root of unity
Unit complex number

Notes
References
Further reading



External links

[http://mathdl.maa.org/mathDL/46/?pa=content&sa;;=viewDocument&nodeId;=2245&bodyId;=2439 Euler's work on Imaginary Roots of Polynomials] at Convergence

"
Category:Complex numbers Category:Algebraic numbers Category:Mathematical constants



"The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Numbers" by David Wells, Page 26.
"[http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=abs(i!) abs(i!)]", WolframAlpha.





