


Circumference




Circumference

Circumference (from Latin circumferentia, meaning "carrying around") is the linear distance around the edge of a closed curve or circular object.1 The circumference of a circle is of special importance in geometry and trigonometry. Informally "circumference" may also refer to the edge itself rather than to the length of the edge. Circumference is a special case of perimeter: the perimeter is the length around any closed figure, but conventionally "perimeter" is typically used in reference to a polygon while "circumference" typically refers to a continuously differentiable curve.
Circumference of a circle
 The circumference of a circle is the distance around it. The term is used when measuring physical objects, as well as when considering abstract geometric forms.  
Relationship with Pi
The circumference of a circle relates to one of the most important mathematical constants in all of mathematics. This constant, pi, is represented by the Greek letter 

. The numerical value of 
 
 
 
  is 3.14159 26535 89793 ... (see ). Pi is defined as the ratio of a circle's circumference 
 
 
 
  to its diameter

 
 
 :



Or, equivalently, as the ratio of the circumference to twice the radius. The above formula can be rearranged to solve for the circumference:



The use of the mathematical constant 
 
 
 
  is ubiquitous in mathematics, engineering, and science. While the constant ratio of circumference to radius 
 
 
 
  also has many uses in mathematics, engineering, and science, it is not formally named. These uses include but are not limited to radians, computer programming, and physical constants.
Circumference of an ellipse
The circumference of an ellipse can be expressed in terms of the complete elliptic integral of the second kind.
Circumference of a graph
In graph theory the circumference of a graph refers to the longest cycle contained in that graph.
See also

Arclength
Area
Caccioppoli set
Isoperimetric inequality
Pythagorean Theorem
Volume

References
External links

Numericana - Circumference of an ellipse
Circumference of a circle With interactive applet and animation

"
Category:Geometric measurement Category:Circles








