


Alexandroff extension




Alexandroff extension

In mathematical field of topology, the Alexandroff extension is a way to extend a noncompact topological space by adjoining a single point in such a way that the resulting space is compact. It is named for the Russian mathematician Pavel Alexandrov.
More precisely, let X be a topological space. Then the Alexandroff extension of X is a certain compact space X* together with an open embedding c : X → X* such that the complement of X in X* consists of a single point, typically denoted ∞. The map c is a Hausdorff compactification if and only if X is a locally compact, noncompact Hausdorff space. For such spaces the Alexandroff extension is called the one-point compactification or Alexandroff compactification. The advantages of the Alexandroff compactification lie in its simple, often geometrically meaningful structure and the fact that it is in a precise sense minimal among all compactifications; the disadvantage lies in the fact that it only gives a Hausdorff compactification on the class of locally compact, noncompact Hausdorff spaces, unlike the Stone–Čech compactification which exists for any Tychonoff space, a much larger class of spaces.
Example: inverse stereographic projection
A geometrically appealing example of one-point compactification is given by the inverse stereographic projection. Recall that the stereographic projection S gives an explicit homeomorphism from the unit sphere minus the north pole (0,0,1) to the Euclidean plane. The inverse stereographic projection 
 
 
 
  is an open, dense embedding into a compact Hausdorff space obtained by adjoining the additional point 
 
 
 
 . Under the stereographic projection latitudinal circles 
 
 
 
  get mapped to planar circles 
 
 
 
 . It follows that the deleted neighborhood basis of 
 
 
 
  given by the punctured spherical caps 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the complements of closed planar disks 
 
 
 
 . More qualitatively, a neighborhood basis at 
 
 
 
  is furnished by the sets 
 
 
 
  as K ranges through the compact subsets of 
 
 
 
 . This example already contains the key concepts of the general case.
Motivation
Let 
 
 
 
  be an embedding from a topological space X to a compact Hausdorff topological space Y, with dense image and one-point remainder 
 
 
 
 . Then c(X) is open in a compact Hausdorff space so is locally compact Hausdorff, hence its homeomorphic preimage X is also locally compact Hausdorff. Moreover, if X were compact then c(X) would be closed in Y and hence not dense. Thus a space can only admit a one-point compactification if it is locally compact, noncompact and Hausdorff. Moreover, in such a one point compactification the image of a neighborhood basis for x in X gives a neighborhood basis for c(x) in c(X), and—because a subset of a compact Hausdorff space is compact if and only if it is closed—the open neighborhoods of 
 
 
 
  must be all sets obtained by adjoining 
 
 
 
  to the image under c of a subset of X with compact complement.
The Alexandroff extension
Let X be any topological space, and let 
 
 
 
  be any object which is not already an element of X. Put 
 
 
 
 , and topologize 
 
 
 
  by taking as open sets all the open subsets U of X together with all subsets V which contain 
 
 
 
  and such that 
 
 
 
  is closed and compact, .
The inclusion map 
 
 
 
  is called the Alexandroff extension of X (Willard, 19A).
The above properties all follow from the above discussion:

The map c is continuous and open: it embeds X as an open subset of 
 
 
 
 .
The space 
 
 
 
  is compact.
The image c(X) is dense in 
 
 
 
 , if X is noncompact.
The space 
 
 
 
  is Hausdorff if and only if X is Hausdorff and locally compact.

The one-point compactification
In particular, the Alexandroff extension 
 
 
 
  is a compactification of X if and only if X is Hausdorff, noncompact and locally compact. In this case it is called the one-point compactification or Alexandroff compactification of X. Recall from the above discussion that any compactification with one point remainder is necessarily (isomorphic to) the Alexandroff compactification.
Let X be any noncompact Tychonoff space. Under the natural partial ordering on the set 
 
 
 
  of equivalence classes of compactifications, any minimal element is equivalent to the Alexandroff extension (Engelking, Theorem 3.5.12). It follows that a noncompact Tychonoff space admits a minimal compactification if and only if it is locally compact.
Further examples

The one-point compactification of the set of positive integers is homeomorphic to the space consisting of K = {0} U {1/n | n is a positive integer.} with the order topology.


The one-point compactification of n-dimensional Euclidean space Rn is homeomorphic to the n-sphere Sn. As above, the map can be given explicitly as an n-dimensional inverse stereographic projection.


Since the closure of a connected subset is connected, the Alexandroff extension of a noncompact connected space is connected. However a one-point compactification may "connect" a disconnected space: for instance the one-point compactification of the disjoint union of 
 
 
 
  copies of the interval (0,1) is a wedge of 
 
 
 
  circles.


The Alexandroff extension can be viewed as a functor from the category of topological spaces to the category whose objects are continuous maps 
 
 
 
  and for which the morphisms from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  are pairs of continuous maps 

Y_1 \rightarrow Y_2 such that 
 
 
 
 . In particular, homeomorphic spaces have isomorphic Alexandroff extensions.

A sequence 
 
 
 
  in a topological space 
 
 
 
  converges to a point 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , if and only if the map 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is continuous. Here 
 
 
 
  has the discrete topology.


Polyadic spaces are defined as topological spaces that are the continuous image of the power of a one-point compactification of a discrete, locally compact Haussdorff space.


Space of continuous functions 
 
 
 
  on a locally compact Hausdroff space 
 
 
 
  is locally compact but can be made compact if and only if we include the single point 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 


See also

Wallman compactification
End (topology)
Riemann sphere
Normal space
Stereographic projection
Pointed set

References











"
Category:General topology Category:Compactification


