


Absolute convergence




Absolute convergence

In mathematics, an infinite series of numbers is said to converge absolutely (or to be absolutely convergent) if the sum of the absolute value of the summand is finite. More precisely, a real or complex series 
 
 
 
  is said to converge absolutely if 
 
 
 
  for some real number 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, an improper integral of a function, 
 
 
 
 , is said to converge absolutely if the integral of the absolute value of the integrand is finite—that is, if 
 
 

Absolute convergence is important for the study of infinite series because its definition is strong enough to have properties of finite sums that not all convergent series possess, yet is broad enough to occur commonly. (A convergent series that is not absolutely convergent is called conditionally convergent.)
Background
One may study the convergence of series 
 
 
 
  whose terms an are elements of an arbitrary abelian topological group. The notion of absolute convergence requires more structure, namely a norm, which is a real-valued function 
 
 
 
  on abelian group G (written additively, with identity element 0) such that:

The norm of the identity element of G is zero
 
 

For every x in G, 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 

For every x in G, 
 
 

For every x, y in G, 
 
 


In this case, the function 
 
 
 
  induces on G the structure of a metric space (a type of topology). We can therefore consider G-valued series and define such a series to be absolutely convergent if 
 
 

In particular, these statements apply using the norm |x| (absolute value) in the space of real numbers or complex numbers.
Relation to convergence
If G is complete with respect to the metric d, then every absolutely convergent series is convergent. The proof is the same as for complex-valued series: use the completeness to derive the Cauchy criterion for convergence—a series is convergent if and only if its tails can be made arbitrarily small in norm—and apply the triangle inequality.
In particular, for series with values in any Banach space, absolute convergence implies convergence. The converse is also true: if absolute convergence implies convergence in a normed space, then the space is a Banach space.
If a series is convergent but not absolutely convergent, it is called conditionally convergent. An example of a conditionally convergent series is the alternating harmonic series. Many standard tests for divergence and convergence, most notably including the ratio test and the root test, demonstrate absolute convergence. This is because a power series is absolutely convergent on the interior of its disk of convergence.
Proof that any absolutely convergent series of complex numbers is convergent
Since a series of complex numbers converges if and only if both its real and imaginary parts converge, we may assume with equal generality that the 
 
 
 
  are real numbers. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is convergent. Then, 
 
 
 
  is convergent.
Since 
 
 
 
 , we have


 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
  is a bounded monotonic sequence (in m), which must converge.


 
  is a difference of convergent series; therefore, it is also convergent, as desired.
Proof that any absolutely convergent series in a Banach space is convergent
The above result can be easily generalized to every Banach space . Let  be an absolutely convergent series in X. As 
 
 
 
  is a Cauchy sequence of real numbers, for any  and large enough natural numbers  it holds:



By the triangle inequality for the norm , one immediately gets:


 
  which means that 
 
 
 
  is a Cauchy sequence in X, hence the series is convergent in X.1
Rearrangements and unconditional convergence
In the general context of a G-valued series, a distinction is made between absolute and unconditional convergence, and the assertion that a real or complex series which is not absolutely convergent is necessarily conditionally convergent (meaning not unconditionally convergent) is then a theorem, not a definition. This is discussed in more detail below.
Given a series 
 
 
 
  with values in a normed abelian group G and a permutation σ of the natural numbers, one builds a new series 
 
 
 
 , said to be a rearrangement of the original series. A series is said to be unconditionally convergent if all rearrangements of the series are convergent to the same value.
When G is complete, absolute convergence implies unconditional convergence:

Theorem. Let
 
 



and let 
 
 
 
  be a permutation. Then:
 
 




The issue of the converse is interesting. For real series it follows from the Riemann rearrangement theorem that unconditional convergence implies absolute convergence. Since a series with values in a finite-dimensional normed space is absolutely convergent if each of its one-dimensional projections is absolutely convergent, it follows that absolute and unconditional convergence coincide for Rn-valued series.
But there are unconditionally and non-absolutely convergent series with values in Hilbert space ℓ2, for example:



where 
 
 
 
  is an orthonormal basis. A theorem of A. Dvoretzky and C. A. Rogers2 asserts that every infinite-dimensional Banach space admits an unconditionally convergent series that is not absolutely convergent.
Proof of the theorem
For any ε > 0, we can choose some 
 
 
 
 , such that:



Let



Finally for any integer 
 
 
 
 
  let



Then



This shows that



that is:



Q.E.D.
Products of series
The Cauchy product of two series converges to the product of the sums if at least one of the series converges absolutely. That is, suppose that


 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The Cauchy product is defined as the sum of terms cn where:



Then, if either the an or bn sum converges absolutely, then



Absolute convergence of integrals
The integral 
 
 
 
  of a real or complex-valued function is said to converge absolutely if 
 
 
 
  One also says that f is absolutely integrable.
When A = [a,b] is a closed bounded interval, every continuous function is integrable, and since f continuous implies |f| continuous, similarly every continuous function is absolutely integrable. It is not generally true that absolutely integrable functions on [a,b] are integrable: let 
 
 
 
  be a nonmeasurable subset and take 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the characteristic function of S. Then f is not Lebesgue measurable but |f| is constant. However, it is a standard result that if f is Riemann integrable, so is |f|. This holds also for the Lebesgue integral; see below. On the other hand a function f may be Kurzweil-Henstock integrable (or "gauge integrable") while |f| is not. This includes the case of improperly Riemann integrable functions.
Similarly, when A is an interval of infinite length it is well known that there are improperly Riemann integrable functions f which are not absolutely integrable. Indeed, given any series 
 
 
 
  one can consider the associated step function 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  converges absolutely, converges conditionally or diverges according to the corresponding behavior of 
 
 

Another example of a convergent but not absolutely convergent improper Riemann integral is 
 
 
 
 .
On any measure space A, the Lebesgue integral of a real-valued function is defined in terms of its positive and negative parts, so the facts:

f integrable implies |f| integrable
f measurable, |f| integrable implies f integrable

are essentially built into the definition of the Lebesgue integral. In particular, applying the theory to the counting measure on a set S, one recovers the notion of unordered summation of series developed by Moore–Smith using (what are now called) nets. When S = N is the set of natural numbers, Lebesgue integrability, unordered summability and absolute convergence all coincide.
Finally, all of the above holds for integrals with values in a Banach space. The definition of a Banach-valued Riemann integral is an evident modification of the usual one. For the Lebesgue integral one needs to circumvent the decomposition into positive and negative parts with Daniell's more functional analytic approach, obtaining the Bochner integral.
See also

Convergence of Fourier series
Conditional convergence
Modes of convergence (annotated index)
Cauchy principal value
Fubini's theorem
1/2 − 1/4 + 1/8 − 1/16 + · · ·
1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + 1/16 + · · ·

Notes


References

Walter Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis (McGraw-Hill: New York, 1964).

"
Category:Mathematical series Category:Integral calculus Category:Summability theory Category:Convergence (mathematics)



 (Theorem 1.3.9)↩
Dvoretzky, A.; Rogers, C. A. (1950), "Absolute and unconditional convergence in normed linear spaces", Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 36:192–197.↩




