


Quadratic formula




Quadratic formula

 In elementary algebra, the quadratic formula is the solution of the quadratic equation. There are other ways to solve the quadratic equation instead of using the quadratic formula, such as factoring, completing the square, or graphing. Using the quadratic formula is often the most convenient way.
The general quadratic equation is


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  represents an unknown, while 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are constants with 
 
 
 
  not equal to 0. One can verify that the quadratic formula satisfies the quadratic equation, by inserting the former into the latter. Each of the solutions given by the quadratic formula is called a root of the quadratic equation.
Geometrically, these roots represent the 
 
 
 
  values at which any parabola, explicitly given as 
 
 
 
  crosses the 
 
 
 
  axis. As well as being a formula that will yield the zeros of any parabola, the quadratic equation will give the axis of symmetry of the parabola, and it can be used to immediately determine how many zeros to expect the parabola to have.
Derivation of the formula
Once a student understands how to complete the square, they can then derive the quadratic formula.12 For that reason, the derivation is sometimes left as an exercise for the student, who can thereby experience rediscovery of this important formula.34 The explicit derivation is as follows.
Divide the quadratic equation by 
 
 
 
 , which is allowed because 
 
 
 
  is non-zero:


 
  Subtract 
 
 
 
  from both sides of the equation, yielding:


 
  The quadratic equation is now in a form to which the method of completing the square can be applied. Thus, add a constant to both sides of the equation such that the left hand side becomes a complete square:


 
  which produces:


 
 . Accordingly, after rearranging the terms on the right hand side to have a common denominator, we obtain this:


 
  The square has thus been completed. Taking the square root of both sides yields the following equation:


 
  Isolating 
 
 
 
  gives the quadratic formula:



The plus-minus symbol "±" indicates that both


 
  are solutions of the quadratic equation.5 There are many alternatives of this derivation with minor differences, mostly concerning the manipulation of 
 
 
 
 .
Some sources, particularly older ones, use alternative parameterizations of the quadratic equation such as 6 or ,7 where 
 
 
 
  has a magnitude one half of the more common one. These result in slightly different forms for the solution, but are otherwise equivalent.
Geometrical Significance
Without going into parabolas as geometrical objects on a cone (see Conic section), a parabola is any curve described by a second-order polynomial, i.e. any equation of the form:



where  represents the polynomial of order 2 and  and  are constant coefficients whose subscripts correspond to their respective term's order. The first and foremost geometrical application of the quadratic formula is that it will define the points along the 
 
 
 
  axis where the parabola will cross it. Additionally, if the quadratic formula were broken into two terms,



the definition of the axis of symmetry appears as the 
 
 
 
  term. The other term, 
 
 
 
 , must then be the distance the zeros are away from the axis of symmetry, where the plus sign represents the distance away to the right, and the minus sign represents the distance away to the left.
If this distance term were to decrease to zero, the axis of symmetry would be the 
 
 
 
  value of the zero, indicating there is only one possible solution to the quadratic equation. Algebraically, this means that 
 
 
 
  or simply 
 
 
 
  (where the left-hand side is referred to as the discriminant) for its term to be reduced to zero. This is simply once case of three, where the discriminant can indicate how many zeros the parabola will have. If the discriminant were positive, the distance would be non-zero, and there will be two solutions, as expected. However, there is the case where the discriminant is less than zero, and this indicates the distance will be imaginary - or some multiple of the unit 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  - and the parabola's zeros will be a complex number. The complex roots will be complex conjugates, and by definition cannot be entirely real, where the real part of the complex root will be the axis of symmetry, therefore geometrical interpretation is that there are no real values of 
 
 
 
  such that the parabola will be observed to cross the 
 
 
 
  axis.
Historical Development
 The earliest methods for solving quadratic equations were geometric. Babylonian cuneiform tablets contain problems reducible to solving quadratic equations.8 The Egyptian Berlin Papyrus, dating back to the Middle Kingdom (2050 BC to 1650 BC), contains the solution to a two-term quadratic equation.9
The Greek mathematician Euclid (circa 300 BC) used geometric methods to solve quadratic equations in Book 2 of his Elements, an influential mathematical treatise.10 Rules for quadratic equations appear in the Chinese The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art circa 200 BC.1112 In his work Arithmetica, the Greek mathematician Diophantus (circa 250 BC) solved quadratic equations with a method more recognizably algebraic than the geometric algebra of Euclid.13 His solution gives only one root, even when both roots are positive.14
The Indian mathematician Brahmagupta (597–668 AD) explicitly described the quadratic formula in his treatise Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta published in 628 AD,15 but written in words instead of symbols.16 His solution of the quadratic equation  was as follows: "To the absolute number multiplied by four times the [coefficient of the] square, add the square of the [coefficient of the] middle term; the square root of the same, less the [coefficient of the] middle term, being divided by twice the [coefficient of the] square is the value."17 This is equivalent to:


 
  The 9th-century Persian mathematician al-Khwārizmī, influenced by earlier Greek and Indian mathematicians, solved quadratic equations algebraically.18 The quadratic formula covering all cases was first obtained by Simon Stevin in 1594.19 In 1637 René Descartes published La Géométrie containing the quadratic formula in the form we know today. The first appearance of the general solution in the modern mathematical literature appeared in an 1896 paper by Henry Heaton.20
Other derivations
A number of alternative derivations of the quadratic formula can be found in the literature. These derivations either (a) are simpler than the standard completing the square method, (b) represent interesting applications of other frequently used techniques in algebra, or (c) offer insight into other areas of mathematics.
Alternate method of completing the square
The great majority of algebra texts published over the last several decades teach completing the square using the sequence presented earlier: (1) divide each side by 
 
 
 
 , (2) rearrange, (3) then add the square of one-half of 
 
 
 
 .
As pointed out by Larry Hoehn in 1975, completing the square can be accomplished by a different sequence that leads to a simpler sequence of intermediate terms: (1) multiply each side by 
 
 
 
 , (2) rearrange, (3) then add .21
In other words, the quadratic formula can be derived as follows:



This actually represents an ancient derivation of the quadratic formula, and was known to the Hindus at least as far back as 1025 AD.22 Compared with the derivation in standard usage, this alternate derivation is shorter, involves fewer computations with literal coefficients, avoids fractions until the last step, has simpler expressions, and uses simpler math. As Hoehn states, "it is easier 'to add the square of 
 
 
 
 ' than it is 'to add the square of half the coefficient of the 
 
 
 
  term'".23
By substitution
Another technique is solution by substitution.24 In this technique, we substitute 
 
 
 
  into the quadratic to get:


 
  Expanding the result and then collecting the powers of 
 
 
 
  produces:


 
  We have not yet imposed a second condition on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , so we now choose 
 
 
 
  so that the middle term vanishes. That is, 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . Subtracting the constant term from both sides of the equation (to move it to the right hand side) and then dividing by 
 
 
 
  gives:


 
  Substituting for 
 
 
 
  gives:


 
  Therefore, 
 
 
 
 ; substituting 
 
 
 
  provides the quadratic formula.
By using algebraic identities
The following method was used by many historical mathematicians:25
Let the roots of the standard quadratic equation be  and . At this point, we recall the identity:



Taking the square root on both sides, we get:



Since the coefficient 
 
 
 
 , we can divide the standard equation by 
 
 
 
  to obtain a quadratic polynomial having the same roots. Namely,


 
  From this we can see that the sum of the roots of the standard quadratic equation is given by 
 
 
 
 , and the product of those roots is given by 
 
 

Hence the identity can be rewritten as:



Now,



Since, 
 
 
 
 , if we take 
 
 
 
  then we obtain 
 
 
 
  and if we instead take 
 
 
 
  then we calculate that 
 
 
 
  Combining these results by using the standard shorthand, we have that the solutions of the quadratic equation are given by:



By Lagrange resolvents
An alternative way of deriving the quadratic formula is via the method of Lagrange resolvents,26 which is an early part of Galois theory.27 This method can be generalized to give the roots of cubic polynomials and quartic polynomials, and leads to Galois theory, which allows one to understand the solution of algebraic equations of any degree in terms of the symmetry group of their roots, the Galois group.
This approach focuses on the roots more than on rearranging the original equation. Given a monic quadratic polynomial


 
  assume that it factors as


 
  Expanding yields


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Since the order of multiplication does not matter, one can switch 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and the values of p and q will not change: one can say that p and q are symmetric polynomials in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In fact, they are the elementary symmetric polynomials – any symmetric polynomial in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  The Galois theory approach to analyzing and solving polynomials is: given the coefficients of a polynomial, which are symmetric functions in the roots, can one "break the symmetry" and recover the roots? Thus solving a polynomial of degree n is related to the ways of rearranging ("permuting") n terms, which is called the symmetric group on n letters, and denoted 
 
 
 
  For the quadratic polynomial, the only way to rearrange two terms is to swap them ("transpose" them), and thus solving a quadratic polynomial is simple.
To find the roots 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  consider their sum and difference:


 
 
  These are called the Lagrange resolvents of the polynomial; notice that one of these depends on the order of the roots, which is the key point. One can recover the roots from the resolvents by inverting the above equations:


 
 
  Thus, solving for the resolvents gives the original roots.
Now 
 
 
 
  is a symmetric function in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  so it can be expressed in terms of p and q, and in fact 
 
 
 
  as noted above. But 
 
 
 
  is not symmetric, since switching 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  yields 
 
 
 
  (formally, this is termed a group action of the symmetric group of the roots). Since 
 
 
 
  is not symmetric, it cannot be expressed in terms of the polynomials p and q, as these are symmetric in the roots and thus so is any polynomial expression involving them. Changing the order of the roots only changes 
 
 
 
  by a factor of 
 
 
 
  and thus the square 
 
 
is symmetric in the roots, and thus expressible in terms of p and q. Using the equationappl


 
  yields


 
  and thus


 
  If one takes the positive root, breaking symmetry, one obtains:


 
 
  and thus


 
 
  Thus the roots are


 
  which is the quadratic formula. Substituting 
 
 
 
  yields the usual form for when a quadratic is not monic. The resolvents can be recognized as 
 
 
 
  being the vertex, and 
 
 
 
  is the discriminant (of a monic polynomial).
A similar but more complicated method works for cubic equations, where one has three resolvents and a quadratic equation (the "resolving polynomial") relating 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which one can solve by the quadratic equation, and similarly for a quartic (degree 4) equation, whose resolving polynomial is a cubic, which can in turn be solved.28 The same method for a quintic equation yields a polynomial of degree 24, which does not simplify the problem, and in fact solutions to quintic equations in general cannot be expressed using only roots.
See also

Discriminant
Fundamental theorem of algebra

References
External links

Quadratic formula calculator
Free Quadratic formula calculator
Quadratic formula calculator Online
Alternative formula (Wolfram)

"
Category:Elementary algebra Category:Equations



, [http://books.google.be/books?id=8PRU9cTKprsC&pg;;=PA291 Chapter 13 §4.4, p. 291]
Li, Xuhui. An Investigation of Secondary School Algebra Teachers' Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching Algebraic Equation Solving, p. 56 (ProQuest, 2007): "The quadratic formula is the most general method for solving quadratic equations and is derived from another general method: completing the square."
Rockswold, Gary. College algebra and trigonometry and precalculus, p. 178 (Addison Wesley, 2002).
Beckenbach, Edwin et al. Modern college algebra and trigonometry, p. 81 (Wadsworth Pub. Co., 1986).










Bradley, Michael. The Birth of Mathematics: Ancient Times to 1300, p. 86 (Infobase Publishing 2006).
Mackenzie, Dana. The Universe in Zero Words: The Story of Mathematics as Told through Equations, p. 61 (Princeton University Press, 2012).



Heaton, H. (1896) A Method of Solving Quadratic Equations, American Mathematical Monthly 3(10), 236–237.



Joseph J. Rotman. (2010). Advanced modern algebra (Vol. 114). American Mathematical Soc. Section 1.1
Debnath, L. (2009). The legacy of Leonhard Euler–a tricentennial tribute. International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 40(3), 353–388. Section 3.6
Clark, A. (1984). Elements of abstract algebra. Courier Corporation. p. 146.
, [http://books.google.com/books?id=fcp9IiZd3tQC&pg;;=PA134#PPA134,M1 §6.2, p. 134]





