


Tropic of Cancer




Tropic of Cancer

 The Tropic of Cancer, also referred to as the Northern Tropic, is the most northerly circle of latitude on the Earth at which the Sun may appear directly overhead at its culmination. This event occurs once per year, at the time of the Northern solstice, when the Northern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun to its maximum extent. As of , it lies at  north of the Equator.1
Its Southern Hemisphere counterpart, marking the most southerly position at which the Sun may appear directly overhead, is the Tropic of Capricorn. These tropics are two of the five major degree measures or major circles of latitude that mark maps of the Earth, besides the Arctic and Antarctic Circles and the Equator. The positions of these circles of latitude (other than the Equator) are dictated by the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation relative to the plane of its orbit.
Name
  The imaginary line is called the Tropic of Cancer because when the Sun reaches the zenith at this latitude, it is entering the astrological sign of Cancer (summer solstice in the northern hemisphere). When it was named, the Sun was also in the direction of the constellation Cancer (Latin for crab). However, this is no longer true due to the precession of the equinoxes. According to International Astronomical Union boundaries, the Sun now is in Taurus at the June solstice. According to sidereal astrology, which divides the zodiac into 12 equal parts, the Sun is in Gemini at that time. However, according to tropical astrology, which divides the ecliptic in twelve 30° sectors, starting with the vernal equinox, the Sun is always entering Cancer at this time, as the Earth's axial tilt is most inclined towards the Sun. The word "tropic" itself comes from the Greek "trope (τροπή)", meaning turn (change of direction, or circumstances), inclination, referring to the fact that the sun appears to "turn back" at the solstices. 
Geography
  The Tropic of Cancer position is not fixed, but varies in a complicated manner over time. It drifts south almost half an arcsecond (0.47″) of latitude per year (it was at exactly 23° 27′ in year 1917).2 See axial tilt and circles of latitude for further information.
North of the tropic are the subtropics and the North Temperate Zone. The equivalent line of latitude south of the Equator is called the Tropic of Capricorn, and the region between the two, centered on the Equator, is the tropics.
Starting at the Prime Meridian and heading eastward, the Tropic of Cancer passes through:




scope="col" Co-ordinates

Country, territory or sea

Notes

















The Tropic touches on the northernmost point of  at 





The Tropic passes through Lake Nasser




Red Sea











Abu Dhabi emirate only









Indian Ocean

Arabian Sea





States of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and West Bengal





Khulna, Dhaka, and Chittagong Divisions





State of Tripura





Chittagong Division





State of Mizoram




(Myanmar)

Chin State, Sagaing Division, Mandalay Division, Shan State





Provinces of Yunnan (passing about 7 km north of the border with ), Guangxi, and Guangdong




Taiwan Strait






Chiayi County, Hualien County




Pacific Ocean

Passing just south of Necker Island, Hawaii, 





State of Baja California Sur




Gulf of California






States of Sinaloa, Durango, Zacatecas, San Luis Potosí, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas




Gulf of Mexico





Atlantic Ocean

Passing through the Straits of Florida and the Nicholas Channel
 Passing just south of the Anguilla Cays ()
 Passing through the Santaren Channel and into the open ocean





Exuma Islands and Long Island




Atlantic Ocean





Western Sahara

Claimed by  and the 




















(Figure)
Relationship between Earth's axial tilt (ε) to the tropical and polar circles

Climate
Excluding cooler highland regions in China, the climate at the Tropic of Cancer is generally hot and dry except for easterly coastal areas where orographic rainfall can be very heavy, in some places reaching . Most regions on the Tropic of Cancer experience two distinct seasons: an extremely hot summer with temperatures often reaching  and a warm winter with maxima around . Much land on or near the Tropic of Cancer is part of the Sahara Desert, whilst to the east the climate is torrid monsoonal with a short wet season from June to September and very little rainfall for the rest of the year.
The highest mountain on or adjacent to the Tropic of Cancer is Yushan in Taiwan; though it had glaciers descending as low as  during the Last Glacial Maximum, none survive and at present no glaciers exist within  of the Tropic of Cancer; the nearest currently surviving are the Minyong and Baishui in the Himalayas to the north and on Iztaccíhuatl to the south.
Circumnavigation
According to the rules of the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale, for a flight to compete for a round-the-world speed record, it must cover a distance no less than the length of the Tropic of Cancer, cross all meridians, and end on the same airfield where it started.
To calculate the length of the Tropic:

At present, the radius of the Tropic of Cancer (or Capricorn) circle, computed from the radius of Earth's equatorial circle, is 6378 km x cos(23° 26′ 16″) which results in .
Then the length of either Tropic circle is 
 
 
 
  = 3.1416 x 2 x 5851.77 which equals .
Therefore, assuming the Earth to be a perfect sphere, the length of the circumference at the parallel of the Tropic of Cancer or Capricorn is .

For an ordinary circumnavigation the rules are somewhat relaxed and the distance is set to a rounded value of at least 37,000 kilometers.
External links

Article on the Tropic of Cancer in Oman
Temporal Epoch Calculations
Useful constants See: Obliquity of the ecliptic

See also

23rd parallel north
24th parallel north
Tropic of Capricorn
Antarctic Circle
Arctic Circle
Axial tilt
Equator
Milankovitch cycles
Ducking and shaving

References
de:Wendekreis (Breitenkreis)#Nördlicher Wendekreis pl:Zwrotnik (geografia)"
Category:Lines of latitude Category:Tropics




Montana State University: Milankovitch Cycles & Glaciation 




