


Pseudometric space




Pseudometric space

In mathematics, a pseudometric or semi-metric space1 is a generalized metric space in which the distance between two distinct points can be zero. In the same way as every normed space is a metric space, every seminormed space is a pseudometric space. Because of this analogy the term semimetric space (which has a different meaning in topology) is sometimes used as a synonym, especially in functional analysis.
When a topology is generated using a family of pseudometrics, the space is called a gauge space.
Definition
A pseudometric space 
 
 
 
  is a set 
 
 
 
  together with a non-negative real-valued function 
 
 
 
  (called a pseudometric) such that, for every 
 
 
 
 ,



 
 .


 
  (symmetry)


 
  (subadditivity/triangle inequality)

Unlike a metric space, points in a pseudometric space need not be distinguishable; that is, one may have 
 
 
 
  for distinct values 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

Pseudometrics arise naturally in functional analysis. Consider the space 
 
 
 
  of real-valued functions 
 
 
 
  together with a special point 
 
 
 
 . This point then induces a pseudometric on the space of functions, given by








for 
 
 



For vector spaces 
 
 
 
 , a seminorm

 
  induces a pseudometric on 
 
 
 
 , as








Conversely, a homogeneous, translation invariant pseudometric induces a seminorm.
 


Pseudometrics also arise in the theory of hyperbolic complex manifolds: see Kobayashi metric.


Every measure space

 
  can be viewed as a complete pseudometric space by defining








for all 
 
 
 
 .
 


If 
 
 
 
  is a function and d2 is a pseudometric on X2, then 
 
 
 
  gives a pseudometric on X1. If d2 is a metric and f is injective, then d1 is a metric.

Topology
The pseudometric topology is the topology induced by the open balls


 
  if 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  and let


 
  Then 
 
 
 
  is a metric on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a well-defined metric space.2
The metric identification preserves the induced topologies. That is, a subset 
 
 
 
  is open (or closed) in 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is open (or closed) in $(X^*,d^*)$. The topological identification is the Kolmogorov quotient.
An example of this construction is the completion of a metric space by its Cauchy sequences.
Notes
References






"
Category:Properties of topological spaces Category:Metric geometry



Dmitri Burago, Yu D Burago, Sergei Ivanov, A Course in Metric Geometry, American Mathematical Society, 2001, ISBN 0-8218-2129-6.↩
↩




