   Co-NP      Co-NP   In computational complexity theory , co-NP is a complexity class . A decision problem    𝒳   𝒳   {\mathcal{X}}   is a member of co-NP if and only if its complement     𝒳  ¯     normal-¯  𝒳    \overline{\mathcal{X}}   is in the complexity class NP . In simple terms, co-NP is the class of problems for which efficiently verifiable proofs of "no" instances, sometimes called counterexamples, exist. Equivalently, co-NP is the set of decision problems where the "no" instances can be accepted in polynomial time by a non-deterministic Turing machine .  An example of an NP -complete problem is the subset sum problem : given a finite set of integers, is there a non-empty subset that sums to zero? To give a proof of a "yes" instance, one must specify a non-empty subset that does sum to zero. The complementary problem is in co-NP and asks: "given a finite set of integers, does every non-empty subset have a non-zero sum?" This problem is not obviously seen to be in NP .  Relationship to other classes  P , the class of polynomial time solvable problems, is a subset of both NP and co-NP . P is thought to be a strict subset in both cases (and demonstrably cannot be strict in one case and not strict in the other). NP and co-NP are also thought to be unequal. 1 If so, then no NP -complete problem can be in co-NP and no co-NP -complete problem can be in NP . 2  This can be shown as follows. Suppose there exists an NP -complete problem   𝒳   𝒳   {\mathcal{X}}   that is in co-NP . Since all problems in NP can be reduced to   𝒳   𝒳   {\mathcal{X}}   , it follows that for every problem in NP we can construct a non-deterministic Turing machine that decides its complement in polynomial time, i.e., NP ⊆ co-NP . From this it follows that the set of complements of the problems in NP is a subset of the set of complements of the problems in co-NP , i.e., co-NP ⊆ NP . Thus co-NP = NP . The proof that no co-NP -complete problem can be in NP if NP ≠ co-NP is symmetrical.  If a problem can be shown to be in both NP and co-NP , that is generally accepted as strong evidence that the problem is probably not NP -complete (since otherwise NP = co-NP ).  An example of a problem that is known to belong to both NP and in co-NP is integer factorization : given positive integers m and n determine if m has a factor less than n and greater than one. Membership in NP is clear; if m does have such a factor then the factor itself is a certificate. Membership in co-NP is also straightforward: one can just list the prime factors of m , which the verifier can confirm to be valid by multiplication and the AKS primality test .  Integer factorization is closely related to the primality problem. Both primality testing and factorization have long been known to be NP and co-NP problems. The AKS primality test , published in 2002, proves that primality testing also lies in P , while factorization may or may not have a polynomial-time algorithm. 3  References  External links     "  Category:Complexity classes     Chap. 11. ↩  ↩  Manindra Agrawal, Neeraj Kayal, Nitin Saxena, " PRIMES is in P ", Annals of Mathematics 160 (2004), no. 2, pp. 781-793. ↩     