


Convex set




Convex set

 
In Euclidean space, a convex set is the region such that, for every pair of points within the region, every point on the straight line segment that joins the pair of points is also within the region. For example, a solid cube is a convex set, but anything that is hollow or has a dent in it, for example, a crescent shape, is not convex. A convex curve forms the boundary of a convex set.
The notion of a convex set can be generalized to other spaces as described below.
In vector spaces
 Let 
 
 
 
  be a vector space over the real numbers, or, more generally, some ordered field. This includes Euclidean spaces. A set

 
  in 
 
 
 
  is said to be convex if, for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
  in the interval

 
 , the point 
 
 
 
  also belongs to 
 
 
 
 . In other words, every point on the line segment connecting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 . This implies that a convex set in a real or complex topological vector space is path-connected, thus connected. Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  is strictly convex if every point on the line segment connecting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  other than the endpoints is inside the interior of 
 
 
 
 .
A set 
 
 
 
  is called absolutely convex if it is convex and balanced.
The convex subsets of 
 
 
 
  (the set of real numbers) are simply the intervals of 
 
 
 
 . Some examples of convex subsets of the Euclidean plane are solid regular polygons, solid triangles, and intersections of solid triangles. Some examples of convex subsets of a Euclidean 3-dimensional space are the Archimedean solids and the Platonic solids. The Kepler-Poinsot polyhedra are examples of non-convex sets.
Non-convex set

''"Concave set" redirects here.
 

A set that is not convex is called a non-convex set. A polygon that is not a convex polygon is sometimes called a concave polygon,1 and some sources more generally use the term concave set to mean a non-convex set,2 but most authorities prohibit this usage.34
Properties
If 
 
 
 
  is a convex set in 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space, then for any collection of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vectors  in 
 
 
 
 , and for any nonnegative numbers  such that  1}}, then one has:


 
  A vector of this type is known as a convex combination of .
Intersections and unions
The collection of convex subsets of a vector space has the following properties:56

The empty set and the whole vector-space are convex.
The intersection of any collection of convex sets is convex.
The union of a non-decreasing sequence of convex subsets is a convex set. For the preceding property of unions of non-decreasing sequences of convex sets, the restriction to nested sets is important: The union of two convex sets need not be convex.

Closed convex sets
Closed convex sets are convex sets that contain all their limit points. They can be characterised as the intersections of closed half-spaces (sets of point in space that lie on and to one side of a hyperplane).
From what has just been said, it is clear that such intersections are convex, and they will also be closed sets. To prove the converse, i.e., every convex set may be represented as such intersection, one needs the supporting hyperplane theorem in the form that for a given closed convex set 
 
 
 
  and point 
 
 
 
  outside it, there is a closed half-space 
 
 
 
  that contains 
 
 
 
  and not 
 
 
 
 . The supporting hyperplane theorem is a special case of the Hahn–Banach theorem of functional analysis.
Convex sets and rectangles
Let C be a convex body in the plane. We can inscribe a rectangle r in C such that a homothetic copy R of r is circumscribed about C. The positive homothety ratio is at most 2 and:7








Convex hulls and Minkowski sums
Convex hulls
Every subset 
 
 
 
  of the vector space is contained within a smallest convex set (called the convex hull of 
 
 
 
 ), namely the intersection of all convex sets containing 
 
 
 
 . The convex-hull operator Conv() has the characteristic properties of a hull operator:






extensive



 
 ,



non-decreasing



 
  implies that 
 
 
 
 , and



idempotent



 
 .





The convex-hull operation is needed for the set of convex sets to form a lattice, in which the "join" operation is the convex hull of the union of two convex sets



 
 .
 

The intersection of any collection of convex sets is itself convex, so the convex subsets of a (real or complex) vector space form a complete lattice.
Minkowski addition
(Figure)
Q1 {{=}} [0, 1] × [0, 1]}} is green. The square  [1, 2] × [1, 2] is brown, and it sits inside the turquoise square Q1+Q2=[1,3]×[1,3]}}.|Minkowski addition of sets. The sum of the squares Q1=[0,1]2 and Q2=[1,2]2 is the square Q1+Q2=[1,3]2.

In a real vector-space, the Minkowski sum of two (non-empty) sets,  and , is defined to be the set  formed by the addition of vectors element-wise from the summand-sets


.


More generally, the Minkowski sum of a finite family of (non-empty) sets  is the set formed by element-wise addition of vectors



For Minkowski addition, the zero set  containing only the zero vector 
 
 
 
  has special importance: For every non-empty subset S of a vector space


;


in algebraic terminology,  is the identity element of Minkowski addition (on the collection of non-empty sets).8
Convex hulls of Minkowski sums
Minkowski addition behaves well with respect to the operation of taking convex hulls, as shown by the following proposition:
Let  be subsets of a real vector-space, the convex hull of their Minkowski sum is the Minkowski sum of their convex hulls

 Conv(S1) + Conv(S2)}}.
 

This result holds more generally for each finite collection of non-empty sets:



In mathematical terminology, the operations of Minkowski summation and of forming convex hulls are commuting operations.910
Minkowski sums of convex sets
The Minkowski sum of two compact convex sets is compact. the sum of a compact convex set and a closed convex set is closed.11
Generalizations and extensions for convexity
The notion of convexity in the Euclidean space may be generalized by modifying the definition in some or other aspects. The common name "generalized convexity" is used, because the resulting objects retain certain properties of convex sets.
Star-convex sets
Let 
 
 
 
  be a set in a real or complex vector space. 
 
 
 
  is star convex if there exists an  in 
 
 
 
  such that the line segment from  to any point 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 . Hence a non-empty convex set is always star-convex but a star-convex set is not always convex.
Orthogonal convexity
An example of generalized convexity is orthogonal convexity.12
A set 
 
 
 
  in the Euclidean space is called orthogonally convex or ortho-convex, if any segment parallel to any of the coordinate axes connecting two points of 
 
 
 
  lies totally within 
 
 
 
 . It is easy to prove that an intersection of any collection of orthoconvex sets is orthoconvex. Some other properties of convex sets are valid as well.
Non-Euclidean geometry
The definition of a convex set and a convex hull extends naturally to geometries which are not Euclidean by defining a geodesically convex set to be one that contains the geodesics joining any two points in the set.
Order topology
Convexity can be extended for a space 
 
 
 
  endowed with the order topology, using the total order


Let 
 
 
 
 . The subspace 
 
 
 
  is a convex set if for each pair of points 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

Convexity spaces
The notion of convexity may be generalised to other objects, if certain properties of convexity are selected as axioms.
Given a set 
 
 
 
 , a convexity over 
 
 
 
  is a collection 
 
 
 
  of subsets of 
 
 
 
  satisfying the following axioms:141516

The empty set and 
 
 
 
  are in 
 
 

The intersection of any collection from 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 .
The union of a chain (with respect to the inclusion relation) of elements of 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 .

The elements of 
 
 
 
  are called convex sets and the pair $( X , 𝒞 )$ is called a convexity space. For the ordinary convexity, the first two axioms hold, and the third one is trivial.
For an alternative definition of abstract convexity, more suited to discrete geometry, see the convex geometries associated with antimatroids.
See also

Concave set
Convex curve
Convex function
Convex metric space
Convex optimization
Carathéodory's theorem (convex hull)
Choquet theory
Helly's theorem
Holomorphically convex hull
Pseudoconvexity
Shapley–Folkman lemma

References
External links


Lectures on Convex Sets, notes by Niels Lauritzen, at Aarhus University, March 2010.

"
Category:Convex geometry Category:Convex analysis



.



Soltan, Valeriu, Introduction to the Axiomatic Theory of Convexity, Ştiinţa, Chişinău, 1984 (in Russian).


The empty set is important in Minkowski addition, because the empty set annihilates every other subset: For every subset $S$ of a vector space, its sum with the empty set is empty: $S + ∅ = ∅$.
Theorem 3 (pages 562–563): 
For the commutativity of Minkowski addition and convexification, see Theorem 1.1.2 (pages 2–3) in Schneider; this reference discusses much of the literature on the convex hulls of Minkowski sumsets in its "Chapter 3 Minkowski addition" (pages 126–196): 
Lemma 5.3: 
Rawlins G.J.E. and Wood D, "Ortho-convexity and its generalizations", in: Computational Morphology, 137-152. Elsevier, 1988.
Munkres, James; Topology, Prentice Hall; 2nd edition (December 28, 1999). ISBN 0-13-181629-2.







