


Chinese remainder theorem




Chinese remainder theorem

 The Chinese remainder theorem is a result about congruences in number theory and its generalizations in abstract algebra. It was first published in the 3rd to 5th centuries by the Chinese mathematician Sun Tzu.
In its basic form, the Chinese remainder theorem will determine a number n that, when divided by some given divisors, leaves given remainders. For example, what is the lowest number n that when divided by 3 leaves a remainder of 2, when divided by 5 leaves a remainder of 3, and when divided by 7 leaves a remainder of 2?
Theorem statement
The original form of the theorem, which is contained in the 5th-century book Sunzi's Mathematical Classic () by the Chinese mathematician Sun Tzu and later generalized with a complete solution called Dayanshu () in Qin Jiushao's 1247 Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections (, Shushu Jiuzhang), is a statement about simultaneous congruences.
Suppose  are positive integers that are pairwise coprime. Then, for any given sequence of integers , there exists an integer 
 
 
 
  solving the following system of simultaneous congruences.



Furthermore, all solutions 
 
 
 
  of this system are congruent modulo the product,  n1 ... nk}}. Hence



Sometimes, the simultaneous congruences can be solved even if the  are not pairwise coprime. A solution 
 
 
 
  exists if and only if:



All solutions 
 
 
 
  are then congruent modulo the least common multiple of the .
Sun Tzu's work contains neither a proof nor a full algorithm. What amounts to an algorithm for solving this problem was described by Aryabhata (6th century; see ). Special cases of the Chinese remainder theorem were also known to Brahmagupta (7th century), and appear in Fibonacci's Liber Abaci (1202).
A modern restatement of the theorem in algebraic language is that for a positive integer with prime factorization



we have the isomorphism between a ring and the direct product of its prime power parts:



The theorem can also be restated in the language of combinatorics as the fact that the infinite arithmetic progressions of integers form a Helly family .
Existence and uniqueness
The existence and uniqueness of the solution can easily be seen through a non-constructive argument:
There are  n1·…·nk}} different 
 
 
 
 -tuples of remainders. Let us call this set 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand  and each element of  corresponds to an element of 
 
 
 
 . Can two numbers  correspond to the same member of 
 
 
 
 ? That is, can they have the same set of remainders when divided by ? If they did then 
 
 
 
  would be divisible by each . Since the  are relatively prime, 
 
 
 
  would be divisible by their product: 
 
 
 
 . But, as 
 
 

Existence can be seen by an explicit construction of 
 
 
 
 . Let  denote the multiplicative inverse of 
 
 
 
  given by the Extended Euclidean algorithm. It is defined exactly when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coprime; the following construction explains why this condition is needed.
=== Case of two equations (
 
 
 
 ) === Consider the system:



Since  1}}, Bézout's identity implies:



This is true because we are using the inverses provided by the Extended Euclidean algorithm; for any other inverses, this would not necessarily be true, but still be valid .
Multiplying both sides by 
 
 
 
 , we get



If we take the congruence modulo  for the right-hand-side expression, it is readily seen that



But we know that , thus this suggests that the coefficient of the first term on the right-hand-side expression can be replaced by . Similarly, we can show that the coefficient of the second term can be substituted by . We can now define the value



and it is seen to satisfy both congruences, for example:



General case
The same type of construction works in the general case of 
 
 
 
  congruence equations. Let  n1 ... nk}} be the product of every modulus then define



and this is seen to satisfy the system of congruences by a similar calculation as before.
Finding the solution with basic algebra and modular arithmetic
For example, consider the problem of finding an integer 
 
 
 
  such that



Brute-force approach
A brute-force approach converts these congruences into sets and writes the elements out to the product of 
 
 
 
  (the solutions modulo 60 for each congruence):








To find an x that satisfies all three congruences, intersect the three sets to get:




Which can be expressed as



Algebraic approach
Another way to find a solution is with basic algebra, modular arithmetic, and stepwise substitution.
We start by translating these congruences into equations for some 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 :



Start by substituting the 
 
 
 
 
  from the first equation into the second congruence:



meaning that 
 
 
 
  for some integer 
 
 
 
 . Substitute 
 
 
 
  into the first equation:



Substitute this 
 
 
 
 
  into the third congruence:



meaning that 
 
 
 
  for some integer 
 
 
 
 . Finally,



So, we have solutions 
Notice that 60 = lcm(3,4,5). If the moduli are pairwise coprime (as they are in this example), the solutions will be congruent modulo their product.
A constructive algorithm to find the solution
The following algorithm only applies if the  are pairwise coprime. (For simultaneous congruences when the moduli are not pairwise coprime, the method of successive substitution can often yield solutions.)
Suppose, as above, that a solution is required for the system of congruences:



Define:  n1 ... nk}}. For each 
 
 
 
 , the integers  and  are coprime. Using the extended Euclidean algorithm we can find  such that  1}}. Substitute  for  to arrive at:  1.}} So the remainder of  divided by  is 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand,  ,}} guarantees that  divides  for 
 
 
 
 . To summarize:



Because of this, and the multiplication rules allowed in congruences, one solution to the system of simultaneous congruences is:



For example, consider the problem of finding an integer 
 
 
 
  such that



Using the extended Euclidean algorithm, for 
 
 
 
  modulo 3 and 20 [4 × 5], we find 
 
 
 
 ; i.e.,  40}}. For 
 
 
 
  modulo 4 and 15 [3 × 5], we get 
 
 
 
 , i.e.  45}}. Finally, for 
 
 
 
  modulo 5 and 12 [3 × 4], we get 
 
 
 
 , i.e.  −24}}. A solution 
 
 
 
  is therefore 
 
 
 
 . All other solutions are congruent to 191 modulo 60, [3 × 4 × 5], which means they are all congruent to 11 modulo 60.
Or in words:

Find a number  that gives modulo 1 for a particular divisor, but is divisible by all other divisors (coprime, in this case).
Multiply the remainder (of the original number N to this particular divisor). Repeat with all the divisors.
Sum all these products together.
Divide the sum by the LCM of all the divisors. N shares the modulo with the final remainder.

Thus, we have  values of 40 (divisible by 4 and 5; gives 1 for mod 3), 45 (for mod 4) and 36 (for mod 5). Multiplying by the given remainders 2, 3 and 1 yields 80, 135 and 36 respectively. The sum, 251, is then divided by 60, yielding remainder 11.

Note: There are multiple implementations of the extended Euclidean algorithm which will yield different sets of  −20, e2 {{=}} −15}}, and  −24}}. These sets however will produce the same solution; i.e., 
 
 
 
 .


Using the same principle, the answer to Sun Tzu's original question is therefore 23, using  values of 70, 21 and 15 for divisors 3, 5, 7: 
 
 
 
 .
Statement for principal ideal domains

Chinese Remainder Theorem for Principal Ideal Domains. Let 
 
 
 
  be principal ideal domain. If  are pairwise coprime elements of 
 
 
 
  where  u1...uk}}, then the quotient ring

 
  and the product ring  are isomorphic via the following map:
 
 :


   f: R/uR &\to R/u_1R \times \cdots \times R/u_k R \\
 f(x + uR) &= (x + u_1R, \ldots, x + u_kR)
\end{align}
This statement is a straightforward generalization of the above theorem about integer congruences: 

 is a principal ideal domain, the surjectivity of the map f shows that every system of congruences of the form



can be solved for 
 
 
 
 , and the injectivity of the map f shows that all the solutions 
 
 
 
  are congruent modulo 
 
 
 
 .
Proof. This map is well-defined and a homomorphism of rings. An inverse homomorphism can be constructed as follows, showing that it is in fact an isomorphism. For each 
 
 
 
 , the elements  and  are coprime, and therefore there exist elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  with



Set  su/ui}}. Then it is clear that



Thus the inverse of f is the map



Statement for general rings
The general form of the Chinese remainder theorem, which implies all the statements given above, can be formulated for commutative rings and ideals.
Chinese Remainder Theorem for Commutative Rings. If 
 
 
 
  is a commutative ring and  are ideals of R that are pairwise coprime (meaning  R}} for all 
 
 
 
 ), then the product 
 
 
 
  of these ideals is equal to their intersection, and the quotient ring

 
  is isomorphic to the product ring  via the isomorphism






   f: R/I &\to R/I_1 \times \cdots \times R/I_k \\
 f(x + I) &= (x + I_1, \cdots, x + I_k)
\end{align}
Here is a version of the theorem where R is not required to be commutative:
Chinese Remainder Theorem for Noncommutative Rings. Let 
 
 
 
  be any ring with 1 (not necessarily commutative) and  be pairwise coprime 
 
 
 
 -sided ideals. Then the canonical 
 
 
 
 -module homomorphism  is onto, with kernel . Hence, 
 
 
 
  (as 
 
 
 
 -modules).
Applications
Sequence numbering
The Chinese remainder theorem can be used to construct an elegant Gödel numbering for sequences, which is needed to prove Gödel's incompleteness theorems.
Fast Fourier transform
The Good-Thomas fast Fourier transform algorithm exploits a re-indexing of the data based on the Chinese remainder theorem. The Prime-factor FFT algorithm contains an implementation.
Encryption
The Chinese remainder theorem can also be used in secret sharing, which consists of distributing a set of shares among a group of people who, all together (but no one alone), can recover a certain secret from the given set of shares. Each of the shares is represented in a congruence, and the solution of the system of congruences using the Chinese remainder theorem is the secret to be recovered. Secret Sharing using the Chinese Remainder Theorem uses, along with the Chinese remainder theorem, special sequences of integers that guarantee the impossibility of recovering the secret from a set of shares with less than a certain cardinality.
Hermite interpolation
The General Hermite Interpolation Problem. Given 
 
 
 
  complex points ("interpolation nodes")  and complex data  find 
 
 
 
  such that:



Solution. Introducing the polynomials



the problem may be equivalently reformulated as a system of 
 
 
 
  simultaneous congruences:



By the Chinese remainder theorem in the principal ideal domain 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique polynomial 
 
 
 
  such that:



A direct construction, in analogy with the above proof for the integer number case, can be performed as follows. Define the polynomials



The partial fraction decomposition of 
 
 
 
  gives 
 
 
 
  polynomials  with degrees  such that



so that



Then a solution of the simultaneous congruence system is given by the polynomial



and the minimal degree solution is this one reduced modulo 
 
 
 
 , that is the unique with degree less than 
 
 
 
 .
Dedekind's theorem
Dedekind's Theorem on the Linear Independence of Characters. Let 
 
 
 
  be a monoid and 
 
 
 
  an integral domain, viewed as a monoid by considering the multiplication on 
 
 
 
 . Then any finite family  of distinct monoid homomorphisms  is linearly independent. In other words every family  of elements  satisfying



must be equal to the family .
Proof. First assume that 
 
 
 
  is a field, otherwise, replace the integral domain 
 
 
 
  by its quotient field, and nothing will change. We can linearly extend the monoid homomorphisms  to 
 
 
 
 -algebra homomorphisms , where 
 
 
 
  is the monoid ring of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . Then, by linearity, the condition



yields



Next, for 
 
 
 
  the two 
 
 
 
 -linear maps  and  are not proportional to each other. Otherwise  and  would also be proportional, and thus equal since as monoid homomorphisms they satisfy:  1 {{=}}  fj (1)}}, which contradicts the assumption that they are distinct.
Therefore the kernels  and  are distinct. Since  k}} is a field,  is a maximal ideal of 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 . Because they are distinct and maximal the ideals  and  are coprime whenever 
 
 
 
 
 . The Chinese Remainder Theorem (for general rings) yields an isomorphism:



where



Consequently, the map



is surjective. Under the isomorphisms  k,}} the map 
 
 
 
 
  corresponds to:



Now,



yields



for every vector  in the image of the map 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is surjective, this means that



for every vector



Consequently,  (0)i∈I}}. QED.
Non-commutative case: a caveat
Sometimes in the commutative case, the conclusion of the Chinese Remainder Theorem is stated as . This version does not hold in the non-commutative case, since , as can be seen from the following case:

Proposition. Let 
 
 
 
  be the ring of non-commutative real polynomials in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the principal two-sided ideal generated by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the principal two-sided ideal generated by 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  but 
 
 
 
 .
 

Proof. Observe that 
 
 
 
  is formed by all polynomials with an 
 
 
 
  in every term and that every polynomial in 
 
 
 
  vanishes under the substitution 
 
 
 
 . Then clearly 
 
 
 
 . Define a "term in 
 
 
 
 ", as an element of the multiplicative monoid of 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and its degree as the usual degree of the term after the substitution 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, suppose 
 
 
 
 . Observe that a term in 
 
 
 
  of maximum degree depends on 
 
 
 
  otherwise 
 
 
 
  under the substitution 
 
 
 
  can not vanish. The same happens then for an element 
 
 
 
 . Note that the last 
 
 
 
 , from left to right, in a term of maximum degree in an element of 
 
 
 
  is preceded by more than one 
 
 
 
 . (We are counting here all the preceding 
 
 
 
 s. E.g., in  the last 
 
 
 
  is preceded by three 
 
 
 
 s.) This proves that 
 
 
 
  since the last 
 
 
 
  in the term of maximum degree in 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) is preceded by only one 
 
 
 
 . Hence 
 
 
 
 .
However, it is true in general that 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 . To see this, note that 
 
 
 
 , while the opposite inclusion is obvious. Also, we have in general that, provided  are pairwise coprime two-sided ideals in 
 
 
 
 , the natural map



is an isomorphism. Note that  can be replaced by a sum over all orderings of  of their product (or just a sum over enough orderings, using inductively that 
 
 
 
  for coprime ideals $I , J ⊂ R$).
See also

Covering system
Hasse principle
Residue number system
Secret sharing using the Chinese remainder theorem

Notes
References


. See Section 31.5: The Chinese remainder theorem, pp. 873–876.


. See in particular Section 2.5, "Helly Property", [http://books.google.com/books?id=5Y9NCwlx63IC&pg;;=PA393 pp. 393–394].




. See Section 4.3.2 (pp. 286–291), exercise 4.6.2–3 (page 456).


External links


"Chinese Remainder Theorem" by Ed Pegg, Jr., Wolfram Demonstrations Project, 2007.

C# program and discussion at codeproject
University of Hawaii System CRT by Lee Lady
Full text of the Sunzi Suanjing (Chinese) — Chinese Text Project

"
Category:Articles containing proofs Sun, Master Category:Commutative algebra Category:Modular arithmetic Category:Theorems in number theory


