


Dual space




Dual space

In mathematics, any vector space V has a corresponding dual vector space (or just dual space for short) consisting of all linear functionals on V together with a naturally induced linear structure. Dual vector spaces for finite-dimensional vector spaces show up in tensor analysis. When applied to vector spaces of functions (which are typically infinite-dimensional), dual spaces are used to describe measures, distributions, and Hilbert spaces. Consequently, the dual space is an important concept in functional analysis.
There are two types of dual spaces: the algebraic dual space, and the continuous dual space. The algebraic dual space is defined for all vector spaces. When defined for a topological vector space there is a subspace of this dual space, corresponding to continuous linear functionals, which constitutes a continuous dual space.
Algebraic dual space
Given any vector space V over a field F, the dual space V∗ is defined as the set of all linear maps  (linear functionals). The dual space V∗ itself becomes a vector space over F when equipped with an addition and scalar multiplication satisfying:


 
 
  for all φ and ψ ∈ V∗, x ∈ V, and a ∈ F. Elements of the algebraic dual space V∗ are sometimes called covectors or one-forms.
The pairing of a functional φ in the dual space V∗ and an element x of V is sometimes denoted by a bracket:  1 or .2 The pairing defines a nondegenerate bilinear mapping3 .
Finite-dimensional case
If V is finite-dimensional, then V∗ has the same dimension as V. Given a basis  in V, it is possible to construct a specific basis in V∗, called the dual basis. This dual basis is a set  of linear functionals on V, defined by the relation


 
  for any choice of coefficients . In particular, letting in turn each one of those coefficients be equal to one and the other coefficients zero, gives the system of equations


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta symbol. For example if V is R2, and its basis chosen to be , then e1 and e2 are one-forms (functions that map a vector to a scalar) such that , , , and . (Note: The superscript here is the index, not an exponent).
In particular, if we interpret Rn as the space of columns of n real numbers, its dual space is typically written as the space of rows of n real numbers. Such a row acts on Rn as a linear functional by ordinary matrix multiplication. One way to see this is that a functional maps every n-vector x into a real number y. Then, seeing this functional as a matrix M, and x, y as a  matrix and a  matrix (trivially, a real number) respectively, if we have , then, by dimension reasons, M must be a  matrix, i.e., M must be a row vector.
If V consists of the space of geometrical vectors in the plane, then the level curves of an element of V∗ form a family of parallel lines in V, because the range is 1-dimensional, so that every point in the range is a multiple of any one nonzero element. So an element of V∗ can be intuitively thought of as a particular family of parallel lines covering the plane. To compute the value of a functional on a given vector, one needs only to determine which of the lines the vector lies on. Or, informally, one "counts" how many lines the vector crosses. More generally, if V is a vector space of any dimension, then the level sets of a linear functional in V∗ are parallel hyperplanes in V, and the action of a linear functional on a vector can be visualized in terms of these hyperplanes.4
Infinite-dimensional case
If V is not finite-dimensional but has a basis5 eα indexed by an infinite set A, then the same construction as in the finite-dimensional case yields linearly independent elements eα () of the dual space, but they will not form a basis.
Consider, for instance, the space R∞, whose elements are those sequences of real numbers that contain only finitely many non-zero entries, which has a basis indexed by the natural numbers N: for , ei is the sequence consisting of all zeroes except in the ith position, which is 1. The dual space of R∞ is RN, the space of all sequences of real numbers: such a sequence (an) is applied to an element (xn) of R∞ to give the number ∑anxn, which is a finite sum because there are only finitely many nonzero xn. The dimension of R∞ is countably infinite, whereas RN does not have a countable basis.
This observation generalizes to any6 infinite-dimensional vector space V over any field F: a choice of basis  identifies V with the space (FA)0 of functions  such that  is nonzero for only finitely many , where such a function f is identified with the vector


 
  in V (the sum is finite by the assumption on f, and any  may be written in this way by the definition of the basis).
The dual space of V may then be identified with the space FA of all functions from A to F: a linear functional T on V is uniquely determined by the values  it takes on the basis of V, and any function  (with ) defines a linear functional T on V by


 
  Again the sum is finite because fα is nonzero for only finitely many α.
Note that (FA)0 may be identified (essentially by definition) with the direct sum of infinitely many copies of F (viewed as a 1-dimensional vector space over itself) indexed by A, i.e., there are linear isomorphisms



On the other hand FA is (again by definition), the direct product of infinitely many copies of F indexed by A, and so the identification


 
  is a special case of a general result relating direct sums (of modules) to direct products.
Thus if the basis is infinite, then the algebraic dual space is always of larger dimension (as a cardinal number) than the original vector space. This is in contrast to the case of the continuous dual space, discussed below, which may be isomorphic to the original vector space even if the latter is infinite-dimensional.
Bilinear products and dual spaces
If V is finite-dimensional, then V is isomorphic to V∗. But there is in general no natural isomorphism between these two spaces.7 Any bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩ on V gives a mapping of V into its dual space via



where the right hand side is defined as the functional on V taking each  to 〈v,w〉. In other words, the bilinear form determines a linear mapping



defined by



If the bilinear form is nondegenerate, then this is an isomorphism onto a subspace of V∗. If V is finite-dimensional, then this is an isomorphism onto all of V∗. Conversely, any isomorphism Φ from V to a subspace of V∗ (resp., all of V∗) defines a unique nondegenerate bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩Φ on V by



Thus there is a one-to-one correspondence between isomorphisms of V to subspaces of (resp., all of) V∗ and nondegenerate bilinear forms on V.
If the vector space V is over the complex field, then sometimes it is more natural to consider sesquilinear forms instead of bilinear forms. In that case, a given sesquilinear form ⟨·,·⟩ determines an isomorphism of V with the complex conjugate of the dual space


 
  The conjugate space V∗ can be identified with the set of all additive complex-valued functionals  such that



Injection into the double-dual
There is a natural homomorphism Ψ from V into the double dual V∗∗, defined by  for all , . This map Ψ is always injective;8 it is an isomorphism if and only if V is finite-dimensional. Indeed, the isomorphism of a finite-dimensional vector space with its double dual is an archetypal example of a natural isomorphism. Note that infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces are not a counterexample to this, as they are isomorphic to their continuous duals, not to their algebraic duals.
Transpose of a linear map
If  is a linear map, then the transpose (or dual)  is defined by


 
  for every . The resulting functional f ∗(φ) in V∗ is called the pullback of φ along f.
The following identity holds for all  and :


 
  where the bracket [·,·] on the left is the duality pairing of V with its dual space, and that on the right is the duality pairing of W with its dual. This identity characterizes the transpose,9 and is formally similar to the definition of the adjoint.
The assignment  produces an injective linear map between the space of linear operators from V to W and the space of linear operators from W∗ to V∗; this homomorphism is an isomorphism if and only if W is finite-dimensional. If  then the space of linear maps is actually an algebra under composition of maps, and the assignment is then an antihomomorphism of algebras, meaning that . In the language of category theory, taking the dual of vector spaces and the transpose of linear maps is therefore a contravariant functor from the category of vector spaces over F to itself. Note that one can identify (f ∗)∗ with f using the natural injection into the double dual.
If the linear map f is represented by the matrix A with respect to two bases of V and W, then f ∗ is represented by the transpose matrix AT with respect to the dual bases of W∗ and V∗, hence the name. Alternatively, as f is represented by A acting on the left on column vectors, f ∗ is represented by the same matrix acting on the right on row vectors. These points of view are related by the canonical inner product on Rn, which identifies the space of column vectors with the dual space of row vectors.
Quotient spaces and annihilators
Let S be a subset of V. The annihilator of S in V∗, denoted here So, is the collection of linear functionals  such that  for all . That is, So consists of all linear functionals  such that the restriction to S vanishes: S = 0}}.
The annihilator of a subset is itself a vector space. In particular,  is all of V∗ (vacuously), whereas  is the zero subspace. Furthermore, the assignment of an annihilator to a subset of V reverses inclusions, so that if , then



Moreover, if A and B are two subsets of V, then


 
  and equality holds provided V is finite-dimensional. If Ai is any family of subsets of V indexed by i belonging to some index set I, then


 
  In particular if A and B are subspaces of V, it follows that



If V is finite-dimensional, and W is a vector subspace, then


 
  after identifying W with its image in the second dual space under the double duality isomorphism . Thus, in particular, forming the annihilator is a Galois connection on the lattice of subsets of a finite-dimensional vector space.
If W is a subspace of V then the quotient space V/W is a vector space in its own right, and so has a dual. By the first isomorphism theorem, a functional  factors through V/W if and only if W is in the kernel of f. There is thus an isomorphism


 
  As a particular consequence, if V is a direct sum of two subspaces A and B, then V∗ is a direct sum of Ao and Bo.
Continuous dual space
When dealing with topological vector spaces, one is typically only interested in the continuous linear functionals from the space into the base field 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ). This gives rise to the notion of the "continuous dual space" or "topological dual" which is a linear subspace of the algebraic dual space 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 . For any finite-dimensional normed vector space or topological vector space, such as Euclidean n-space, the continuous dual and the algebraic dual coincide. This is however false for any infinite-dimensional normed space, as shown by the example of discontinuous linear maps. Nevertheless in the theory of topological vector spaces the terms "continuous dual space" and "topological dual space" are rarely used, as a rule they are replaced by "dual space", since there is no serious need to consider discontinuous maps in this field.
For a topological vector space

 
  its continuous dual space,10 or topological dual space,11 or just dual space12131415 (in the sense of the theory of topological vector spaces) 
 
 
 
  is defined as the space of all continuous linear functionals 
 
 
 
 .
There is a standard construction for introducing topology on the continuous dual 
 
 
 
  of a topological vector space 
 
 
 
 : each given class 
 
 
 
  of bounded subsets in 
 
 
 
  defines a topology on 
 
 
 
  of uniform convergence on sets from 
 
 
 
 , or what is the same a topology generated by seminorms of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a continuous linear functional on 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  runs over the class 
 
 
 
 .
This means that a net of functionals 
 
 
 
  tends to a functional 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  if and only if


 
  Usually (but not necessarily) the class 
 
 
 
  is supposed to satisfy the following conditions:

each point 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  belongs to some set 
 
 






each two sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are contained in some set 
 
 
 
 :







 
  is closed under the operation of multiplication by scalars:




If these requirements are fulfilled then the corresponding topology on 
 
 
 
  is Hausdorff and the sets


 
  form its local base.
Here are the three most important special cases.

The strong topology on 
 
 
 
  is the topology of uniform convergence on bounded subsets in 
 
 
 
  (so here 
 
 
 
  can be chosen as the class of all bounded subsets in 
 
 
 
 ). If 
 
 
 
  is a normed vector space (e.g., a Banach space or a Hilbert space) then the strong topology on 
 
 
 
  is normed (in fact a Banach space if the field of scalars is complete), with the norm





The stereotype topology on 
 
 
 
  is the topology of uniform convergence on totally bounded sets in 
 
 
 
  (so here 
 
 
 
  can be chosen as the class of all totally bounded subsets in 
 
 
 
 ).


The weak topology on 
 
 
 
  is the topology of uniform convergence on finite subsets in 
 
 
 
  (so here 
 
 
 
  can be chosen as the class of all finite subsets in 
 
 
 
 ).

Each of these three choices of topology on 
 
 
 
  leads to a variant of reflexivity property for topological vector spaces.
Examples
Let 1  p]]'' of all sequences  (an)}} for which


 
  is finite. Define the number q by . Then the continuous dual of ℓ p is naturally identified with ℓ q: given an element , the corresponding element of  is the sequence (φ(en)) where en denotes the sequence whose n-th term is 1 and all others are zero. Conversely, given an element  (an) ∈ ℓ q}}, the corresponding continuous linear functional φ on  is defined by  ∑n anbn}} for all  (bn) ∈ ℓ p}} (see Hölder's inequality).
In a similar manner, the continuous dual of  is naturally identified with  (the space of bounded sequences). Furthermore, the continuous duals of the Banach spaces c (consisting of all convergent sequences, with the supremum norm) and c0 (the sequences converging to zero) are both naturally identified with .
By the Riesz representation theorem, the continuous dual of a Hilbert space is again a Hilbert space which is anti-isomorphic to the original space. This gives rise to the bra–ket notation used by physicists in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics.
Transpose of a continuous linear map
If  is a continuous linear map between two topological vector spaces, then the (continuous) transpose  is defined by the same formula as before:


 
  The resulting functional  is in. The assignment  produces a linear map between the space of continuous linear maps from V to W and the space of linear maps from  to . When T and U are composable continuous linear maps, then



When V and W are normed spaces, the norm of the transpose in is equal to that of T in. Several properties of transposition depend upon the Hahn–Banach theorem. For example, the bounded linear map T has dense range if and only if the transpose  is injective.
When T is a compact linear map between two Banach spaces V and W, then the transpose  is compact. This can be proved using the Arzelà–Ascoli theorem.
When V is a Hilbert space, there is an antilinear isomorphism iV from V onto its continuous dual. For every bounded linear map T on V, the transpose and the adjoint operators are linked by



When T is a continuous linear map between two topological vector spaces V and W, then the transpose  is continuous when  and  are equipped with"compatible" topologies: for example when, for  and , both duals  have the strong topology  of uniform convergence on bounded sets of X, or both have the weak-∗ topology  of pointwise convergence on X. The transpose  is continuous from  to , or from  to .
Annihilators
Assume that W is a closed linear subspace of a normed space V, and consider the annihilator of W in,


 
  Then, the dual of the quotient  can be identified with W⊥, and the dual of W can be identified with the quotient .16 Indeed, let P denote the canonical surjection from V onto the quotient ; then, the transpose  is an isometric isomorphism from  into, with range equal to W⊥. If j denotes the injection map from W into V, then the kernel of the transpose  is the annihilator of W:


 
  and it follows from the Hahn–Banach theorem that  induces an isometric isomorphism .
Further properties
If the dual of a normed space V is separable, then so is the space V itself. The converse is not true: for example the space  is separable, but its dual  is not.
Topologies on the dual
The topology of V and the topology of real or complex numbers can be used to induce on V′ a dual space topology.
Double dual
 In analogy with the case of the algebraic double dual, there is always a naturally defined continuous linear operator  from a normed space V into its continuous double dual, defined by



As a consequence of the Hahn–Banach theorem, this map is in fact an isometry, meaning |Ψ(x)|{{!!}}|
 
 
 
 |{{!!}}|x''|{{!!}}}} for all x in V. Normed spaces for which the map Ψ is a bijection are called reflexive.
When V is a topological vector space, one can still define Ψ(x) by the same formula, for every , however several difficulties arise. First, when V is not locally convex, the continuous dual may be equal to {0} and the map Ψ trivial. However, if V is Hausdorff and locally convex, the map Ψ is injective from V to the algebraic dual  of the continuous dual, again as a consequence of the Hahn–Banach theorem.17
Second, even in the locally convex setting, several natural vector space topologies can be defined on the continuous dual , so that the continuous double dual  is not uniquely defined as a set. Saying that Ψ maps from V to , or in other words, that Ψ(x) is continuous on  for every , is a reasonable minimal requirement on the topology of , namely that the evaluation mappings


 
  be continuous for the chosen topology on . Further, there is still a choice of a topology on , and continuity of Ψ depends upon this choice. As a consequence, defining reflexivity in this framework is more involved than in the normed case.
See also

Duality (mathematics)
Duality (projective geometry)
Pontryagin duality
Reciprocal lattice – dual space basis, in crystallography
Covariance and contravariance of vectors
Dual norm

Notes
References






.





"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Functional analysis Space





In many areas, such as quantum mechanics, ⟨·,·⟩ is reserved for a sesquilinear form defined on .

Several assertions in this article require the axiom of choice for their justification. The axiom of choice is needed to show that an arbitrary vector space has a basis: in particular it is needed to show that RN has a basis. It is also needed to show that the dual of an infinite-dimensional vector space V is nonzero, and hence that the natural map from V to its double dual is injective.











If V is locally convex but not Hausdorff, the kernel of Ψ is the smallest closed subspace containing {0}.




