


Equivalence class




Equivalence class

(Figure)
Congruence is an example of an equivalence relation. The two triangles on the left are congruent, while the third and fourth triangles are not congruent to any other triangle. Thus, the first two triangles are in the same equivalence class, while the third and fourth triangles are in their own equivalence class.

In mathematics, when a set has an equivalence relation defined on its elements, there is a natural grouping of elements that are related to one another, forming what are called equivalence classes. Notationally, given a set 
 
 
 
  and an equivalence relation 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , the equivalence class of an element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is the subset of all elements in 
 
 
 
  which are equivalent to 
 
 
 
 . It follows from the definition of the equivalence relations that the equivalence classes form a partition of 
 
 
. The set of equivalence classes is sometimes called the quotient set or the quotient space of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
When 
 
 
 
  has some structure, and the equivalence relation is defined with some connection to this structure, the quotient set often inherits some related structure. Examples include quotient spaces in linear algebra, quotient spaces in topology, quotient groups, homogeneous spaces, quotient rings, quotient monoids, and quotient categories.
Notation and formal definition
An equivalence relation is a binary relation

 
  satisfying three properties:1

For every element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  (reflexivity),
For every two elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  (symmetry)
For every three elements 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  (transitivity).

The equivalence class of an element 
 
 
 
  is denoted 
 
 
 
  and is defined as the set



of elements that are related to 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . An alternative notation  can be used to denote the equivalence class of the element 
 
 
 
 , specifically with respect to the equivalence relation 
 
 
 
 . This is said to be the 
 
 
 
 -equivalence class of 
 
 
 
 .
The set of all equivalence classes in 
 
 
 
  with respect to an equivalence relation 
 
 
 
  is denoted as 
 
 
 
  and called 
 
 
modulo

 
  (or the quotient set of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 ).2 The surjective map

 
  from 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
 , which maps each element to its equivalence class, is called the canonical surjection or the canonical projection map.
When an element is chosen (often implicitly) in each equivalence class, this defines an injective map called a section. If this section is denoted by 
 
 
 
 , one has 
 
 
 
  for every equivalence class 
 
 
 
 . The element 
 
 
 
  is called a representative of 
 
 
 
 . Any element of a class may be chosen as a representative of the class, by choosing the section appropriately.
Sometimes, there is a section that is more "natural" than the other ones. In this case, the representatives are called canonical representatives. For example, in modular arithmetic, consider the equivalence relation on the integers defined by 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is a multiple of a given integer 
 
 
 
 , called the modulus. Each class contains a unique non-negative integer smaller than 
 
 
 
 , and these integers are the canonical representatives. The class and its representative are more or less identified, as is witnessed by the fact that the notation 
 
 
 
  may denote either the class or its canonical representative (which is the remainder of the division of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 ).
Examples

If 
 
 
 
  is the set of all cars, and 
 
 
 
  is the equivalence relation "has the same color as." then one particular equivalence class consists of all green cars. 
 
 
 
  could be naturally identified with the set of all car colors (cardinality of 
 
 
 
  would be the number of all car colors).
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of all rectangles in a plane, and 
 
 
 
  the equivalence relation "has the same area as". For each positive real number A there will be an equivalence class of all the rectangles that have area A.3
Consider the modulo 2 equivalence relation on the set 
 
 
 
  of integers: 
 
 
 
  if and only if their difference 
 
 
 
  is an even number. This relation gives rise to exactly two equivalence classes: one class consisting of all even numbers, and the other consisting of all odd numbers. Under this relation 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  all represent the same element of 
 
 
 
 .4
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of ordered pairs of integers 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  not zero, and define an equivalence relation 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  according to which 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 . Then the equivalence class of the pair 
 
 
 
  can be identified with the rational number

 
 , and this equivalence relation and its equivalence classes can be used to give a formal definition of the set of rational numbers.5 The same construction can be generalized to the field of fractions of any integral domain.
If 
 
 
 
  consists of all the lines in, say the Euclidean plane, and L ~ M means that L and M are parallel lines, then the set of lines that are parallel to each other form an equivalence class as long as a line is considered parallel to itself. In this situation, each equivalence class determines a point at infinity.

Properties
Every element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is a member of the equivalence class 
 
 
 
 . Every two equivalence classes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are either equal or disjoint. Therefore, the set of all equivalence classes of 
 
 
 
  forms a partition of 
 
 
 
 : every element of 
 
 
 
  belongs to one and only one equivalence class.6 Conversely every partition of 
 
 
 
  comes from an equivalence relation in this way, according to which 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  belong to the same set of the partition.7
It follows from the properties of an equivalence relation that




 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
 



In other words, if 
 
 
 
  is an equivalence relation on a set 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two elements of 
 
 
 
 , then these statements are equivalent:











Graphical representation
Any binary relation can be represented by a directed graph and symmetric ones, such as equivalence relations, by undirected graphs. If 
 
 
 
  is an equivalence relation on a set 
 
 
 
 , let the vertices of the graph be the elements of 
 
 
 
  and join vertices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 . The equivalence classes are represented in this graph by the maximal cliques forming the connected components of the graph.8
Invariants
If 
 
 
 
  is an equivalence relation on 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a property of elements of 
 
 
 
  such that whenever 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is true if 
 
 
 
  is true, then the property 
 
 
 
  is said to be an invariant of 
 
 
 
 , or well-defined under the relation 
 
 
 
 .
A frequent particular case occurs when 
 
 
 
  is a function from 
 
 
 
  to another set 
 
 
 
 ; if  whenever , then 
 
 
 
  is said to be a morphism for 
 
 
 
 , a class invariant under

 
 , or simply invariant under

 
 . This occurs, e.g. in the character theory of finite groups. Some authors use "compatible with 
 
 
 
 " or just "respects 
 
 
 
 " instead of "invariant under 
 
 
 
 ".
Any function

 
  itself defines an equivalence relation on 
 
 
 
  according to which  if and only if . The equivalence class of 
 
 
 
  is the set of all elements in 
 
 
 
  which get mapped to 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the class 
 
 
 
  is the inverse image of 
 
 
 
 . This equivalence relation is known as the kernel of 
 
 
 
 .
More generally, a function may map equivalent arguments (under an equivalence relation  on 
 
 
 
 ) to equivalent values (under an equivalence relation  on 
 
 
 
 ). Such a function is known as a morphism from  to .
Quotient space in topology
In topology, a quotient space is a topological space formed on the set of equivalence classes of an equivalence relation on a topological space using the original space's topology to create the topology on the set of equivalence classes.
In abstract algebra, congruence relations on the underlying set of an algebra allow the algebra to induce an algebra on the equivalence classes of the relation, called a quotient algebra. In linear algebra, a quotient space is a vector space formed by taking a quotient group where the quotient homomorphism is a linear map. By extension, in abstract algebra, the term quotient space may be used for quotient modules, quotient rings, quotient groups, or any quotient algebra. However, the use of the term for the more general cases can as often be by analogy with the orbits of a group action.
The orbits of a group action on a set may be called the quotient space of the action on the set, particularly when the orbits of the group action are the right cosets of a subgroup of a group, which arise from the action of the subgroup on the group by left translations, or respectively the left cosets as orbits under right translation.
A normal subgroup of a topological group, acting on the group by translation action, is a quotient space in the senses of topology, abstract algebra, and group actions simultaneously.
Although the term can be used for any equivalence relation's set of equivalence classes, possibly with further structure, the intent of using the term is generally to compare that type of equivalence relation on a set X either to an equivalence relation that induces some structure on the set of equivalence classes from a structure of the same kind on X, or to the orbits of a group action. Both the sense of a structure preserved by an equivalence relation and the study of invariants under group actions lead to the definition of invariants of equivalence relations given above.
See also

Equivalence partitioning, a method for devising test sets in software testing based on dividing the possible program inputs into equivalence classes according to the behavior of the program on those inputs
Homogeneous space, the quotient space of Lie groups.
Transversal (combinatorics)

Notes
References







Further reading
This material is basic and can be found in any text dealing with the fundamentals of proof technique, such as any of the following:















de:Äquivalenzrelation#Äquivalenzklassen nl:Equivalentierelatie#Equivalentieklasse"
Category:Mathematical relations















