


Euler–Maclaurin formula




Euler–Maclaurin formula

In mathematics, the Euler–Maclaurin formula provides a powerful connection between integrals (see calculus) and sums. It can be used to approximate integrals by finite sums, or conversely to evaluate finite sums and infinite series using integrals and the machinery of calculus. For example, many asymptotic expansions are derived from the formula, and Faulhaber's formula for the sum of powers is an immediate consequence.
The formula was discovered independently by Leonhard Euler and Colin Maclaurin around 1735 (and later generalized as Darboux's formula). Euler needed it to compute slowly converging infinite series while Maclaurin used it to calculate integrals.
The formula
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are natural numbers and 
 
 
 
  is a complex or real valued continuous function for real numbers

 
 
  in the interval 
 
 
 
 , then the integral



can be approximated by the sum (or vice versa)



(see trapezoidal rule). The Euler–Maclaurin formula provides expressions for the difference between the sum and the integral in terms of the higher derivatives  evaluated at the end points of the interval, that is to say when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 .
Explicitly, for a natural number 
 
 
 
  and a function 
 
 
 
  that is 
 
 
 
  times continuously differentiable in the interval 
 
 
 
 , we have



where  is the 
 
 
 
 th Bernoulli number, with  1}},  +1/2}},  1/6}},  0}},  −1/30}},  0}},  1/42}},  0}},  −1/30}} ..., and 
 
 
 
  is an error term which is normally small for suitable values of 
 
 
 
  and depends on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 .
The formula is often written with the subscript taking only even values, since the odd Bernoulli numbers are zero except for B1, in which case we have



The Bernoulli polynomials and periodic function
The formula is derived below using repeated integration by parts applied to successive intervals 
 
 
 
  for integers 
 
 
 
 . The derivation uses the periodic Bernoulli functions, 
 
 
 
  which are defined in terms of the Bernoulli polynomials

 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
the Bernoulli polynomials may be defined recursively by



and the periodic Bernoulli functions are defined as



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the largest integer that is not greater than 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  always lies in the interval 
 
 
 
 .
It can be shown that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  so that except for 
 
 
 
 , all the periodic Bernoulli functions are continuous. The functions 
 
 
 
  are sometimes written as 
 
 
 
 .
The remainder term
The remainder term 
 
 
 
  can be written as



or equivalently, integrating by parts, assuming ƒ(2p) is differentiable again and recalling that all odd Bernoulli numbers (but the first one) are zero:



When n > 0, it can be shown that



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Riemann zeta function; one approach to prove this inequality is to obtain the Fourier series for the polynomials . The bound is achieved for even 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  is zero. The term 
 
 
 
  may be omitted for odd 
 
 
 
  but the proof in this case is more complex (see Lehmer:1)
Using this inequality, the size of the remainder term can be estimated using



Applicable formula
We can use the formula as a means of approximating a finite integral, with the following simple formula:2


 
 .
Where 
 
 
 
  is the number of points in the interval of integration from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the distance between points so that 
 
 
 
 . Note the series above is usually not convergent; indeed, often the terms will increase rapidly after a number of iterations. Thus, attention generally needs to be paid to the remainder term.
This may be viewed as an extension of the trapezoid rule by the inclusion of correction terms.3
Applications
The Basel problem
The Basel problem asks to determine the sum



Euler computed this sum to 20 decimal places with only a few terms of the Euler–Maclaurin formula in 1735. This probably convinced him that the sum equals π2 / 6, which he proved in the same year.4 Parseval's identity for the Fourier series of f(x) = x gives the same result.
Sums involving a polynomial
If f is a polynomial and p is big enough, then the remainder term vanishes. For instance, if f(x) = x3, we can choose p = 2 to obtain after simplification



(see Faulhaber's formula).
Numerical integration
The Euler–Maclaurin formula is also used for detailed error analysis in numerical quadrature. It explains the superior performance of the trapezoidal rule on smooth periodic functions and is used in certain extrapolation methods. Clenshaw–Curtis quadrature is essentially a change of variables to cast an arbitrary integral in terms of integrals of periodic functions where the Euler–Maclaurin approach is very accurate (in that particular case the Euler–Maclaurin formula takes the form of a discrete cosine transform). This technique is known as a periodizing transformation.
Asymptotic expansion of sums
In the context of computing asymptotic expansions of sums and series, usually the most useful form of the Euler–Maclaurin formula is



where a and b are integers.5 Often the expansion remains valid even after taking the limits 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , or both. In many cases the integral on the right-hand side can be evaluated in closed form in terms of elementary functions even though the sum on the left-hand side cannot. Then all the terms in the asymptotic series can be expressed in terms of elementary functions. For example,



Here the left-hand side is equal to 
 
 
 
 , namely the first-order polygamma function defined through 
 
 
 
 ; the gamma function

 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is a positive integer. This results in an asymptotic expansion for 
 
 
 
 . That expansion, in turn, serves as the starting point for one of the derivations of precise error estimates for Stirling's approximation of the factorial function.
Examples










Proofs
Derivation by mathematical induction
We follow the argument given in Apostol.6
The Bernoulli polynomials  and the periodic Bernoulli functions  for 
 
 
 
  were introduced above.
The first several Bernoulli polynomials are



The values  are the Bernoulli numbers. Notice that for 
 
 
 
  we have



For 
 
 
 
 ,



The functions  agree with the Bernoulli polynomials on the interval 
 
 
 
  and are periodic with period 1. Furthermore, except when 
 
 
 
 , they are also continuous. Thus,



Let 
 
 
 
  be an integer, and consider the integral



where



Integrating by parts, we get



Summing the above from k = 0 to k = n − 1, we get



Adding (f(n) - f(0))/2 to both sides and rearranging, we have



The last two terms therefore give the error when the integral is taken to approximate the sum.
Next, consider



where



Integrating by parts again, we get



Then summing from k = 0 to k = n − 1, and then replacing the last integral in (1) with what we have thus shown to be equal to it, we have



By now the reader will have guessed that this process can be iterated. In this way we get a proof of the Euler–Maclaurin summation formula which can be formalized by mathematical induction, in which the induction step relies on integration by parts and on the identities for periodic Bernoulli functions.
See also

Cesàro summation
Euler summation
Gauss–Kronrod quadrature formula
Darboux's formula

Notes
References


, pp. 16, 806, 886

Gourdon, Xavier; Sebah, Pascal Introduction on Bernoulli's numbers, (2002)


"
Category:Approximation theory Category:Asymptotic analysis Category:Hilbert space Category:Numerical integration (quadrature) Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Summability methods






Pengelley, David J. "Dances between continuous and discrete: Euler's summation formula", in: Robert Bradley and Ed Sandifer (Eds), Proceedings, Euler 2K+2 Conference (Rumford, Maine, 2002), Euler Society, 2003.
, 23.1.30





