


Euler's formula




Euler's formula


''This article is about Euler's formula in complex analysis. For Euler's formula in algebraic topology and polyhedral combinatorics see Euler characteristic.
 

Euler's formula, named after Leonhard Euler, is a mathematical formula in complex analysis that establishes the fundamental relationship between the trigonometric functions and the complex exponential function. Euler's formula states that, for any real number .



where  is the base of the natural logarithm,  is the imaginary unit, and  and  are the trigonometric functions cosine and sine respectively, with the argument x given in radians. This complex exponential function is sometimes denoted  ("cosine plus i sine"). The formula is still valid if  is a complex number, and so some authors refer to the more general complex version as Euler's formula.1
Euler's formula is ubiquitous in mathematics, physics, and engineering. The physicist Richard Feynman called the equation "our jewel" and "the most remarkable formula in mathematics."2
History
It was Johann Bernoulli who noted that3


And since



the above equation tells us something about complex logarithms. Bernoulli, however, did not evaluate the integral.
Bernoulli's correspondence with Euler (who also knew the above equation) shows that Bernoulli did not fully understand complex logarithms. Euler also suggested that the complex logarithms can have infinitely many values.
Meanwhile, Roger Cotes, in 1714, discovered that



(
 
 
 
  is the natural logarithm).4
Cotes missed the fact that a complex logarithm can have infinitely many values, differing by multiples of , due to the periodicity of the trigonometric functions.
Around 1740 Euler turned his attention to the exponential function instead of logarithms, and obtained the formula used today that is named after him. It was published in 1748, obtained by comparing the series expansions of the exponential and trigonometric expressions.5
None of these mathematicians saw the geometrical interpretation of the formula; the view of complex numbers as points in the complex plane was described some 50 years later by Caspar Wessel.
Applications in complex number theory
thumb |right thumb|upright=1.5|Three-dimensional visualization of Euler's formula. See also circular polarization. This formula can be interpreted as saying that the function  is a unit complex number, i.e., traces out the unit circle in the complex plane as  ranges through the real numbers. Here,  is the angle that a line connecting the origin with a point on the unit circle makes with the positive real axis, measured counter clockwise and in radians.
The original proof is based on the Taylor series expansions of the exponential function  (where  is a complex number) and of  and  for real numbers  (see below). In fact, the same proof shows that Euler's formula is even valid for all complex numbers .
A point in the complex plane can be represented by a complex number written in cartesian coordinates. Euler's formula provides a means of conversion between cartesian coordinates and polar coordinates. The polar form simplifies the mathematics when used in multiplication or powers of complex numbers. Any complex number , and its complex conjugate, , can be written as



where


 
  the real part


 
  the imaginary part


 
  the magnitude of z


atan2(y, x) .
is the argument of z—i.e., the angle between the x axis and the vector z measured counterclockwise and in radians—which is defined up to addition of . Many texts write θ = tan−1(y/x) instead of θ = atan2(y,x), but the first equation needs adjustment when x ≤ 0. This is because, for any real x, y not both zero, the angles of the vectors (x,y) and (-x,-y) differ by  radians, but have the identical value of tan(θ) = y/x.
Now, taking this derived formula, we can use Euler's formula to define the logarithm of a complex number. To do this, we also use the definition of the logarithm (as the inverse operator of exponentiation) that



and that



both valid for any complex numbers a and b.
Therefore, one can write:



for any z ≠ 0. Taking the logarithm of both sides shows that:



and in fact this can be used as the definition for the complex logarithm. The logarithm of a complex number is thus a multi-valued function, because  is multi-valued.
Finally, the other exponential law



which can be seen to hold for all integers k, together with Euler's formula, implies several trigonometric identities as well as de Moivre's formula.
Relationship to trigonometry
 Euler's formula provides a powerful connection between analysis and trigonometry, and provides an interpretation of the sine and cosine functions as weighted sums of the exponential function:



The two equations above can be derived by adding or subtracting Euler's formulas:



and solving for either cosine or sine.
These formulas can even serve as the definition of the trigonometric functions for complex arguments x. For example, letting x = iy, we have:



Complex exponentials can simplify trigonometry, because they are easier to manipulate than their sinusoidal components. One technique is simply to convert sinusoids into equivalent expressions in terms of exponentials. After the manipulations, the simplified result is still real-valued. For example:



Another technique is to represent the sinusoids in terms of the real part of a complex expression, and perform the manipulations on the complex expression. For example:



This formula is used for recursive generation of cos(nx) for integer values of n and arbitrary x (in radians).
See also Phasor arithmetic.
Topological interpretation
In the language of topology, Euler's formula states that the imaginary exponential function 
 
 
 
  is a (surjective) morphism of topological groups from the real line  to the unit circle 
 
 
 
 . In fact, this exhibits  as a covering space of 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, Euler's identity says that the kernel of this map is 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . These observations may be combined and summarized in the commutative diagram below:
(Figure)
Euler's formula and identity combined in diagrammatic form

Other applications
In differential equations, the function  is often used to simplify derivations, even if the final answer is a real function involving sine and cosine. The reason for this is that the complex exponential is the eigenfunction of differentiation. Euler's identity is an easy consequence of Euler's formula.
In electronic engineering and other fields, signals that vary periodically over time are often described as a combination of sine and cosine functions (see Fourier analysis), and these are more conveniently expressed as the real part of exponential functions with imaginary exponents, using Euler's formula. Also, phasor analysis of circuits can include Euler's formula to represent the impedance of a capacitor or an inductor.
Definitions of complex exponentiation
The exponential function  for real values of  may be defined in a few different equivalent ways (see Characterizations of the exponential function). Several of these methods may be directly extended to give definitions of  for complex values of  simply by substituting  in place of  and using the complex algebraic operations. In particular we may use either of the two following definitions which are equivalent. From a more advanced perspective, each of these definitions may be interpreted as giving the unique analytic continuation of  to the complex plane.
Power series definition
For complex 



Using the ratio test it is possible to show that this power series has an infinite radius of convergence, and so defines  for all complex .
Limit definition
For complex 



Polar to Rectangular Conversion definition
If the original z is expressed in not ordinary rectilinear but rather packed polar coordinates, where the normal x is actually representing the radius, and the normal y is actually representing the angle theta, then complex exponentiation serves to unpack the polar coordinates into regular rectangular space, while simultaneously exponentiating the radius part. Thus for complex  =  + j 



where the new radius R' = .
Then the new x is R'cos(theta), and the new y is R'sin(theta), as usual.
Proofs
Various proofs of the formula are possible.
Using power series
Here is a proof of Euler's formula using power series expansions as well as basic facts about the powers of i:6



and so on. Using now the power series definition from above we see that for real values of x



In the last step we have simply recognized the Maclaurin series for cos(x) and sin(x). The rearrangement of terms is justified because each series is absolutely convergent.
Using calculus
Another proof7 is based on the fact that all complex numbers can be expressed in polar coordinates. Therefore for some  and  depending on ,


 
  Now from any of the definitions of the exponential function it can be shown that the derivative of  is . Therefore differentiating both sides gives


 
  Substituting 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
  and equating real and imaginary parts in this formula gives 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Together with the initial values 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which come from 
 
 
 
 
  this gives 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This proves the formula 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Complex number
Euler's identity
Integration using Euler's formula
List of topics named after Leonhard Euler

References


External links


Proof of Euler's Formula by Julius O. Smith III
Euler's Formula and Fermat's Last Theorem
Complex Exponential Function Module by John H. Mathews
Elements of Algebra
Visual Derivation of Euler's Formula
Euler's Formula and Euler's Identity : Rationale for Euler's Formula and Euler's Identity, video at Khanacademy.org


Difficult definite integrals by complex numbers

"
Category:Theorems in complex analysis Category:Articles containing proofs Category:E (mathematical constant)



↩
↩
Johann Bernoulli, Solution d'un problème concernant le calcul intégral, avec quelques abrégés par rapport à ce calcul, Mémoires de l'Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, 197-289 (1702).↩
↩

[http://books.google.com/books?id=PjK0F0T3NBoC&pg;;=PA428 A Modern Introduction to Differential Equations, by Henry J. Ricardo, p428]↩
 (Second proof on page)↩




