   Erwin Schrödinger      Erwin Schrödinger    Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrödinger (; 12 August 1887 – 4 January 1961), sometimes written as or , was a Nobel Prize-winning Austrian  physicist who developed a number of fundamental results in the field of quantum theory , which formed the basis of wave mechanics: he formulated the wave equation (stationary and time-dependent Schrödinger equation ) and revealed the identity of his development of the formalism and matrix mechanics . Schrödinger proposed an original interpretation of the physical meaning of the wave function .  In addition, he was the author of many works in various fields of physics: statistical mechanics and thermodynamics , physics of dielectrics, colour theory , electrodynamics , general relativity , and cosmology , and he made several attempts to construct a unified field theory. In his book What Is Life? Schrödinger addressed the problems of genetics, looking at the phenomenon of life from the point of view of physics. He paid great attention to the philosophical aspects of science, ancient and oriental philosophical concepts, ethics, and religion. 1 He also wrote on philosophy and theoretical biology. He is also known for his " Schrödinger's cat " thought-experiment. 2 3  Biography  Early years  On 12 August 1887, Schrödinger was born in Vienna, Austria, to Rudolf Schrödinger (cerecloth producer, botanist) and Georgine Emilia Brenda (daughter of Alexander Bauer, Professor of Chemistry, Technische Hochschule Vienna ). He was their only child.  His mother was half Austrian and half English; his father was Catholic and his mother was Lutheran. Despite being raised in a religious household, he called himself an atheist . 4 5 However, he had strong interests in Eastern religions, pantheism and used religious symbolism in his works. He also believed his scientific work was an approach to the godhead, albeit in a metaphorical sense. 6  He was also able to learn English outside of school, as his maternal grandmother was British. 7 Between 1906 and 1910 Schrödinger studied in Vienna under Franz S. Exner (1849–1926) and Friedrich Hasenöhrl (1874–1915). He also conducted experimental work with Karl Wilhelm Friedrich "Fritz" Kohlrausch.  In 1911, Schrödinger became an assistant to Exner. At an early age, Schrödinger was strongly influenced by Arthur Schopenhauer . As a result of his extensive reading of Schopenhauer's works, he became deeply interested throughout his life in colour theory and philosophy. In his lecture "Mind and Matter", he said that "The world extended in space and time is but our representation ." This is a repetition of the first words of Schopenhauer's main work.  Middle years  In 1914 Erwin Schrödinger achieved Habilitation ( venia legendi ). Between 1914 and 1918 he participated in war work as a commissioned officer in the Austrian fortress artillery ( Gorizia , Duino , Sistiana , Prosecco, Vienna). In 1920 he became the assistant to Max Wien , in Jena , and in September 1920 he attained the position of ao. Prof. ( ausserordentlicher Professor ), roughly equivalent to Reader (UK) or associate professor (US), in Stuttgart . In 1921, he became o. Prof. ( ordentlicher Professor , i.e. full professor), in Breslau (now Wrocław, Poland).  In 1921, he moved to the University of Zürich . In 1927, he succeeded Max Planck at the Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin. In 1934, however, Schrödinger decided to leave Germany; he disliked the Nazis' anti-semitism. He became a Fellow of Magdalen College at the University of Oxford . Soon after he arrived, he received the Nobel Prize together with Paul Dirac . His position at Oxford did not work out well; his unconventional domestic arrangements, sharing living quarters with two women 8 was not met with acceptance. In 1934, Schrödinger lectured at Princeton University ; he was offered a permanent position there, but did not accept it. Again, his wish to set up house with his wife and his mistress may have created a problem. 9 He had the prospect of a position at the University of Edinburgh but visa delays occurred, and in the end he took up a position at the University of Graz in Austria in 1936. He had also accepted the offer of chair position at Department of Physics, Allahabad University in India. 10 11 12  In the midst of these tenure issues in 1935, after extensive correspondence with Albert Einstein , he proposed what is now called the Schrödinger's cat  thought experiment .  Later years  In 1938, after the Anschluss , Schrödinger had problems because of his flight from Germany in 1933 and his known opposition to Nazism . He issued a statement recanting this opposition (he later regretted doing so and personally apologized to Einstein ). However, this did not fully appease the new dispensation and the University of Graz dismissed him from his job for political unreliability. He suffered harassment and received instructions not to leave the country, but he and his wife fled to Italy. From there, he went to visiting positions in Oxford and Ghent University .  In the same year he received a personal invitation from Ireland's Taoiseach , Éamon de Valera , to reside in Ireland and agree to help establish an Institute for Advanced Studies in Dublin. 13 He moved to Clontarf, Dublin , became the Director of the School for Theoretical Physics in 1940 and remained there for 17 years. He became a naturalized Irish citizen in 1948, but retained his Austrian citizenship. He wrote about 50 further publications on various topics, including his explorations of unified field theory .  In 1944, he wrote What Is Life? , which contains a discussion of negentropy and the concept of a complex molecule with the genetic code for living organisms . According to James D. Watson 's memoir, DNA , the Secret of Life , Schrödinger's book gave Watson the inspiration to research the gene , which led to the discovery of the DNA  double helix structure in 1953. Similarly, Francis Crick , in his autobiographical book What Mad Pursuit , described how he was influenced by Schrödinger's speculations about how genetic information might be stored in molecules. However, the geneticist and 1946 Nobel-prize winner H.J. Muller had in his 1922 article "Variation due to Change in the Individual Gene" 14 already laid out all the basic properties of the heredity molecule that Schrödinger derives from first principles in What Is Life? , properties which Muller refined in his 1929 article "The Gene As The Basis of Life" 15 and further clarified during the 1930s, long before the publication of What Is Life? . 16  Schrödinger stayed in Dublin until retiring in 1955. He had a lifelong interest in the Vedanta philosophy of Hinduism , which influenced his speculations at the close of What Is Life? about the possibility that individual consciousness is only a manifestation of a unitary consciousness pervading the universe . 17 A manuscript "Fragment From An Unpublished Dialogue of Galileo" from this time recently resurfaced at The King's Hospital boarding school, Dublin 18 after it was written for the School's 1955 edition of their Blue Coat to celebrate his leaving of Dublin to take up his appointment as Chair of Physics at the University of Vienna.  In 1956, he returned to Vienna (chair ad personam ). At an important lecture during the World Energy Conference he refused to speak on nuclear energy because of his skepticism about it and gave a philosophical lecture instead. During this period Schrödinger turned from mainstream quantum mechanics' definition of wave–particle duality and promoted the wave idea alone , causing much controversy.  Personal life  On 6 April 1920, Schrödinger married Annemarie (Anny) Bertel. 19  Schrödinger suffered from tuberculosis and several times in the 1920s stayed at a sanatorium in Arosa . It was there that he formulated his wave equation. 20  On 4 January 1961, Schrödinger died of tuberculosis, aged 73, in Vienna . He left Anny a widow, and was buried in Alpbach , Austria, in a Catholic cemetery. Although he was not Catholic, the priest in charge of the cemetery permitted the burial after learning Schrödinger was a member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences . 21 His wife, Anny (born 3 December 1896) died on 3 October 1965.  Scientific activities  Early activities  Early in his life, Schrödinger experimented in the fields of electrical engineering, atmospheric electricity, and atmospheric radioactivity; he usually worked with his former teacher Franz Exner. He also studied vibrational theory, the theory of Brownian movement, and mathematical statistics. In 1912, at the request of the editors of the Handbook of Electricity and Magnetism , Schrödinger wrote an article titled Dieelectrism . That same year, Schrödinger gave a theoretical estimate of the probable height distribution of radioactive substances, which is required to explain the observed radioactivity of the atmosphere, and in August 1913 executed several experiments in Zeehame that confirmed his theoretical estimate and those of Victor Franz Hess. For this work, Schrödinger was awarded the 1920 Haytingera Prize (Haitinger-Preis) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. 22 Other experimental studies conducted by the young researcher in 1914 were checking formulas for capillary pressure in gas bubbles and the study of the properties of soft beta-radiation appearing in the fall of gamma rays on the surface of metal. The last work he performed together with his friend Fritz Kohlrausch. In 1919, Schrödinger performed his last physical experiment on coherent light and subsequently focused on theoretical studies.  Quantum mechanics  New quantum theory  In the first years of his career Schrödinger became acquainted with the ideas of quantum theory, developed in the works of Max Planck , Albert Einstein , Niels Bohr , Arnold Sommerfeld , and others. This knowledge helped him work on some problems in theoretical physics, but the Austrian scientist at the time was not yet ready to part with the traditional methods of classical physics.  The first publications of Schrödinger about atomic theory and the theory of spectra began to emerge only from the beginning of the 1920s, after his personal acquaintance with Sommerfeld and Wolfgang Pauli and his move to Germany. In January 1921, Schrödinger finished his first article on this subject, about the framework of the Bohr-Sommerfeld effect of the interaction of electrons on some features of the spectra of the alkali metals. Of particular interest to him was the introduction of relativistic considerations in quantum theory. In autumn 1922 he analyzed the electron orbits in an atom from a geometric point of view, using methods developed by the mathematician Hermann Weyl (1885–1955). This work, in which it was shown that quantum orbits are associated with certain geometric properties, was an important step in predicting some of the features of wave mechanics. Earlier in the same year he created the Schrödinger equation of the relativistic Doppler effect for spectral lines, based on the hypothesis of light quanta and considerations of energy and momentum. He liked the idea of his teacher Exner on the statistical nature of the conservation laws, so he enthusiastically embraced the articles of Bohr, Kramers , and Slater , which suggested the possibility of violation of these laws in individual atomic processes (for example, in the process of emission of radiation). Despite the fact that the experiments of Hans Geiger and Walther Bothe soon cast doubt on this, the idea of energy as a statistical concept was a lifelong attraction for Schrödinger and he discussed it in some reports and publications. 23  Creation of wave mechanics  In January 1926, Schrödinger published in Annalen der Physik the paper " Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem " 24 [ tr . Quantization as an Eigenvalue Problem] on wave mechanics and presented what is now known as the Schrödinger equation . In this paper, he gave a "derivation" of the wave equation for time-independent systems and showed that it gave the correct energy eigenvalues for a hydrogen-like atom. This paper has been universally celebrated as one of the most important achievements of the twentieth century and created a revolution in quantum mechanics and indeed of all physics and chemistry. A second paper was submitted just four weeks later that solved the quantum harmonic oscillator , rigid rotor , and diatomic molecule problems and gave a new derivation of the Schrödinger equation. A third paper, published in May, showed the equivalence of his approach to that of Heisenberg and gave the treatment of the Stark effect. A fourth paper in this series showed how to treat problems in which the system changes with time, as in scattering problems. In this paper he introduced a complex solution to the Wave equation in order to prevent the occurrence of a fourth order differential equation, and this was arguably the moment when quantum mechanics switched from real to complex numbers, never to return. These papers were his central achievement and were at once recognized as having great significance by the physics community.  Schrödinger was not entirely comfortable with the implications of quantum theory. Schrödinger wrote about the probability interpretation of quantum mechanics, saying: "I don't like it, and I'm sorry I ever had anything to do with it." 25  Work on a Unified Field Theory  Following his work on quantum mechanics, Schrödinger devoted considerable effort to working on a Unified Field Theory that would unite gravity, electromagnetism, and nuclear forces within the basic framework of General Relativity, doing the work with an extended correspondence with Albert Einstein. 26 In 1947, he announced a result, "Affine Field Theory," 27 in a talk at the Royal Irish Academy, but the announcement was criticized by Einstein as "preliminary" and failed to lead to the desired unified theory. 28 Following the failure of his attempt at unification, Schrödinger gave up his work on unification and turned to other topics.  Colour  One of Schrödinger's lesser-known areas of scientific contribution was his work on colour, colour perception , and colorimetry ( Farbenmetrik ). In 1920, he published three papers in this area:   "Theorie der Pigmente von größter Leuchtkraft", Annalen der Physik , (4), 62, (1920), 603–22 (Theory of Pigments with Highest Luminosity)  "Grundlinien einer Theorie der Farbenmetrik im Tagessehen", Annalen der Physik , (4), 63, (1920), 397–456; 481–520 (Outline of a theory of colour measurement for daylight vision)  "Farbenmetrik", Zeitschrift für Physik , 1, (1920), 459–66 (Colour measurement).   The second of these is available in English as "Outline of a Theory of Colour Measurement for Daylight Vision" in Sources of Colour Science , Ed. David L. MacAdam, The MIT Press (1970), 134–82.  Legacy  The philosophical issues raised by Schrödinger's cat are still debated today and remain his most enduring legacy in popular science, while Schrödinger's equation is his most enduring legacy at a more technical level. To this day, Schrödinger is known as the father of quantum mechanics . The large crater Schrödinger , on the far side of the Moon , is named after him. The Erwin Schrödinger International Institute for Mathematical Physics was established in Vienna in 1993.  Schrödinger's portrait was the main feature of the design of the 1983–97 Austrian 1000-Schilling banknote , the second-highest denomination.  A building is named after him at the University of Limerick, in Limerick, Ireland, 29 as is the 'Erwin Schrödinger Zentrum' at Adlershof in Berlin. 30  Schrödinger's 126th birthday anniversary was celebrated with a Google Doodle . 31 32  Honors and awards   Nobel Prize for Physics (1933) – for the formulation of the Schrödinger equation  Max Planck Medal (1937)  Elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1949 33  Erwin Schrödinger Prize of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (1956)  Austrian Decoration for Science and Art (1957)   Schrodinger's cat is named in his honour, see also list of things named after Erwin Schrödinger .  Published works   The List of Erwin Schrödinger's publications, compiled by Auguste Dick, Gabriele Kerber, Wolfgang Kerber and Karl von Meyenn's Erwin Schrödinger: Publications  Science and the human temperament  Allen & Unwin (1935), translated and introduced by James Murphy , with a foreword by Ernest Rutherford  Nature and the Greeks and Science and Humanism Cambridge University Press (1996) ISBN 0-521-57550-8.  The interpretation of Quantum Mechanics Ox Bow Press (1995) ISBN 1-881987-09-4.  Statistical Thermodynamics Dover Publications (1989) ISBN 0-486-66101-6.  Collected papers Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn (1984) ISBN 3-7001-0573-8.  My View of the World Ox Bow Press (1983) ISBN 0-918024-30-7.  Expanding Universes Cambridge University Press (1956).  Space-Time Structure Cambridge University Press (1950) ISBN 0-521-31520-4. 34  What Is Life? Macmillan (1944).  What Is Life? & Mind and Matter Cambridge University Press (1974) ISBN 0-521-09397-X.   References  Further reading   John Gribbin (2012), Erwin Schrödinger and the Quantum Revolution, Bantam Press.    .   .   External links   Erwin Schrödinger on an Austrian banknote.   " biographie " (in German) or  " Biography from the Austrian Central Library for Physics " (in English)  Encyclopaedia Britannica article on Erwin Schrodinger  Nobel Lectures , Physics 1922–1941, " Erwin Schrödinger Biography " from NobelPrize.org  Vallabhan, C. P. Girija, " Indian influences on Quantum Dynamics " [ ed. Schrödinger's interest in Vedanta ]  Schrödinger Medal of the World Association of Theoretically Oriented Chemists ( WATOC )  The Discovery of New Productive Forms of Atomic Theory Nobel Banquet speech (in German)  Annotated bibliography for Erwin Schrodinger from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues   Critical interdisciplinary review of Schrödinger's "What Is life?"   "    Category:1887 births  Category:1961 deaths  Category:20th-century physicists  Category:Austrian atheists  Category:Austrian emigrants to Ireland  Category:Austrian Nobel laureates  Category:Austrian people of British descent  Category:Austrian physicists  Category:Corresponding Members of the USSR Academy of Sciences  Category:Deaths from tuberculosis  Category:Fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford  Category:Foreign Members of the Royal Society  Category:Honorary Members of the USSR Academy of Sciences  Category:Humboldt University of Berlin faculty  Category:Infectious disease deaths in Austria  Category:Irish physicists  Category:Mathematical physicists  Category:Members of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences  Category:Mystics  Category:Nobel laureates in Physics  Category:Optical physicists  Category:People associated with the University of Zurich  Category:People from Landstraße  Category:People who emigrated to escape Nazism  Category:Quantum physicists  Category:Recipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art  Category:Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class)  Category:Theoretical physicists  Category:Thermodynamicists  Category:University of Breslau faculty  Category:University of Graz faculty  Category:University of Stuttgart faculty  Category:University of Vienna faculty  Category:Winners of the Max Planck Medal  Category:Quantum biology     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  Moore : "He rejected traditional religious beliefs (Jewish, Christian, and Islamic) not on the basis of any reasoned argument, nor even with an expression of emotional antipathy, for he loved to use religious expressions and metaphors, but simply by saying that they are naive." ... p. 4: "He claimed to be an atheist, but he always used religious symbolism and believed his scientific work was an approach to the godhead." ↩  ↩  Moore , pp. 278 ff. ↩  "Schrödinger, Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander" in Deutsche Biographie ↩  http://www.life.illinois.edu/govindjee/Krishnaj%20TributeFinal.pdf ↩  http://www.allduniv.ac.in/index.php?option=com_k2&view; ;=item&id;=48&Itemid;=220 ↩  http://www.jta.org/1940/05/20/archive/bombay-university-names-refugee-scientist-to-faculty ↩  ↩  American Naturalist 56 (1922) ↩  Proceedings of the International Congress of Plant Sciences 1 (1929) ↩  Schwartz, James (2008). In Pursuit of the Gene. From Darwin to DNA . Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674034910. ↩  Schrödinger, Erwin. My View of the World , chapter iv, and What Is life? ↩  Ahlstrom, Dick (April 18, 2012) 'Quantum humour' beams back after absence . Irish Times ↩  Moore discusses Schrödinger's unconventional relationships, including his affair with Hildegunde March, in chapters seven and eight, "Berlin" and "Exile in Oxford". ↩  Moore , p. 194 ↩  Moore , p. 482: "There was some problem about burial in the churchyard since Erwin was not a Catholic, but the priest relented when informed that he was a member in good standing of the Papal Academy, and a plot was made available at the edge of the Friedhof." ↩  Mehra, J. and Rechenberg, H. (1987) Erwin Schrödinger and the Rise of Wave Mechanics . Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-95179-9 ↩  The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966; 2nd ed: New York: American Institute of Physics, 1989. ISBN 0-88318-617-9 ↩  ↩  ↩  Halpern, Paul, Battle of the Nobel Laureates , April 2015 (accessed 2 April 2015). ↩  Schrodinger, E., Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, Vol. 51A (1947) p. 163. Available here (accessed 2 April 2015) ↩   ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩   ↩     