


Fundamental theorem of arithmetic




Fundamental theorem of arithmetic

 In number theory, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, also called the unique factorization theorem or the unique-prime-factorization theorem, states that every integer greater than 11 either is prime itself or is the product of prime numbers, and that this product is unique, up to the order of the factors.234 For example,
1200 = 2
 
 
 
  × 3
 
 
 
  × 5
 
 
 
  = 3 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 5 × 5 = 5 × 2 × 3 × 2 × 5 × 2 × 2 = etc.
The theorem is stating two things: first, that 1200 can be represented as a product of primes, and second, no matter how this is done, there will always be four 2s, one 3, two 5s, and no other primes in the product.
The requirement that the factors be prime is necessary: factorizations containing composite numbers may not be unique (e.g. 12 = 2 × 6 = 3 × 4).
This theorem is one of the main reasons for which 1 is not considered as a prime number: if 1 were prime, the factorization would not be unique, as, for example, 
History
Book VII, propositions 30 and 32 of Euclid's Elements is essentially the statement and proof of the fundamental theorem.
Proposition 30 is referred to as Euclid's lemma. And it is the key in the proof of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
Proposition 31 is derived from proposition 30.
Proposition 32 is derived from proposition 31.
Article 16 of Gauss' Disquisitiones Arithmeticae is an early modern statement and proof employing modular arithmetic.5
Applications
Canonical representation of a positive integer
Every positive integer n > 1 can be represented in exactly one way as a product of prime powers:


 
  where p1 2 k are primes and the αi are positive integers.
This representation is called the canonical representation6 of n, or the standard form78 of n.

For example 999 = 33×37, 1000 = 23×53, 1001 = 7×11×13
 

Note that factors p0 = 1 may be inserted without changing the value of n (e.g. 1000 = 23×30×53).
 In fact, any positive integer can be uniquely represented as an infinite product taken over all the positive prime numbers,


 
  where a finite number of the ni are positive integers, and the rest are zero. Allowing negative exponents provides a canonical form for positive rational numbers.
Arithmetic operations
The canonical representation, when it is known, is convenient for easily computing products, gcd, and lcm:









However, as Integer factorization of large integers is much harder than computing their product, gcd or lcm, these formulas have, in practice, a limited usage.
Arithmetical functions
Many arithmetical functions are defined using the canonical representation. In particular, the values of additive and multiplicative functions are determined by their values on the powers of prime numbers.
Proof
The proof uses Euclid's lemma (Elements VII, 30): if a prime p divides the product of two natural numbers a and b, then either p divides a or p divides b (or both).
Existence
We need to show that every integer greater than 1 is a product of primes. By induction: assume it is true for all numbers between 1 and n. If n is prime, there is nothing more to prove (a prime is a trivial product of primes, a "product" with only one factor). Otherwise, there are integers a and b, where n = ab and 1 1p2...pj and b = q1q2...qk are products of primes. But then n = ab = p1p2...pjq1q2...qk is a product of primes.
Uniqueness
Assume that s > 1 is the product of prime numbers in two different ways:



We must show m = n and that the qj are a rearrangement of the pi.
By Euclid's lemma, p1 must divide one of the qj; relabeling the qj if necessary, say that p1 divides q1. But q1 is prime, so its only divisors are itself and 1. Therefore, p1 = q1, so that



Reasoning the same way, p2 must equal one of the remaining qj. Relabeling again if necessary, say p2 = q2. Then



This can be done for each of the m pi's, showing that m ≤ n and every pi is a qj. Applying the same argument with the 
 
 
 
 's and 
 
 
 
 's reversed shows n ≤ m (hence m = n) and every qj is a pi.
Elementary proof of uniqueness
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic can also be proved without using Euclid's lemma, as follows:
Assume that s > 1 is the smallest positive integer which is the product of prime numbers in two different ways. If s were prime then it would factor uniquely as itself, so there must be at least two primes in each factorization of s:



If any pi = qj then, by cancellation, s/pi = s/qj would be another positive integer, different from s, which is greater than 1 and also has two distinct factorizations. But s/pi is smaller than s, meaning s would not actually be the smallest such integer. Therefore every pi must be distinct from every qj.
Without loss of generality, take p1 1 (if this is not already the case, switch the p and q designations.) Consider



and note that 1 2 ≤ t  \begin{align} t &= q_1(q_2 \cdots q_n) - p_1(q_2 \cdots q_n) \\ &= s - p_1(q_2 \cdots q_n) \\ &= p_1((p_2 \cdots p_m) - (q_2 \cdots q_n)). \end{align} 
Here u = ((p2 ... pm) - (q2 ... qn)) is positive, for if it were negative or zero then so would be its product with p1, but that product equals t which is positive. So u is either 1 or factors into primes. In either case, t = p1u yields a prime factorization of t, which we know to be unique, so p1 appears in the prime factorization of t.
If (q1 - p1) equaled 1 then the prime factorization of t would be all q's, which would preclude p1 from appearing. Thus (q1 - p1) is not 1, but is positive, so it factors into primes: (q1 - p1) = (r1 ... rh). This yields a prime factorization of



which we know is unique. Now, p1 appears in the prime factorization of t, and it is not equal to any q, so it must be one of the r's. That means p1 is a factor of (q1 - p1), so there exists a positive integer k such that p1k = (q1 - p1), and therefore



But that means q1 has a proper factorization, so it is not a prime number. This contradiction shows that s does not actually have two different prime factorizations. As a result, there is no smallest positive integer with multiple prime factorizations, hence all positive integers greater than 1 factor uniquely into primes.
Generalizations
The first generalization of the theorem is found in Gauss's second monograph (1832) on biquadratic reciprocity. This paper introduced what is now called the ring of Gaussian integers, the set of all complex numbers a + bi where a and b are integers. It is now denoted by 
 
 
 
  He showed that this ring has the four units ±1 and ±i, that the non-zero, non-unit numbers fall into two classes, primes and composites, and that (except for order), the composites have unique factorization as a product of primes.9
Similarly, in 1844 while working on cubic reciprocity, Eisenstein introduced the ring 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  is a cube root of unity. This is the ring of Eisenstein integers, and he proved it has the six units 
 
 
 
  and that it has unique factorization.
However, it was also discovered that unique factorization does not always hold. An example is given by 
 
 
 
 . In this ring one has10



Examples like this caused the notion of "prime" to be modified. In 
 
 
 
  it can be proven that if any of the factors above can be represented as a product, e.g. 2 = ab, then one of a or b must be a unit. This is the traditional definition of "prime". It can also be proven that none of these factors obeys Euclid's lemma; e.g. 2 divides neither (1 + √−5) nor (1 − √−5) even though it divides their product 6. In algebraic number theory 2 is called irreducible in 
 
 
 
  (only divisible by itself or a unit) but not prime in in 
 
 
 
  (if it divides a product it must divide one of the factors). The mention of 
 
 
 
  is required because 2 is prime and irreducible in 
 
 
 
  Similarly, 5 is prime and irreducible in 
 
 
 
  and not prime nor irreducible in 
 
 
 
  Using these definitions it can be proven that in any ring a prime must be irreducible. Euclid's classical lemma can be rephrased as "in the ring of integers 
 
 
 
  every irreducible is prime". This is also true in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  but not in 
 
 

The rings where every irreducible is prime are called unique factorization domains. As the name indicates, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic is true in them. Important examples are polynomial rings over the integers or over a field, Euclidean domains and principal ideal domains.
In 1843 Kummer introduced the concept of ideal number, which was developed further by Dedekind (1876) into the modern theory of ideals, special subsets of rings. Multiplication is defined for ideals, and the rings in which they have unique factorization are called Dedekind domains.
There is a version of unique factorization for ordinals, though it requires some additional conditions to ensure uniqueness.
See also

Euler product formula
Integer factorization
Noetherian ring
Prime signature

Notes
References
The Disquisitiones Arithmeticae has been translated from Latin into English and German. The German edition includes all of his papers on number theory: all the proofs of quadratic reciprocity, the determination of the sign of the Gauss sum, the investigations into biquadratic reciprocity, and unpublished notes.




The two monographs Gauss published on biquadratic reciprocity have consecutively numbered sections: the first contains §§ 1–23 and the second §§ 24–76. Footnotes referencing these are of the form "Gauss, BQ, § n". Footnotes referencing the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae are of the form "Gauss, DA, Art. n".




These are in Gauss's Werke, Vol II, pp. 65–92 and 93–148; German translations are pp. 511–533 and 534–586 of the German edition of the Disquisitiones.






.

.




External links

Why isn’t the fundamental theorem of arithmetic obvious?
GCD and the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic at cut-the-knot.
PlanetMath: Proof of fundamental theorem of arithmetic
Fermat's Last Theorem Blog: Unique Factorization, a blog that covers the history of Fermat's Last Theorem from Diophantus of Alexandria to the proof by Andrew Wiles.
"Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic" by Hector Zenil, Wolfram Demonstrations Project, 2007.


de:Primfaktorzerlegung#Fundamentalsatz der Arithmetik"
Category:Theorems about prime numbers Category:Articles containing proofs Arithmetic



Using the empty product rule one need not exclude the number 1, and the theorem can be stated as: every positive integer has unique prime factorization.







Gauss, BQ, §§ 31–34





