


Histogram




Histogram

A histogram is a graphical representation of the distribution of numerical data. It is an estimate of the probability distribution of a continuous variable (quantitative variable) and was first introduced by Karl Pearson.1 To construct a histogram, the first step is to "bin" the range of values—that is, divide the entire range of values into a series of small intervals—and then count how many values fall into each interval. A rectangle is drawn with height proportional to the count and width equal to the bin size, so that rectangles about each other. A histogram may also be normalized displaying relative frequencies. It then shows the proportion of cases that fall into each of several categories, with the sum of the heights equaling 1. The bins are usually specified as consecutive, non-overlapping intervals of a variable. The bins (intervals) must be adjacent, and usually equal size.2 The rectangles of a histogram are drawn so that they touch each other to indicate that the original variable is continuous.3
Histograms give a rough sense of the density of the data, and often for density estimation: estimating the probability density function of the underlying variable. The total area of a histogram used for probability density is always normalized to 1. If the length of the intervals on the x-axis are all 1, then a histogram is identical to a relative frequency plot.
A histogram can be thought of as a simplistic kernel density estimation, which uses a kernel to smooth frequencies over the bins. This yields a smoother probability density function, which will in general more accurately reflect distribution of the underlying variable. The density estimate could be plotted as an alternative to the histogram, and is usually drawn as a curve rather than a set of boxes.
A variable binwidth histogram was introduced by Denby and Mallows.4 Examples of this are displayed on Census bureau data below.
Another alternative is the average shifted histogram, which is fast to compute and gives a smooth curve estimate of the density without using kernels.
The histogram is one of the seven basic tools of quality control.5
Histograms are often confused with bar charts. A histogram is used for continuous data, where the bins represent ranges of data, and the areas of the rectangles are meaningful, while a bar chart is a plot of categorical variables and the discontinuity should be indicated by having gaps between the rectangles, from which only the length is meaningful. Often this is neglected, which may lead to a bar chart being confused for a histogram.
Etymology
 The etymology of the word histogram is uncertain. Sometimes it is said to be derived from the Ancient Greek  (histos) – "anything set upright" (as the masts of a ship, the bar of a loom, or the vertical bars of a histogram); and  (gramma) – "drawing, record, writing". It is also said that Karl Pearson, who introduced the term in 1891, derived the name from "historical diagram".6 {{-}}
Examples
This is a toy example:
(Figure)
Example histogram.png





Bin

Count





−3.5

9



−2.5

32



−1.5

109



−0.5

180



0.5

132



1.5

34



2.5

4



3.5

9





The words used to describe the patterns in a histogram are: "symmetric", "skewed left" or "right", "unimodal", "bimodal" or "multimodal".
Symmetric-histogram.png|Symmetric, unimodal Skewed-right.png|Skewed right Skewed-left.png|Skewed left Bimodal-histogram.png|Bimodal Multimodal.png|Multimodal Symmetric2.png|Symmetric
It is a good idea to plot the data using several different bin widths to learn more about it. Here is an example on tips given in a restaurant.
Tips-histogram1.png|Tips using a $1 bin width, skewed right, unimodal Tips-histogram2.png|Tips using a 10c bin width, still skewed right, multimodal with modes at $ and 50c amounts, indicates rounding, also some outliers
Here are a couple more examples:
Housingprice.png|Prices of houses sold in Ames in 2009 exhibits some right skew Tennis-aces.png|Aces by players in a grand slam tennis tournament, facetted by gender. There are more aces in the mens game.
The U.S. Census Bureau found that there were 124 million people who work outside of their homes.7 Using their data on the time occupied by travel to work, the table below shows the absolute number of people who responded with travel times "at least 30 but less than 35 minutes" is higher than the numbers for the categories above and below it. This is likely due to people rounding their reported journey time. The problem of reporting values as somewhat arbitrarily rounded numbers is a common phenomenon when collecting data from people.
(Figure)
Histogram of travel time (to work), US 2000 census. Area under the curve equals the total number of cases. This diagram uses Q/width from the table.







Data by absolute numbers



Interval



0



5



10



15



20



25



30



35



40



45



60



90





This histogram shows the number of cases per unit interval as the height of each block, so that the area of each block is equal to the number of people in the survey who fall into its category. The area under the curve represents the total number of cases (124 million). This type of histogram shows absolute numbers, with Q in thousands. 
(Figure)
Histogram of travel time (to work), US 2000 census. Area under the curve equals 1. This diagram uses Q/total/width from the table.







Data by proportion



Interval



0



5



10



15



20



25



30



35



40



45



60



90





This histogram differs from the first only in the vertical scale. The area of each block is the fraction of the total that each category represents, and the total area of all the bars is equal to 1 (the fraction meaning "all"). The curve displayed is a simple density estimate. This version shows proportions, and is also known as a unit area histogram. 
In other words, a histogram represents a frequency distribution by means of rectangles whose widths represent class intervals and whose areas are proportional to the corresponding frequencies: the height of each is the average frequency density for the interval. The intervals are placed together in order to show that the data represented by the histogram, while exclusive, is also contiguous. (E.g., in a histogram it is possible to have two connecting intervals of 10.5–20.5 and 20.5–33.5, but not two connecting intervals of 10.5–20.5 and 22.5–32.5. Empty intervals are represented as empty and not skipped.)8
Mathematical definition
 In a more general mathematical sense, a histogram is a function mi that counts the number of observations that fall into each of the disjoint categories (known as bins), whereas the graph of a histogram is merely one way to represent a histogram. Thus, if we let n be the total number of observations and k be the total number of bins, the histogram mi meets the following conditions:



Cumulative histogram
A cumulative histogram is a mapping that counts the cumulative number of observations in all of the bins up to the specified bin. That is, the cumulative histogram Mi of a histogram mj is defined as:



Number of bins and width
There is no "best" number of bins, and different bin sizes can reveal different features of the data. Grouping data is at least as old as Graunt's work in the 17th century, but no systematic guidelines were given9 until Sturges's work in 1926.10
Using wider bins where the density is low reduces noise due to sampling randomness; using narrower bins where the density is high (so the signal drowns the noise) gives greater precision to the density estimation. Thus varying the bin-width within a histogram can be beneficial. Nonetheless, equal-width bins are widely used.
Some theoreticians have attempted to determine an optimal number of bins, but these methods generally make strong assumptions about the shape of the distribution. Depending on the actual data distribution and the goals of the analysis, different bin widths may be appropriate, so experimentation is usually needed to determine an appropriate width. There are, however, various useful guidelines and rules of thumb.11
The number of bins k can be assigned directly or can be calculated from a suggested bin width h as:



The braces indicate the ceiling function.

Square-root choice:




which takes the square root of the number of data points in the sample (used by Excel histograms and many others).12

Sturges' formula

Sturges' formula13 is derived from a binomial distribution and implicitly assumes an approximately normal distribution.



It implicitly bases the bin sizes on the range of the data and can perform poorly if n k = \lceil 2 n^{1/3}\rceil,
The Rice Rule 14 is presented as a simple alternative to Sturges's rule.

Doane's formula

Doane's formula15 is a modification of Sturges' formula which attempts to improve its performance with non-normal data.



where 
 
 
 
  is the estimated 3rd-moment-skewness of the distribution and




Scott's normal reference rule:




where 
 
 
 
  is the sample standard deviation. Scott's normal reference rule16 is optimal for random samples of normally distributed data, in the sense that it minimizes the integrated mean squared error of the density estimate.17
This approach of minimizing integrated mean squared error can be generalized beyond Normal distributions:18



Here, 
 
 
 
  is the number of datapoints in the kth bin, and choosing the value of h that minimizes J will minimize integrated mean squared error.

Freedman–Diaconis' choice

The Freedman–Diaconis rule is:1920



which is based on the interquartile range, denoted by IQR. It replaces 3.5σ of Scott's rule with 2 IQR, which is less sensitive than the standard deviation to outliers in data.

Choice based on minimization of an estimated L221 risk function:




where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are mean and biased variance of a histogram with bin-width 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

Remark

A good reason why the number of bins should be proportional to 
 
 
 
  is the following: suppose that the data are obtained as 
 
 
 
  independent realizations of a bounded probability distribution with smooth density. Then the histogram remains equally »rugged« as 
 
 
 
  tends to infinity. If 
 
 
 
  is the »width« of the distribution (e. g., the standard deviation or the inter-quartile range), then the number of units in a bin (the frequency) is of order 
 
 
 
  and the relative standard error is of order 
 
 
 
 . Comparing to the next bin, the relative change of the frequency is of order 
 
 
 
  provided that the derivative of the density is non-zero. These two are of the same order if 
 
 
 
  is of order 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  is of order 
 
 
 
 .
This simple cubic root choice can also be applied to bins with non-constant width.
See also

Data binning
Density estimation

Kernel density estimation, a smoother but more complex method of density estimation

Entropy estimation
Freedman–Diaconis rule
Image histogram
Pareto chart
Seven Basic Tools of Quality
V-optimal histograms

References
Further reading

Lancaster, H.O. An Introduction to Medical Statistics. John Wiley and Sons. 1974. ISBN 0-471-51250-8

External links

Journey To Work and Place Of Work (location of census document cited in example)
Smooth histogram for signals and images from a few samples
Histograms: Construction, Analysis and Understanding with external links and an application to particle Physics.
A Method for Selecting the Bin Size of a Histogram
Histograms: Theory and Practice, some great illustrations of some of the Bin Width concepts derived above.
Histograms the Right Way
Interactive histogram generator
Matlab function to plot nice histograms
Dynamic Histogram in MS Excel
Histogram construction and manipulation using Java applets, and charts on SOCR

"
Category:Statistical charts and diagrams Category:Quality control tools Category:Estimation of densities Category:Non-parametric statistics Category:Statistics articles needing expert attention




Howitt, D. and Cramer, D. (2008) Statistics in Psychology. Prentice Hall
Charles Stangor (2011) "Research Methods For The Behavioral Sciences". Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. ISBN 9780840031976.
"Lorraine Denby and Colin Mallows", [http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.170.173&rep;;=rep1&type;=pdf "Variations on the histogram"], Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics


US 2000 census.
Dean, S., & Illowsky, B. (2009, February 19). Descriptive Statistics: Histogram. Retrieved from the Connexions Web site: http://cnx.org/content/m16298/1.11/


e.g. § 5.6 "Density Estimation", W. N. Venables and B. D. Ripley, Modern Applied Statistics with S (2002), Springer, 4th edition. ISBN 0-387-95457-0.
EXCEL 2007: Histogram

Online Statistics Education: A Multimedia Course of Study (http://onlinestatbook.com/). Project Leader: David M. Lane, Rice University (chapter 2 "Graphing Distributions", section "Histograms")
Doane DP (1976) Aesthetic frequency classiﬁcation. American Statistician, 30: 181–183


https://maikolsolis.wordpress.com/2014/04/26/optimizing-histogram-cross-validation/







