


Hilbert's basis theorem




Hilbert's basis theorem

In mathematics, specifically commutative algebra, Hilbert's basis theorem says that a polynomial ring over a Noetherian ring is Noetherian.
Statement
If 
 
 
 
 
  a ring, let 
 
 
 
  denote the ring of polynomials in the indeterminate 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . Hilbert proved that if 
 
 
 
  is "not too large", in the sense that if 
 
 
 
 
  is Noetherian, the same must be true for 
 
 
 
 . Formally,

Hilbert's Basis Theorem. If 
 
 
 
  is a Noetherian ring, then 
 
 
 
  is a Noetherian ring.


Corollary. If 
 
 
 
  is a Noetherian ring, then 
 
 
 
 
  is a Noetherian ring.

This can be translated into algebraic geometry as follows: every algebraic set over a field can be described as the set of common roots of finitely many polynomial equations.  proved the theorem (for the special case of polynomial rings over a field) in the course of his proof of finite generation of rings of invariants.
Hilbert produced an innovative proof by contradiction using mathematical induction; his method does not give an algorithm to produce the finitely many basis polynomials for a given ideal: it only shows that they must exist. One can determine basis polynomials using the method of Gröbner bases.
Proof

Theorem. If 
 
 
 
  is a left (resp. right) Noetherian ring, then the polynomial ring

 
  is also a left (resp. right) Noetherian ring.
 

Remark. We will give two proofs, in both only the "left" case is considered, the proof for the right case is similar.
First Proof
Suppose 
 
 
 
  were a non-finitely generated left-ideal. Then by recursion (using the axiom of dependent choice) there is a sequence 
 
 
 
  of polynomials such that if 
 
 
 
 
  is the left ideal generated by 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is of minimal degree. It is clear that 
 
 
 
  is a non-decreasing sequence of naturals. Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the leading coefficient of 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the left ideal in 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
  is Noetherian the chain of ideals 
 
 
 
  must terminate. Thus 
 
 
 
  for some integer 
 
 
 
 . So in particular,


 
 ; moreover, 
 
 
 
 
 . However, 
 
 
 
 , which means that 
 
 
 
  has degree less than 
 
 
 
 , contradicting the minimality.
Second Proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be a left-ideal. Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the set of leading coefficients of members of 
 
 
 
 . This is obviously a left-ideal over 
 
 
 
 , and so is finitely generated by the leading coefficients of finitely many members of 
 
 
 
 ; say 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the maximum of the set 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be the set of leading coefficients of members of 
 
 
 
 , whose degree is 
 
 
 
 . As before, the 
 
 
 
 
  are left-ideals over 
 
 
 
 , and so are finitely generated by the leading coefficients of finitely many members of 
 
 
 
 , say



with degrees 
 
 
 
 . Now let 
 
 
 
 
  be the left-ideal generated by


 
  and claim also 
 
 
 
 . Suppose for the sake of contradiction this is not so. Then let 
 
 
 
  be of minimal degree, and denote its leading coefficient by 
 
 
 
 .

Case 1
 
 
 
 
 . Regardless of this condition, we have 
 
 
 
 , so is a left-linear combination
 










of the coefficients of the 
 
 
 
 . Consider
 










which has the same leading term as 
 
 
 
 
 ; moreover 
 
 
 
  while 
 
 
 
 . Therefore 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , which contradicts minimality.
 


Case 2
 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  so is a left-linear combination
 










of the leading coefficients of the 
 
 
 
 . Considering
 










we yield a similar contradiction as in Case 1.
 

Thus our claim holds, and 
 
 
 
 
  which is finitely generated.
Note that the only reason we had to split into two cases was to ensure that the powers of 
 
 
 
  multiplying the factors, were non-negative in the constructions.
Applications
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Noetherian commutative ring. Hilbert's basis theorem has some immediate corollaries.

By induction we see that 
 
 
 
  will also be Noetherian.
Since any affine variety over 
 
 
 
  (i.e. a locus-set of a collection of polynomials) may be written as the locus of an ideal 
 
 
 
 
  and further as the locus of its generators, it follows that every affine variety is the locus of finitely many polynomials — i.e. the intersection of finitely many hypersurfaces.
If 
 
 
 
  is a finitely-generated 
 
 
 
 -algebra, then we know that 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an ideal. The basis theorem implies that 
 
 
 
 
  must be finitely generated, say $\mathfrak a = (p_0,\dotsc, p_{N-1})$, i.e. $A$ is finitely presented.

Mizar System
The Mizar project has completely formalized and automatically checked a proof of Hilbert's basis theorem in the HILBASIS file.
References

Cox, Little, and O'Shea, Ideals, Varieties, and Algorithms, Springer-Verlag, 1997.


"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Invariant theory Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in abstract algebra


