


Horsepower




Horsepower

thumb|upright=1.3|A team of six horses mowing hay in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania Horsepower (hp) is a unit of measurement of power (the rate at which work is done). There are many different standards and types of horsepower. The term was adopted in the late 18th century by Scottish engineer James Watt to compare the output of steam engines with the power of draft horses. It was later expanded to include the output power of other types of piston engines, as well as turbines, electric motors and other machinery.12 The definition of the unit varied between geographical regions. Most countries now use the SI unit watt for measurement of power. With the implementation of the EU Directive 80/181/EEC on January 1, 2010, the use of horsepower in the EU is permitted only as a supplementary unit.3
Definitions of term
(Figure)
One metric horsepower is needed to lift 75 kilograms (avg. body weight of a person) by 1 meter (3.28 feet) in 1 second.

Units called "horsepower" have differing definitions:

The mechanical horsepower, also known as imperial horsepower, of exactly 550 foot-pounds per second is approximately equivalent to 745.7 watts.
The metric horsepower of 75 kgf-m per second is approximately equivalent to 735.5 watts or 98.6% of an imperial mechanical horsepower.
 
The Pferdestärke PS (German translation of horsepower) is a name for a group of similar power measurements used in Germany around the end of the 19th century, all of about one metric horsepower in size.456

The boiler horsepower is used for rating steam boilers and is equivalent to 34.5 pounds of water evaporated per hour at 212 degrees Fahrenheit, or 9,809.5 watts.
One horsepower for rating electric motors is equal to 746 watts.
Continental European electric motors used to have dual ratings, using a conversion rate of 0.735 kW for 1 hp
British Royal Automobile Club (RAC) horsepower is one of the tax horsepower systems adopted around Europe which make an estimate based on several engine dimensions.

History of the unit
The development of the steam engine provided a reason to compare the output of horses with that of the engines that could replace them. In 1702, Thomas Savery wrote in The Miner's Friend:

So that an engine which will raise as much water as two horses, working together at one time in such a work, can do, and for which there must be constantly kept ten or twelve horses for doing the same. Then I say, such an engine may be made large enough to do the work required in employing eight, ten, fifteen, or twenty horses to be constantly maintained and kept for doing such a work…7

The idea was later used by James Watt to help market his improved steam engine. He had previously agreed to take royalties of one third of the savings in coal from the older Newcomen steam engines.8 This royalty scheme did not work with customers who did not have existing steam engines but used horses instead.
Watt determined that a horse could turn a mill wheel 144 times in an hour (or 2.4 times a minute).9 The wheel was 12 feet in radius; therefore, the horse travelled 2.4·2π·12 feet in one minute. Watt judged that the horse could pull with a force of 180 pounds. So:



Watt defined and calculated the horsepower as 32,572 ft·lbf/min, which was rounded to an even 33,000 ft·lbf/min.10
Watt determined that a pony could lift an average   per minute over a four-hour working shift.11 Watt then judged a horse was 50% more powerful than a pony and thus arrived at the 33,000 ft·lbf/min figure.12 Engineering in History recounts that John Smeaton initially estimated that a horse could produce 22,916 foot-pounds per minute. John Desaguliers had previously suggested 44,000 foot-pounds per minute and Tredgold 27,500 foot-pounds per minute. "Watt found by experiment in 1782 that a 'brewery horse' could produce 32,400 foot-pounds per minute." James Watt and Matthew Boulton standardized that figure at 33,000 the next year.13
Most observers familiar with horses and their capabilities estimate that Watt was either a bit optimistic or intended to underpromise and overdeliver; few horses can maintain that effort for long. Regardless, comparison with a horse proved to be an enduring marketing tool.
In 1993, R. D. Stevenson and R. J. Wassersug published an article calculating the upper limit to an animal's power output.14 The peak power over a few seconds has been measured to be as high as 14.9 hp.15 However, Stevenson and Wassersug observe that for sustained activity, a work rate of about 1 hp per horse is consistent with agricultural advice from both 19th and 20th century sources.16
When considering human-powered equipment, a healthy human can produce about 1.2 hp briefly (see orders of magnitude) and sustain about 0.1 hp indefinitely; trained athletes can manage up to about 2.5 hp briefly17 and 0.3 hp for a period of several hours.
Calculating power
When torque

 
  is in pound-foot units, rotational speed

 
  is in rpm and power is required in horsepower:



The constant 5252 is the rounded value of (33,000 ft·lbf/min)/(2π rad/rev).
When torque 
 
 
 
  is in inch pounds:



The constant 63,025 is the approximation of


 
 .
If torque and rotational speed are expressed in coherent SI units, the power is calculated by ;



where 
 
 
 
  is power in watts when 
 
 
 
  is torque in newton-metres, and 
 
 
 
  is angular speed in radians per second. When using other units or if the speed is in revolutions per unit time rather than radians, a conversion factor has to be included.
Current definitions
The following definitions have been widely used:




Mechanical horsepower
 hp(I)

≡ 33,000 ft-lbf/min
550 ft·lbf/s
 ≈ 17696 lbm·ft2/s3

745.69987158227  W



Metric horsepower
 hp(M) - also PS, ''''cv, hk, pk, ks or ''ch

≡ 75 kgf·m/s
 ≡ 735.49875  W



Electrical horsepower
 hp(E)

≡ 746 W



Boiler horsepower
 hp(S)

≡ 33,475 BTU/h = 9,812.5 W



Hydraulic horsepower
flow rate (US gal/min) × pressure (psi) × 7/12,000
 or

flow rate (US gal/min) × pressure (psi) / 1714
 = 550 ft·lbf/s
 = 745.69987158227 W



In certain situations it is necessary to distinguish between the various definitions of horsepower and thus a suffix is added: hp(I) for mechanical (or imperial) horsepower, hp(M) for metric horsepower, hp(S) for boiler (or steam) horsepower and hp(E) for electrical horsepower.
Hydraulic horsepower is equivalent to mechanical horsepower. The formula given above is for conversion to mechanical horsepower from the factors acting on a hydraulic system.
Mechanical horsepower
Assuming the third CGPM (1901, CR 70) definition of standard gravity, gn=9.80665 m/s2, is used to define the pound-force as well as the kilogram force, and the international avoirdupois pound (1959), one mechanical horsepower is:






1 hp

≡ 33,000 ft-lbf/min

by definition




= 550 ft·lbf/s

since




= 550×0.3048×0.45359237 m·kgf/s 

since




= 76.0402249068 kgf·m/s





= 76.0402249068×9.80665 kg·m2/s3





= 745.69987158227 W

since





Or given that 1 hp = 550 ft·lbf/s, 1 ft = 0.3048 m, 1 lbf ≈ 4.448 N, 1 J = 1 N·m, 1 W = 1 J/s: 1 hp ≈ 746 W
Metric horsepower (PS, cv, hk, pk, ks, ch)
The various units used to indicate this definition (PS, cv, hk, pk, ks and ch) all translate to horse power in English, so it is common to see these values referred to as horsepower or hp in the press releases or media coverage of the German, French, Italian, and Japanese automobile companies. British manufacturers often intermix metric horsepower and mechanical horsepower depending on the origin of the engine in question. Sometimes the metric horsepower rating of an engine is conservative enough so that the same figure can be used for both 80/1269/EEC with metric hp and SAE J1349 with imperial hp.
DIN 66036 defines one metric horsepower as the power to raise a mass of 75 kilograms against the earth's gravitational force over a distance of one metre in one second;18 this is equivalent to 735.49875 W or 98.6% of an imperial mechanical horsepower.
In 1972, the PS was rendered obsolete by EEC directives, when it was replaced by the kilowatt as the official power measuring unit.19 It is still in use for commercial and advertising purposes, in addition to the kW rating, as many customers are still not familiar with the use of kilowatts for engines.
Other names for the metric horsepower are the Dutch  (pk), the French  (ch), the Portuguese  (cv), the Russian  (лс), the Swedish  (hk), the Finnish  (hv), the Norwegian and Danish  (hk), the Hungarian  (LE), the Czech  and Slovak  (k or ks), the Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian  (KS), the Bulgarian , the Macedonian  (KC), the Polish  (KM), Slovenian  (KM) and the Romanian  (CP), which all equal the German  (PS).
In the 19th century, the French had their own unit, which they used instead of the CV or horsepower. It was called the poncelet and was abbreviated p.
French and Italian tax horsepower (CV)
In addition, the capital form CV is used in Italy and France as a unit for tax horsepower, short for, respectively,  and  (steam horses). CV is a non-linear rating of a motor vehicle for tax purposes.20 The CV rating, or fiscal power, is 
 
 
 
 , where P is the maximum power in kilowatts and U is the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) emitted in grams per kilometre. The term for CO2 measurements has been included in the definition only since 1998, so older ratings in CV are not directly comparable. The fiscal power has found its way into naming of automobile models, such as the popular Citroën deux-chevaux. The  (ch) unit should not be confused with the French  (CV).
Electrical horsepower
The horsepower used for electrical machines is defined as exactly 746 W. 21 In the US, nameplates on electrical motors show their power output in hp, not their power input. Outside the United States watts or kilowatts are generally used for electric motor ratings and in such usage it is the input power that is stated.
Boiler horsepower
Boiler horsepower is a boiler's capacity to deliver steam to a steam engine and is not the same unit of power as the 550 ft-lb/s definition. One boiler horsepower is equal to the thermal energy rate required to evaporate 34.5 lb of fresh water at 212°F in one hour. In the early days of steam use, the boiler horsepower was roughly comparable to the horsepower of engines fed by the boiler. 22
The term "Boiler Horsepower" was originally developed at the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition in 1876, where the best steam engines of that period were tested. The average steam consumption of those engines (per output horsepower) was determined to be the evaporation of 30 pounds of water per hour, based on feed water at 100F, and saturated steam generated at 70 PSIG. This original definition is equivalent to a boiler heat output of 33,485 Btu/hr. Years later in 1884, the ASME re-defined the boiler horsepower as the thermal output equal to the evaporation of 34.5 pounds per hour of water "from and at" 212F. This considerably simplified boiler testing, and provided more accurate comparisons of the boilers at that time. This revised definition is equivalent to a boiler heat output of 33,469 Btu/hr. Present industrial practice is to define "Boiler Horsepower" as a boiler thermal output equal to 33,475 Btu/hr, which is very close to the original and revised definitions.
Boiler horsepower is still used to measure boiler output in industrial boiler engineering in Australia, the US, and New Zealand. Boiler horsepower is abbreviated BHP, not to be confused with brake horsepower, below, which is also called BHP.
Drawbar horsepower

See also Power at rail


Drawbar horsepower (dbhp) is the power a railway locomotive has available to haul a train or an agricultural tractor to pull an implement. This is a measured figure rather than a calculated one. A special railway car called a dynamometer car coupled behind the locomotive keeps a continuous record of the drawbar pull exerted, and the speed. From these, the power generated can be calculated. To determine the maximum power available, a controllable load is required; it is normally a second locomotive with its brakes applied, in addition to a static load.
If the drawbar force (
 
 
 
 ) is measured in pounds-force (lbf) and speed (
 
 
 
 ) is measured in miles per hour (mph), then the drawbar power (
 
 
 
 ) in horsepower (hp) is:



Example: How much power is needed to pull a drawbar load of 2,025 pounds-force at 5 miles per hour?



The constant 375 is because 1 hp = 375 lbf·mph. If other units are used, the constant is different. When using coherent SI units (watts, newtons, and metres per second), no constant is needed, and the formula becomes 
 
 
 
 .
This formula may also be used to calculate the horsepower of a jet engine, using the speed of the jet and the thrust required to maintain that speed.
Example: How much power is generated with a thrust of 4,000 pounds at 400 miles per hour?



RAC horsepower (taxable horsepower)
This measure was instituted by the Royal Automobile Club in Britain and was used to denote the power of early 20th-century British cars. Many cars took their names from this figure (hence the Austin Seven and Riley Nine), while others had names such as "40/50 hp", which indicated the RAC figure followed by the true measured power.
Taxable horsepower does not reflect developed horsepower; rather, it is a calculated figure based on the engine's bore size, number of cylinders, and a (now archaic) presumption of engine efficiency. As new engines were designed with ever-increasing efficiency, it was no longer a useful measure, but was kept in use by UK regulations which used the rating for tax purposes.




where
 


D is the diameter (or bore) of the cylinder in inches
 
n is the number of cylinders 23


This is equal to the engine displacement in cubic inches divided by 10π then divided again by the stroke in inches.
Since taxable horsepower was computed based on bore and number of cylinders, not based on actual displacement, it gave rise to engines with 'undersquare' dimensions (bore smaller than stroke) this tended to impose an artificially low limit on rotational speed (rpm), hampering the potential power output and efficiency of the engine.
The situation persisted for several generations of four- and six-cylinder British engines: for example, Jaguar's 3.4-litre XK engine of the 1950s had six cylinders with a bore of  and a stroke of ,24 where most American automakers had long since moved to oversquare (large bore, short stroke) V-8s (see, for example, the early Chrysler Hemi).
Measurement
The power of an engine may be measured or estimated at several points in the transmission of the power from its generation to its application. A number of names are used for the power developed at various stages in this process, but none is a clear indicator of either the measurement system or definition used.
In the case of an engine dynamometer, power is measured at the engine's flywheel. Also, with a chassis dynamometer or rolling road, power output is measured at the driving wheels. This accounts for energy or power loss through the drive train inefficiencies and weight thereof as well as gravitational force placed upon components therein.
In general:

Nominal or rated horsepower is derived from the size of the engine and the piston speed and is only accurate at a pressure of .25



Indicated or gross horsepower (theoretical capability of the engine) [ PLAN/ 33000]
 
minus frictional losses within the engine (bearing drag, rod and crankshaft windage losses, oil film drag, etc.), equals
 


Brake / net / crankshaft horsepower (power delivered directly to and measured at the engine's crankshaft)
 
minus frictional losses in the transmission (bearings, gears, oil drag, windage, etc.), equals
 


Shaft horsepower (power delivered to and measured at the output shaft of the transmission, when present in the system)
 
minus frictional losses in the universal joint/s, differential, wheel bearings, tire and chain, (if present), equals
 


Effective, True (thp) or commonly referred to as wheel horsepower (whp)
 

All the above assumes that no power inflation factors have been applied to any of the readings.
Engine designers use expressions other than horsepower to denote objective targets or performance, such as brake mean effective pressure (BMEP). This is a coefficient of theoretical brake horsepower and cylinder pressures during combustion.
Nominal (or rated) horsepower (nhp or rhp)
Nominal horsepower (nhp) is an early 19th-century rule of thumb used to estimate the power of steam engines.26
nhp = 7 x area of piston x equivalent piston speed/33,000
For paddle ships the piston speed was estimated as 129.7 x (stroke)1/3.35.27
The stroke was the distance moved by the piston.
For the nominal horsepower to equal the actual power it would be necessary for the mean steam pressure in the cylinder during the stroke to be  and for the piston speed to be of the order of 54–75 m/min.28
The French Navy used the same definition of nominal horse power as Britain.29
Indicated horsepower (ihp)
Indicated horsepower (ihp) is the theoretical power of a reciprocating engine if it is completely frictionless in converting the expanding gas energy (piston pressure × displacement) in the cylinders. It is calculated from the pressures developed in the cylinders, measured by a device called an engine indicator – hence indicated horsepower. As the piston advances throughout its stroke, the pressure against the piston generally decreases, and the indicator device usually generates a graph of pressure vs stroke within the working cylinder. From this graph the amount of work performed during the piston stroke may be calculated.
Indicated horsepower was a better measure of engine power than nominal horsepower (nhp) because it took account of steam pressure. But unlike later measures such as shaft horsepower (shp) and brake horsepower (bhp), it did not take into account power losses due to the machinery internal frictional losses, such as a piston sliding within the cylinder, plus bearing friction, transmission and gear box friction, etc.
 Brake horsepower (bhp)
Horsepower at the output shaft of an engine, turbine, or motor is termed brake horsepower or shaft horsepower, depending on what kind of instrument is used to measure it.
It is the measure of an engine's horsepower before the loss in power caused by the gearbox and drive train etc.
In Europe the DIN standard tested the engine fitted with all ancillaries and exhaust system as used in the car. The American SAE system tests without alternator, water pump, and other auxiliary components such as power steering pump, muffled exhaust system, etc. so the figures are higher than the European figures for the same engine. Brake refers to the device which was used to load an engine and hold it at a desired rotational speed. During testing, the output torque and rotational speed were measured to determine the brake horsepower. Horsepower was originally measured and calculated by use of the "indicator diagram" (a James Watt invention of the late 18th century), and later by means of a de Prony brake connected to the engine's output shaft.
More recently, an electrical brake dynamometer is used instead of a De Prony brake. Although the output delivered to the driving wheels is less than that obtainable at the engine's crankshaft, a chassis dynamometer gives an indication of an engine's "real world" horsepower after losses in the drive train and gearbox.
Shaft horsepower (shp)
Shaft horsepower (shp) is the power delivered to the propeller shafts of a steamship (or one powered by diesel engines or nuclear power), or an aircraft powered by a piston engine or a gas turbine engine, and the rotors of a helicopter. This shaft horsepower can be measured with instruments, or estimated from the indicated horsepower and a standard figure for the losses in the transmission (typical figures are around 10%). This measure is not commonly used in the automobile industry, because in that context drive train losses can become significant.
Wheel horsepower (whp)
Motor vehicle dynamometers are used which measure the actual horsepower delivered to the driving wheel(s), which represents the actual usable power levels available considering all losses in the drive train, and all parasitic losses such as pumps, fans, alternator, etc. The vehicle is generally attached to the dynamometer and accelerates a large roller and Power Absorbing Unit which is driven by the vehicle's drive wheel(s). The actual power is then computer calculated based on the rotational inertia of the roller, its resultant acceleration rates and power applied by the Power Absorbing Unit.
Engine power test codes
Engine power test codes determine how the power and torque of an automobile engine is measured and corrected. Correction factors are used to adjust power and torque measurements to standard atmospheric conditions to provide a more accurate comparison between engines as they are affected by the pressure, humidity, and temperature of ambient air.30 There exist several standards for this purpose, some described below.
Society of Automotive Engineers/SAE International
SAE gross power
Prior to the 1972 model year, American automakers rated and advertised their engines in brake horsepower (bhp), frequently referred to as SAE gross horsepower, because it was measured in accord with the protocols defined in SAE standards J245 and J1995. As with other brake horsepower test protocols, SAE gross hp was measured using a stock test engine, generally running with few belt-driven accessories and sometimes fitted with long tube test headers in lieu of the OEM exhaust manifolds. The atmospheric correction standards for barometric pressure, humidity and temperature for testing were relatively idealistic.
SAE net power
In the United States, the term bhp fell into disuse in 1971–72, as automakers began to quote power in terms of SAE net horsepower in accord with SAE standard J1349. Like SAE gross and other brake horsepower protocols, SAE Net hp is measured at the engine's crankshaft, and so does not account for transmission losses. However, the SAE net power testing protocol calls for standard production-type belt-driven accessories, air cleaner, emission controls, exhaust system, and other power-consuming accessories. This produces ratings in closer alignment with the power produced by the engine as it is actually configured and sold.
SAE certified power
In 2005, the SAE introduced "SAE Certified Power" with SAE J2723.31 This test is voluntary and is in itself not a separate engine test code but a certification of either J1349 or J1995 after which the manufacturer is allowed to advertise "Certified to SAE J1349" or "Certified to SAE J1995" depending on which test standard have been followed. To attain certification the test must follow the SAE standard in question, take place in an ISO9000/9002 certified facility and be witnessed by an SAE approved third party.
A few manufacturers such as Honda and Toyota switched to the new ratings immediately, with multi-directional results; the rated output of Cadillac's supercharged Northstar V8 jumped from  under the new tests, while the rating for Toyota's Camry 3.0 L 1MZ-FE V6 fell from . The company's Lexus ES 330 and Camry SE V6 were previously rated at  but the ES 330 dropped to  while the Camry declined to . The first engine certified under the new program was the 7.0 L LS7 used in the 2006 Chevrolet Corvette Z06. Certified power rose slightly from .
While Toyota and Honda are retesting their entire vehicle lineups, other automakers generally are retesting only those with updated powertrains. For example, the 2006 Ford Five Hundred is rated at 203 horsepower, the same as that of 2005 model. However, the 2006 rating does not reflect the new SAE testing procedure as Ford is not going to spend the extra expense of retesting its existing engines. Over time, most automakers are expected to comply with the new guidelines.
SAE tightened its horsepower rules to eliminate the opportunity for engine manufacturers to manipulate factors affecting performance such as how much oil was in the crankcase, engine control system calibration, and whether an engine was tested with premium fuel. In some cases, such can add up to a change in horsepower ratings. A road test editor at Edmunds.com, John Di Pietro, said decreases in horsepower ratings for some '06 models are not that dramatic. For vehicles like a midsize family sedan, it is likely that the reputation of the manufacturer will be more important.32 
Deutsches Institut für Normung 70020
DIN 70020 is a standard from German DIN regarding road vehicles. DIN testing, unlike SAE, tested the engine as installed in the vehicle, with cooling system, charging system and stock exhaust system all connected. Because the German word for horsepower is Pferdestärke, in Germany it is commonly abbreviated to PS. DIN hp is measured at the engine's output shaft, and is usually expressed in metric (Pferdestärke) rather than mechanical horsepower.
Economic Commission for Europe R24
ECE R24 is a UN standard for the approval of compression ignition engine emissions, installation and measurement of engine power.33 It is similar to DIN 70020 standard, but with different requirements for connecting an engine's fan during testing causing it to absorb less power from the engine.34
Economic Commission for Europe R85
ECE R85 is a UN standard for the approval of internal combustion engines with regard to the measurement of the net power.35
80/1269/EEC
80/1269/EEC of 16 December 1980 is a European Union standard for road vehicle engine power.
International Organization for Standardization


ISO 14396 specifies the additional and method requirement for determining the power of reciprocating internal combustion engines when presented for an ISO 8178 exhaust emission test. It applies to reciprocating internal combustion engines for land, rail and marine use excluding engines of motor vehicles primarily designed for road use.36
ISO 1585 is an engine net power test code intended for road vehicles.37
ISO 2534 is an engine gross power test code intended for road vehicles38
ISO 4164 is an engine net power test code intended for mopeds.39
ISO 4106 is an engine net power test code intended for motorcycles.40
ISO 9249 is an engine net power test code intended for earth moving machines.41

Japanese Industrial Standard D 1001
JIS D 1001 is a Japanese net, and gross, engine power test code for automobiles or trucks having a spark ignition, diesel engine, or fuel injection engine.42
See also

Brake specific fuel consumption—how much fuel an engine consumes per unit energy output
European units of measurement directives
Mean effective pressure
Horsepower-hour
Torque

References
External links

How Stuff Works - Horsepower

"
Category:Imperial units Category:Units of power Category:Customary units of measurement in the United States Category:James Watt



"Horsepower", Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Retrieved 2012-06-24.
"International System of Units" (SI), Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Retrieved 2012-06-24.
"Directive 2009/3/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2009", Official Journal of the European Union. Retrieved 2013-02-15.
"Horsepower", Sizes.com. Retrieved 2009-02-05
"Metric Horsepower", Sizes.com. Retrieved 2012-06-24.
"Conversion Factors", page F-313 of Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 58th Edition, CRC Press Inc., Cleveland, Ohio ISBN 0-8493-0458-X, 1977, Robert C. Weast (ed.)
Rochester history department website: "The miner's friend" Accessed July 21, 2011

Hart-Davis, Adam, Engineers, pub Dorling Kindersley, 2012, p121.







Eugene A. Avallone et. al, (ed), ''Marks' Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers 11th Edition '', Mc-Graw Hill, New York 2007 ISBN 0-07-142867-4 page 9-4



H. Wayne Beatty, Handbook of Electric Power Calculations Third Edition, McGraw Hill 2001, ISBN 0-07-136298-3, page 6-14
Robert McCain Johnston Elements of Applied Thermodynamics, Naval Institute Press, 1992 ISBN 1557502269, p.503


Brown, DK Before the ironclad, pub Conway, 1990, p188.




Heywood, J.B. "Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals", ISBN 0-07-100499-8, page 54

Jeff Plungis, Asians Oversell Horsepower, Detroit News
ECE Regulation 24, Revision 2, Annex 10













