


Imaginary number




Imaginary number







 
  (repeats the pattern
 from blue area)















































An imaginary number is a complex number that can be written as a real number multiplied by the imaginary unit

 
 ,1 which is defined by its property .2 The square of an imaginary number 
 
 
 
  is . For example, 
 
 
 
 
  is an imaginary number, and its square is 
 
 
 
 . Except for 0 (which is both real and imaginary3), imaginary numbers produce negative real numbers when squared.
An imaginary number 
 
 
 
  can be added to a real number 
 
 
 
  to form a complex number of the form 
 
 
 
 , where the real numbers 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called, respectively, the real part and the imaginary part of the complex number.45 Imaginary numbers can therefore be thought of as complex numbers whose real part is zero. The name "imaginary number" was coined in the 17th century as a derogatory term, as such numbers were regarded by some as fictitious or useless. The term "imaginary number" now means simply a complex number with a real part equal to 
 
 
 
 , that is, a number of the form 
 
 
 
 .
History
 Although Greek mathematician and engineer Heron of Alexandria is noted as the first to have conceived these numbers,67 Rafael Bombelli first set down the rules for multiplication of complex numbers in 1572. The concept had appeared in print earlier, for instance in work by Gerolamo Cardano. At the time, such numbers were poorly understood and regarded by some as fictitious or useless, much as zero and the negative numbers once were. Many other mathematicians were slow to adopt the use of imaginary numbers, including René Descartes, who wrote about them in his La Géométrie, where the term imaginary was used and meant to be derogatory.8 The use of imaginary numbers was not widely accepted until the work of Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) and Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855). The geometric significance of complex numbers as points in a plane was first described by Caspar Wessel (1745–1818).9
In 1843 a mathematical physicist, William Rowan Hamilton, extended the idea of an axis of imaginary numbers in the plane to a three-dimensional space of quaternion imaginaries.
With the development of quotient rings of polynomial rings, the concept behind an imaginary number became more substantial, but then one also finds other imaginary numbers such as the j of tessarines which has a square of 
 
 
 
 . This idea first surfaced with the articles by James Cockle beginning in 1848.10
Geometric interpretation
(Figure)
90-degree rotations in the complex plane

Geometrically, imaginary numbers are found on the vertical axis of the complex number plane, allowing them to be presented perpendicular to the real axis. One way of viewing imaginary numbers is to consider a standard number line, positively increasing in magnitude to the right, and negatively increasing in magnitude to the left. At 0 on this 
 
 
 
 
 -axis, a 
 
 
 
 -axis can be drawn with "positive" direction going up; "positive" imaginary numbers then increase in magnitude upwards, and "negative" imaginary numbers increase in magnitude downwards. This vertical axis is often called the "imaginary axis" and is denoted 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 .
In this representation, multiplication by 
 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a rotation of 180 degrees about the origin. Multiplication by 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a 90-degree rotation in the "positive" direction (i.e., counterclockwise), and the equation  is interpreted as saying that if we apply two 90-degree rotations about the origin, the net result is a single 180-degree rotation. Note that a 90-degree rotation in the "negative" direction (i.e. clockwise) also satisfies this interpretation. This reflects the fact that 
 
 
 
  also solves the equation . In general, multiplying by a complex number is the same as rotating around the origin by the complex number's argument, followed by a scaling by its magnitude.
Multiplication of square roots
Care must be used in multiplying square roots of negative numbers. For example,11 the following reasoning is incorrect:



The fallacy is that the rule 
 
 
 
 , where the principal value of the square root is taken in each instance, is generally valid only if 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are suitably constrained.12 It is not possible to extend the definition of principal values to the square roots of all complex numbers in a way that preserves the validity of the multiplication rule. Hence 
 
 
 
  in such contexts should be regarded either as meaningless, or as a two-valued expression with the possible values 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Imaginary unit
de Moivre's formula
NaN (Not a number)
Octonion
Quaternion

Notes
References
Bibliography


, explains many applications of imaginary expressions.

External links

How can one show that imaginary numbers really do exist? – an article that discusses the existence of imaginary numbers.
In our time: Imaginary numbers Discussion of imaginary numbers on BBC Radio 4.
5Numbers programme 4 BBC Radio 4 programme

"
 



j is often used in Engineering↩
↩
↩
↩
Both the real part and the imaginary part are defined as real numbers.↩
↩
↩
, discusses ambiguities of meaning in imaginary expressions in historical context.↩
↩
James Cockle (1848) "On Certain Functions Resembling Quaternions and on a New Imaginary in Algebra", London-Dublin-Edinburgh Philosophical Magazine, series 3, 33:435–9 and Cockle (1849) "On a New Imaginary in Algebra", Philosophical Magazine 34:37–47↩
. Chapter VI, §I.2↩
When the principal square root is defined to be in 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to be in 
 
 
 
 , a suitable constraint is that 
 
 





