


Inverse function




Inverse function

 
In mathematics, an inverse function is a function that "reverses" another function. That is, if 
 
 
 
  is a function mapping 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , then the inverse function of 
 
 
 
  maps 
 
 
 
  back to 
 
 
 
 .1
Definitions
 
Let 
 
 
 
  be a function whose domain is the set

 
 , and whose image (range) is the set 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is invertible if there exists a function 
 
 
 
  with domain 
 
 
 
  and image 
 
 
 
 , with the property:



If 
 
 
 
  is invertible, the function 
 
 
 
  is unique, which means that there is exactly one function 
 
 
 
  satisfying this property (no more, no less). That function 
 
 
 
  is then called the inverse of 
 
 
 
 , and is usually denoted as .
Stated otherwise, a function is invertible if and only if its inverse relation is a function on the range 
 
 
 
 , in which case the inverse relation is the inverse function.2
Not all functions have an inverse. For this rule to be applicable, each element 
 
 
 
  must correspond to no more than one 
 
 
 
 ; a function 
 
 
 
  with this property is called one-to-one or an injection. If 
 
 
 
  and  are functions on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively, then both are bijections. The inverse of an injection that is not a bijection is a partial function, that means for some 
 
 
 
  it is undefined.
Example: squaring and square root functions
The function  may or may not be invertible, depending on what kinds of numbers are being considered (the "domain").
If the domain is the real numbers, then each possible result y (except 0) corresponds to two different starting points in 
 
 
 
  – one positive and one negative, and so this function is not invertible: as it is impossible to deduce an input from its output. Such a function is called non-injective or information-losing.
If the domain of the function is restricted to the nonnegative reals then the function is injective and invertible.
Inverses in higher mathematics
The definition given above is commonly adopted in set theory and calculus. In higher mathematics, the notation


 
  means "
 
 
 
  is a function mapping elements of a set 
 
 
 
  to elements of a set 
 
 
 
 ". The source, 
 
 
 
 , is called the domain of 
 
 
 
 , and the target, 
 
 
 
 , is called the codomain. The codomain contains the range of 
 
 
 
  as a subset, and is part of the definition of 
 
 
 
 .3
When using codomains, the inverse of a function 
 
 
 
  is required to have domain 
 
 
 
  and codomain 
 
 
 
 . For the inverse to be defined on all of 
 
 
 
 , every element of 
 
 
 
  must lie in the range of the function 
 
 
 
 . A function with this property is called onto or surjective. Thus, a function with a codomain is invertible if and only if it is both injective (one-to-one) and surjective (onto). Such a function is called a one-to-one correspondence or a bijection, and has the property that every element 
 
 
 
  corresponds to exactly one element 
 
 
 
 .
Inverses and composition
If 
 
 
 
  is an invertible function with domain 
 
 
 
  and range 
 
 
 
 , then


 
 , for every 
 
 

Using the composition of functions we can rewrite this statement as follows:



where  is the identity function on the set 
 
 
 
 ; that is, the function that leaves its argument unchanged. In category theory, this statement is used as the definition of an inverse morphism.
Considering function composition helps to understand the notation . Repeatedly composing a function with itself is called iteration.If 
 
 
 
  is applied 
 
 
 
  times, starting with the value 
 
 
 
 , then this is written as ; so  f (f (x))}}, etc. Since  x}}, composing  and  yields , "undoing" the effect of one application of 
 
 
 
 .
Note on notation
Whereas the notation  might be misunderstood,  certainly denotes the multiplicative inverse of 
 
 
 
  and has nothing to do with inversion of 
 
 
 
 .
The expression  does not represent the multiplicative inverse to 
 
 
 
 ,4 but the inverse of the sine function applied to 
 
 
 
  (actually a partial inverse; see below). To avoid confusion, an inverse trigonometric function is often indicated by the prefix "arc" (for Latin arcus). For instance, the inverse of the sine function is typically called the arcsine function, written as arcsin. Similarly, the inverse of a hyperbolic function is indicated by the prefix "ar" (for Latin area).
Properties
Uniqueness
If an inverse function exists for a given function 
 
 
 
 , it is unique: it must be the inverse relation.
Symmetry
There is a symmetry between a function and its inverse. Specifically, if 
 
 
 
  is an invertible function with domain 
 
 
 
  and range 
 
 
 
 , then its inverse  has domain 
 
 
 
  and range 
 
 
 
 , and the inverse of  is the original function 
 
 
 
 . In symbols, for functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,



This follows from the connection between function inverse and relation inverse, because inversion of relations is an involution.
This statement is an obvious consequence of the deduction that for 
 
 
 
  to be invertible it must be injective (first definition of the inverse) or bijective (second definition). The property of involutive symmetry can be concisely expressed by the following formula:



 The inverse of a composition of functions is given by the formula


 
  Notice that the order of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have been reversed; to undo 
 
 
 
  followed by 
 
 
 
 , we must first undo 
 
 
 
  and then undo 
 
 
 
 .
For example, let 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
 . Then the composition 
 
 
 
  is the function that first multiplies by three and then adds five:


 
  To reverse this process, we must first subtract five, and then divide by three:


 
  This is the composition .
Self-inverses
If 
 
 
 
  is a set, then the identity function on 
 
 
 
  is its own inverse:



More generally, a function 
 
 
 
  is equal to its own inverse if and only if the composition 
 
 
 
  is equal to . Such a function is called an involution.
Inverses in calculus
Single-variable calculus is primarily concerned with functions that map real numbers to real numbers. Such functions are often defined through formulas, such as:


 
  A function 
 
 
 
  from the real numbers to the real numbers possesses an inverse as long as it is one-to-one, i.e. as long as the graph of 
 
 
 
  has, for each possible 
 
 
 
  value only one corresponding 
 
 
 
  value, and thus passes the horizontal line test.
The following table shows several standard functions and their inverses:






Function 
 
 


Inverse 

Notes































































 
  only









no restriction on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 






 (i.e. 
 
 
 
 )



 
  in general, 
 
 






















 
  and 
 
 




trigonometric functions

inverse trigonometric functions

various restrictions (see table below)





Formula for the inverse
One approach to finding a formula for , if it exists, is to solve the equation

 
  for 
 
 
 
 . For example, if 
 
 
 
  is the function



then we must solve the equation  for 
 
 
 
 :



Thus the inverse function  is given by the formula



Sometimes the inverse of a function cannot be expressed by a formula with a finite number of terms. For example, if 
 
 
 
  is the function



then 
 
 
 
  is one-to-one, and therefore possesses an inverse function . The formula for this inverse has an infinite number of terms:


Graph of the inverse
 If 
 
 
 
  is invertible, then the graph of the function



is the same as the graph of the equation



This is identical to the equation 
 
 
 
  that defines the graph of 
 
 
 
 , except that the roles of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have been reversed. Thus the graph of  can be obtained from the graph of 
 
 
 
  by switching the positions of the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  axes. This is equivalent to reflecting the graph across the line 
 
 
 
 .
Inverses and derivatives
A continuous function

 
  is one-to-one (and hence invertible) if and only if it is either strictly increasing or decreasing (with no local maxima or minima). For example, the function



is invertible, since the derivative  is always positive.
If the function 
 
 
 
  is differentiable, then the inverse  will be differentiable as long as 
 
 
 
 . The derivative of the inverse is given by the inverse function theorem:


 
  If we set 
 
 
 
 , then the formula above can be written


 
  This result follows from the chain rule (see the article on inverse functions and differentiation).
The inverse function theorem can be generalized to functions of several variables. Specifically, a differentiable multivariable function  is invertible in a neighborhood of a point 
 
 
 
  as long as the Jacobian matrix of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  is invertible. In this case, the Jacobian of  at 
 
 
 
  is the matrix inverse of the Jacobian of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 .
Real-world examples
1. Let 
 
 
 
  be the function that converts a temperature in degrees Celsius to a temperature in degrees Fahrenheit:


 
  then its inverse function converts degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Celsius:


 
  since



2. Suppose 
 
 
 
  assigns each child in a family its birth year. An inverse function would output which child was born in a given year. However, if the family has twins (or triplets) then the output cannot be known when the input is the common birth year. As well, if a year is given in which no child was born then a child cannot be named. But if each child was born in a separate year, and if we restrict attention to the three years in which a child was born, then we do have an inverse function. For example,



3. Let 
 
 
 
  be the function that leads to an 
 
 
 
  percentage rise of some quantity, and 
 
 
 
  be the function producing an 
 
 
 
  percentage fall. Applied to $100 with 
 
 
 
  = 10%, we find that applying the first function followed by the second does not restore the original value of $100, demonstrating the fact that, despite appearances, these two functions are not inverses of each other.
Generalizations
Partial inverses
 Even if a function 
 
 
 
  is not one-to-one, it may be possible to define a partial inverse of 
 
 
 
  by restricting the domain. For example, the function



is not one-to-one, since . However, the function becomes one-to-one if we restrict to the domain 
 
 
 
 , in which case



(If we instead restrict to the domain 
 
 
 
 , then the inverse is the negative of the square root of 
 
 
 
 .) Alternatively, there is no need to restrict the domain if we are content with the inverse being a multivalued function:



 Sometimes this multivalued inverse is called the full inverse of 
 
 
 
 , and the portions (such as 
 
 
 
  and −
 
 
 
 ) are called branches. The most important branch of a multivalued function (e.g. the positive square root) is called the principal branch, and its value at 
 
 
 
  is called the principal value of .
For a continuous function on the real line, one branch is required between each pair of local extrema. For example, the inverse of a cubic function with a local maximum and a local minimum has three branches (see the picture to the right).
 These considerations are particularly important for defining the inverses of trigonometric functions. For example, the sine function is not one-to-one, since



for every real 
 
 
 
  (and more generally 
 
 
 
  for every integer

 
 ). However, the sine is one-to-one on the interval 
 
 
 
 , and the corresponding partial inverse is called the arcsine. This is considered the principal branch of the inverse sine, so the principal value of the inverse sine is always between −
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The following table describes the principal branch of each inverse trigonometric function:






function

Range of usual principal value





arcsin





arccos





arctan





arccot





arcsec





arccsc









Left and right inverses
If 
 
 
 
 , a left inverse for 
 
 
 
  (or retraction of 
 
 
 
 ) is a function 
 
 
 
  such that



That is, the function 
 
 
 
  satisfies the rule

If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 


Thus, 
 
 
 
  must equal the inverse of 
 
 
 
  on the image of 
 
 
 
 , but may take any values for elements of 
 
 
 
  not in the image. A function 
 
 
 
  with a left inverse is necessarily injective. In classical mathematics, every injective function 
 
 
 
  necessarily has a left inverse; however, this may fail in constructive mathematics. For instance, a left inverse of the inclusion  of the two-element set in the reals violates indecomposability by giving a retraction of the real line to the set .
A right inverse for 
 
 
 
  (or section of 
 
 
 
 ) is a function 
 
 
 
  such that



That is, the function 
 
 
 
  satisfies the rule

If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 


Thus, 
 
 
 
  may be any of the elements of 
 
 
 
  that map to 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 . A function 
 
 
 
  has a right inverse if and only if it is surjective (though constructing such an inverse in general requires the axiom of choice).
An inverse which is both a left and right inverse must be unique. Likewise, if 
 
 
 
  is a left inverse for 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  may or may not be a right inverse for 
 
 
 
 ; and if 
 
 
 
  is a right inverse for 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily a left inverse for 
 
 
 
 . For example let 
 
 
 
  denote the squaring map, such that  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  denote the square root map, such that 
 
 

 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 ; that is, 
 
 
 
  is a right inverse to 
 
 
 
 . However, 
 
 
 
  is not a left inverse to 
 
 
 
 , since, e.g., 
 
 
 
 .
Preimages
If 
 
 
 
  is any function (not necessarily invertible), the preimage (or inverse image) of an element 
 
 
 
  is the set of all elements of 
 
 
 
  that map to 
 
 
 
 :



The preimage of 
 
 
 
  can be thought of as the image of 
 
 
 
  under the (multivalued) full inverse of the function 
 
 
 
 .
Similarly, if 
 
 
 
  is any subset of 
 
 
 
 , the preimage of 
 
 
 
  is the set of all elements of 
 
 
 
  that map to 
 
 
 
 :



For example, take a function 
 
 
 
 , where . This function is not invertible for reasons discussed above. Yet preimages may be defined for subsets of the codomain:



The preimage of a single element 
 
 
 
  – a singleton set  – is sometimes called the fiber of 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  is the set of real numbers, it is common to refer to  as a level set.
See also

Inverse function theorem, gives sufficient conditions for a function to be invertible in a neighborhood of a point in its domain and gives a formula for the derivative of the inverse function
Inverse functions and differentiation
Inverse relation
Lagrange inversion theorem, gives the Taylor series expansion of the inverse function of an analytic function

Notes
References




Further reading




External links

Basic outline.

Wikibook: Functions
Wolfram Mathworld: Inverse Function

"
Category:Basic concepts in set theory Category:Inverse functions











