


Joule




Joule

The joule ( or sometimes ), symbol J, is a derived unit of energy in the International System of Units.1 It is equal to the energy transferred (or work done) to an object when a force of one newton acts on that object in the direction of its motion through a distance of one metre (1 newton metre or N·m). It is also the energy dissipated as heat when an electric current of one ampere passes through a resistance of one ohm for one second. It is named after the English physicist James Prescott Joule (1818–1889).234
In terms firstly of base SI units and then in terms of other SI units:



where kg is the kilogram, m is the metre, s is the second, N is the newton, Pa is the pascal, W is the watt, C is the coulomb, and V is the volt.
One joule can also be defined as:

The work required to move an electric charge of one coulomb through an electrical potential difference of one volt, or one '"coulomb volt" (C·V). This relationship can be used to define the volt.
The work required to produce one watt of power for one second, or one "watt second" (W·s) (compare kilowatt hour - 3.6 megajoules). This relationship can be used to define the watt.

Usage
Confusion with newton-metre
In angular mechanics, torque is analogous to the linear Newtonian mechanics parameter of force, moment of inertia to mass, and angle to distance. Energy is the same in both systems. Thus, although the joule has the same dimensions as the newton-metre (1 J = 1 N·m = 1 kg·m2·s−2), these units are not interchangeable: the CGPM has given the unit of energy the name "joule", but has not given the unit of torque any special name, hence the unit of torque is known as the newton-metre (N·m) - a compound name derived from its constituent parts.5 Torque and energy are related to each other using the equation


 
  where E is the energy, τ is the torque, and θ is the angle moved (in radians). Since radians are dimensionless, it follows that torque and energy have the same dimensions.
The use of newton-metres for torque and joules for energy is useful in helping avoid misunderstandings and miscommunications.6
An additional solution is to realize that joules are scalars – they are the dot product of a vector force and a vector displacement whereas torque is a vector. Torque is the cross product of a distance vector and a force vector. Drawing a traditional vector arrow over "newton-metre" in a torque resolves the ambiguity.
Practical examples
One joule in everyday life represents approximately:

the energy required to lift a small apple (with a mass of approximately 100 g) vertically through one metre of air.
the energy released when that same apple falls one metre to the ground.
the energy required to accelerate a 1 kg mass at 1 m·s−2 through a 1 m distance in space.
the heat required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water by 0.24 K.7
the typical energy released as heat by a person at rest every 1/60 second (approximately 17 ms).8
the kinetic energy of a 50 kg human moving very slowly ().
the kinetic energy of a 56 g tennis ball moving at .9
the kinetic energy of an object with mass 1 kg moving at √2 ≈ 1.4 m/s.
The amount of electricity required to light a 1 watt LED for 1 s.

Since the joule is also a watt-second and the common unit for electricity sales to homes is the kW·h (kilowatt-hour), a kW·h is thus 1000 (kilo) watt × 3600 seconds = 3.6 MJ (megajoules).
Multiples

For additional examples, see: Orders of magnitude (energy)






{{SI multiples

unit=joule

symbol=J

note=Common multiples are in bold face

m=|k=|mc=|M=|n=|G=|p=|T= }}



Zeptojoule
The zeptojoule (zJ) is equal to one sextillionth (10−21) of one joule. 160 zeptojoules is equivalent to one electronvolt.
Nanojoule
The nanojoule (nJ) is equal to one billionth (10−9) of one joule. One nanojoule is about 1/160 of the kinetic energy of a flying mosquito.10
Microjoule
The microjoule (μJ) is equal to one millionth (10−6) of one joule. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is expected to produce collisions on the order of 1 microjoule (7 TeV) per particle.
Millijoule
The millijoule (mJ) is equal to one thousandth (10−3) of a joule.
Kilojoule
The kilojoule (kJ) is equal to one thousand (103) joules. Nutritional food labels in certain countries express energy in kilojoules (kJ).
One kilojoule per second (1 kilowatt) is approximately the amount of solar radiation received by one square metre of the Earth in full daylight.11
Megajoule
The megajoule (MJ) is equal to one million (106) joules, or approximately the kinetic energy of a one megagram (tonne) vehicle moving at 160 km/h.
One kilowatt-hour is 3.6 megajoules: since 1 watt times 1 second equals 1 joule, 1000 watts times 3600 seconds equal 3.6 MJ.
Gigajoule
The gigajoule (GJ) is equal to one billion (109) joules. 6 GJ is about the amount of potential chemical energy in 160 L (approximately one US standard barrel) of oil, when combusted.12
Terajoule
The terajoule (TJ) is equal to one trillion (1012) joules. About 63 TJ of energy was released by the atomic bomb that exploded over Hiroshima.13 The International Space Station, with a mass of approximately 450 megagrams and orbital velocity of 7.7 km/s,14 has a kinetic energy of roughly 13 TJ.
Petajoule
The petajoule (PJ) is equal to one quadrillion (1015) joules. 210 PJ is equivalent to about 50 megatons of TNT. This is the amount of energy released by the Tsar Bomba, the largest man-made nuclear explosion ever.
Exajoule
The exajoule (EJ) is equal to one quintillion (1018) joules. The 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan had 1.41 EJ of energy according to its 9.0 on the moment magnitude scale. Energy in the United States used per year is roughly 94 EJ.
Zettajoule
The zettajoule (ZJ) is equal to one sextillion (1021) joules. Annual global energy consumption is approximately 0.5 ZJ.
Yottajoule
The yottajoule (YJ) is equal to one septillion (1024) joules. This is approximately the amount of energy required to heat the entire volume of water on Earth by 1 °C. The thermal output of the Sun is approximately 400 YJ per second.
Conversions
1 joule is equal to:


(exactly)


(gram calories)

(food calories)



(foot-poundal)



(litre-atmosphere)

(by way of mass-energy equivalence)

(exactly)

Units defined exactly in terms of the joule include:

1 thermochemical calorie = 4.184 J15
1 International Table calorie = 4.1868 J16
1 watt hour = 3600 J (or 3.6 kJ)
1 kilowatt hour =  (or 3.6 MJ)
1 watt second = 
1 ton TNT = 

See also

Conversion of units of energy
Orders of magnitude (energy)
Fluence
International System of Units

Notes and references
"
Category:SI derived units Category:Units of energy Category:James Prescott Joule




American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Online Edition (2009). Houghton Mifflin Co., hosted by Yahoo! Education.
The American Heritage Dictionary, Second College Edition (1985). Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., p. 691.
McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Physics, Fifth Edition (1997). McGraw-Hill, Inc., p. 224.



This is called the basal metabolic rate. It corresponds to about  per day. The kilocalorie (symbol kcal) is also known as the dietary calorie. "At rest" means awake but inactive.

CERN - Glossary

IRS publication


The adoption of joules as units of energy, FAO/WHO Ad Hoc Committee of Experts on Energy and Protein, 1971. A report on the changeover from calories to joules in nutrition.





