


Logistic map




Logistic map

The logistic map is a polynomial mapping (equivalently, recurrence relation) of degree 2, often cited as an archetypal example of how complex, chaotic behaviour can arise from very simple non-linear dynamical equations. The map was popularized in a seminal 1976 paper by the biologist Robert May,1 in part as a discrete-time demographic model analogous to the logistic equation first created by Pierre François Verhulst.2 Mathematically, the logistic map is written


 
  where:


 
  is a number between zero and one that represents the ratio of existing population to the maximum possible population This nonlinear difference equation is intended to capture two effects.

reproduction where the population will increase at a rate proportional to the current population when the population size is small.
starvation (density-dependent mortality) where the growth rate will decrease at a rate proportional to the value obtained by taking the theoretical "carrying capacity" of the environment less the current population.

However, as a demographic model the logistic map has the pathological problem that some initial conditions and parameter values lead to negative population sizes. This problem does not appear in the older Ricker model, which also exhibits chaotic dynamics.
The 
 
 
 
  case of the logistic map is a nonlinear transformation of both the bit-shift map and the 
 
 
 
 
  case of the tent map.
Behavior dependent on r
The image below shows the amplitude and frequency content of some logistic map iterates for parameter values ranging from 2 to 4.
(Figure)
Logistic map animation.gif

By varying the parameter r, the following behavior is observed:

With r between 0 and 1, the population will eventually die, independent of the initial population.
With r between 1 and 2, the population will quickly approach the value 
 
 
 
 , independent of the initial population.
With r between 2 and 3, the population will also eventually approach the same value 
 
 
 
 , but first will fluctuate around that value for some time. The rate of convergence is linear, except for r=3, when it is dramatically slow, less than linear.
With r between 3 and 
 
 
 
  (approximately 3.44949), from almost all initial conditions the population will approach permanent oscillations between two values. These two values are dependent on r.
With r between 3.44949 and 3.54409 (approximately), from almost all initial conditions the population will approach permanent oscillations among four values. The latter number is a root of a 12th degree polynomial .
With r increasing beyond 3.54409, from almost all initial conditions the population will approach oscillations among 8 values, then 16, 32, etc. The lengths of the parameter intervals that yield oscillations of a given length decrease rapidly; the ratio between the lengths of two successive such bifurcation intervals approaches the Feigenbaum constant δ = 4.66920
 
 
 
 . This behavior is an example of a period-doubling cascade.
At r approximately 3.56995  is the onset of chaos, at the end of the period-doubling cascade. From almost all initial conditions, we no longer see oscillations of finite period. Slight variations in the initial population yield dramatically different results over time, a prime characteristic of chaos.
Most values beyond 3.56995 exhibit chaotic behaviour, but there are still certain isolated ranges of r that show non-chaotic behavior; these are sometimes called islands of stability. For instance, beginning at 
 
 
 
 
  (approximately 3.82843) there is a range of parameters r that show oscillation among three values, and for slightly higher values of r oscillation among 6 values, then 12 etc.
The development of the chaotic behavior of the logistic sequence as the parameter r varies from approximately 3.56995 to approximately 3.82843 is sometimes called the Pomeau–Manneville scenario, characterized by a periodic (laminar) phase interrupted by bursts of aperiodic behavior. Such a scenario has an application in semiconductor devices.

 There are other ranges that yield oscillation among 5 values etc.; all oscillation periods occur for some values of r. A period-doubling window with parameter c is a range of r-values consisting of a succession of sub-ranges. The kth sub-range contains the values of r for which there is a stable cycle (a cycle that attracts a set of initial points of unit measure) of period 
 
 
 
  This sequence of sub-ranges is called a cascade of harmonics.3 In a sub-range with a stable cycle of period 
 
 
 
  there are unstable cycles of period 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Unpredictability is not randomness, but in some circumstances looks very much like it. Hence, and fortunately, even if we know very little about the initial state of the logistic map (or some other chaotic system), we can still say something about the distribution of states a long time into the future, and use this knowledge to inform decisions based on the state of the system.
Solution in some cases
The special case of r = 4 can in fact be solved exactly, as can the case with r = 2;4 however the general case can only be predicted statistically.5 The solution when r = 4 is,67



where the initial condition parameter 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 . For rational 
 
 
 
 , after a finite number of iterations 
 
 
 
  maps into a periodic sequence. But almost all 
 
 
 
 
  are irrational, and, for irrational 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  never repeats itself – it is non-periodic. This solution equation clearly demonstrates the two key features of chaos – stretching and folding: the factor 2n shows the exponential growth of stretching, which results in sensitive dependence on initial conditions, while the squared sine function keeps 
 
 
 
  folded within the range [0, 1].
For r = 4 an equivalent solution in terms of complex numbers instead of trigonometric functions is8



where 
 
 
 
  is either of the complex numbers



with modulus equal to 1. Just as the squared sine function in the trigonometric solution leads to neither shrinkage nor expansion of the set of points visited, in the latter solution this effect is accomplished by the unit modulus of 
 
 
 
 .
By contrast, the solution when r=2 is9



for 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
  for any value of 
 
 
 
  other than the unstable fixed point 0, the term 
 
 
 
  goes to 0 as n goes to infinity, so 
 
 
 
  goes to the stable fixed point 
 
 

==Finding cycles of any length when r = 4== For the r = 4 case, from almost all initial conditions the iterate sequence is chaotic. Nevertheless, there exist an infinite number of initial conditions that lead to cycles, and indeed there exist cycles of length k for all integers k ≥ 1. We can exploit the relationship of the logistic map to the dyadic transformation (also known as the bit-shift map) to find cycles of any length. If x follows the logistic map 
 
 
 
  and y follows the dyadic transformation



then the two are related by


 
 .
The reason that the dyadic transformation is also called the bit-shift map is that when y is written in binary notation, the map moves the binary point one place to the right (and if the bit to the left of the binary point has become a "1", this "1" is changed to a "0"). A cycle of length 3, for example, occurs if an iterate has a 3-bit repeating sequence in its binary expansion (which is not also a one-bit repeating sequence): 001, 010, 100, 110, 101, or 011. The iterate 001001001... maps into 010010010..., which maps into 100100100..., which in turn maps into the original 001001001...; so this is a 3-cycle of the bit shift map. And the other three binary-expansion repeating sequences give the 3-cycle 110110110... → 101101101... → 011011011... → 110110110.... Either of these 3-cycles can be converted to fraction form: for example, the first-given 3-cycle can be written as 1/7 → 2/7 → 4/7 → 1/7. Using the above translation from the bit-shift map to the r = 4 logistic map gives the corresponding logistic cycle .611260467... → .950484434... → .188255099... → .611260467... . We could similarly translate the other bit-shift 3-cycle into its corresponding logistic cycle. Likewise, cycles of any length k can be found in the bit-shift map and then translated into the corresponding logistic cycles.
However, since almost all numbers in [0, 1) are irrational, almost all initial conditions of the bit-shift map lead to the non-periodicity of chaos. This is one way to see that the logistic r = 4 map is chaotic for almost all initial conditions.
Amount of cycles of (minimal) length k for logistic map with r = 4 (tent map with 
 
 
 
 ) is a known integer sequence : 2, 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 18, 30, 56, 99, 186, 335, 630, 1161 ... It tells us that logistic map with r = 4 has 2 fixed points, 1 cycle of length 2, 2 cycles of length 3 and so on. This sequence takes a particularly simple form for prime k

 
 . For example
 
 
 
  is the number of cycles of length 13.
See also

Logistic function, the continuous version
Lyapunov stability for iterated systems
Malthusian growth model
Radial basis function network This article illustrates the inverse problem for the logistic map.
Schröder's equation
Stiff equation

Notes
References







External links

Logistic Map Simulation. A Java applet simulating the Logistic Map by Yuval Baror.
[http://www.webcitation.org/query?url=http://www.geocities.com/CapeCanaveral/Hangar/7959/logisticmap.html&date;;=2009-10-25+06:37:07 Logistic Map]. Contains an interactive computer simulation of the logistic map.
The Chaos Hypertextbook. An introductory primer on chaos and fractals.
Interactive Logistic map with iteration and bifurcation diagrams in Java.
Interactive Logistic map showing fixed points.
[http://www.drchaos.net/drchaos/_...._files/qm.html Macintosh Quadratic Map Program]
The transition to Chaos and the Feigenbaum constant- JAVA applet
The Logistic Map and Chaos by Elmer G. Wiens
Complexity & Chaos (audiobook) by Roger White. Chapter 5 covers the Logistic Equation.
"History of iterated maps," in A New Kind of Science by Stephen Wolfram. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media, p. 918, 2002.
Discrete Logistic Equation by Marek Bodnar after work by Phil Ramsden, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
Multiplicative coupling of 2 logistic maps by C. Pellicer-Lostao and R. Lopez-Ruiz after work by Ed Pegg Jr, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
Using SAGE to investigate the discrete logistic equation

"
Category:Chaotic maps



May, Robert M. 1976. "Simple mathematical models with very complicated dynamics." Nature 261(5560):459-467.
"




Lorenz, Edward (1964), "The problem of deducing the climate from the governing equations," Tellus 16 (February): 1-11.






