


Luminance




Luminance

Luminance is a photometric measure of the luminous intensity per unit area of light travelling in a given direction. It describes the amount of light that passes through, is emitted or reflected from a particular area, and falls within a given solid angle. The SI unit for luminance is candela per square metre (cd/m2). A non-SI term for the same unit is the "nit". The CGS unit of luminance is the stilb, which is equal to one candela per square centimetre or 10 kcd/m2.
Explanation
Luminance is often used to characterize emission or reflection from flat, diffuse surfaces. The luminance indicates how much luminous power will be detected by an eye looking at the surface from a particular angle of view. Luminance is thus an indicator of how bright the surface will appear. In this case, the solid angle of interest is the solid angle subtended by the eye's pupil. Luminance is used in the video industry to characterize the brightness of displays. A typical computer display emits between 50 and . The sun has luminance of about  at noon.1
Luminance is invariant in geometric optics. This means that for an ideal optical system, the luminance at the output is the same as the input luminance. For real, passive, optical systems, the output luminance is at most equal to the input. As an example, if one uses a lens to form an image that is smaller than the source object, the luminous power is concentrated into a smaller area, meaning that the illuminance is higher at the image. The light at the image plane, however, fills a larger solid angle so the luminance comes out to be the same assuming there is no loss at the lens. The image can never be "brighter" than the source.
Definition
Luminance is defined 2 by the derivative



where


 
  is the luminance (cd/m2),


 
  is the luminous flux or luminous power (lm),


 
  is the angle between the surface normal and the specified direction,


 
  is the area of the surface (m2), and


 
  is the solid angle (sr). The expression is written using Leibniz's notation.
Units
A variety of units have been used for luminance, besides the candela per square metre.
One candela per square metre is equal to:

10−4 stilbs (the CGS unit of luminance)
π apostilbs
π×10−4 lamberts
0.292 foot-lamberts

Health effects
Retinal damage can occur when the eye is exposed to high luminance. Damage can occur due to local heating of the retina. Photochemical effects can also cause damage, especially at short wavelengths.
See also

Orders of magnitude (luminance)
Diffuse reflection
Etendue
Exposure value
Lambertian reflectance
Lightness, property of a color
Luma, the representation of luminance in a video monitor
Lumen (unit)
Radiance, radiometric quantity analogous to luminance
Brightness, the subjective impression of luminance
Glare
Luminance meter

References


External links

A Kodak guide to Estimating Luminance and Illuminance using a camera's exposure meter. Also available in PDF form and Google Docs [http://docs.google.com/gview?a=v&q;;=cache:3ygRnO1mEpEJ:www.kodak.com/cluster/global/en/consumer/products/techInfo/am105/am105kic.pdf+estimating+luminance+and+illuminance+with+reflection+type&hl;=en≷=ie&sig;=AFQjCNGlsuOrMAs62ZwlzQilxa6mkx0QaA online version]
Autodesk Design Academy Measuring Light Levels

"
Category:Photometry Category:Physical quantities



↩
↩




