


Apollos




Apollos

Apollos (Ἀπολλώς) is a 1st century Alexandrian Jewish Christian mentioned several times in the New Testament. A contemporary of Paul the Apostle, he played an important role in the churches of Ephesus and Corinth.
Biblical account
Apollos was a Jew from Alexandria. This led to speculations that Apollos preached in the allegorical style of Philo. Theologian Jerome Murphy-O'Connor, for example, recently commented: "It is difficult to imagine that an Alexandrian Jew ... could have escaped the influence of Philo, the great intellectual leader ... particularly since the latter seems to have been especially concerned with education and preaching."1
Apollos is first mentioned as a Christian preacher who had come to Ephesus (probably in the year 52-3), where he is described as "being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, though he knew only the baptism of John."  Priscilla and Aquila, a Jewish Christian couple who had come to Ephesus with the Apostle Paul, instructed Apollos. "When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside and explained to him the way of God more adequately." The differences between the two and Apollos probably included baptism and the Holy Spirit, for Acts says that Apollos "knew only the baptism of John"  and later, during Apollos' absence, recounts an encounter between Paul and some disciples at Ephesus: 
Before Paul's arrival, Apollos had moved from Ephesus to Achaia2 and is located at Corinth, the provincial capital of Achaia. Acts reports that Apollos arrived in Achaia with letters of recommendation from Ephesian Christians and "greatly helped those who through grace had believed, for he powerfully refuted the Jews in public, showing by the Scriptures that the Christ was Jesus.
Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (55 AD) mentions Apollos as an important figure at Corinth. Paul described Apollos' role at Corinth: "I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth." Paul's Epistle refers to a schism between four parties in the Corinthian church, of which two attached themselves to Paul and Apollos respectively, using their names (the third and fourth were Peter, identified as Cephas, and Jesus Christ himself).3 There is no indication that Apollos favored or approved an overestimation of his person. Paul urged him to go to Corinth at the time, but Apollos refused, stating that he would come later when he had an opportunity.
Apollos is mentioned one more time in the New Testament. In the Epistle to Titus, the recipient is exhorted to "speed Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way".
Extrabiblical information
Jerome states that Apollos was so dissatisfied with the division at Corinth, that he retired to Crete with Zenas the lawyer; and that the schism having been healed by Paul's letters to the Corinthians, Apollos returned to the city, and became its bishop.4 Less probable traditions assign to him the bishop of Duras, or of Iconium in Phrygia, or of Caesarea.
Martin Luther and some modern scholars have proposed Apollos as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, rather than Paul or Barnabas. Both Apollos and Barnabas were Jewish Christians with sufficient intellectual authority.5 Other than this, there are no known surviving texts attributed to Apollos.
Apollos is regarded as a saint by several Christian churches, including the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, which hold a commemoration for him, Aquila and Priscilla on 13 February.
Notes
References

Articles in
 
Encyclopaedia Biblica
Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie
The Jewish Encyclopedia ([http://jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=1650&letter;;=A&search;=Apollos Jewish Encyclopedia: Apollos])

Jerome Commentary on the Epistle to Titus
James Hastings, Dictionary of the Bible
Karl Heinrich von Weizsäcker, Das apostolische Zeitalter (1886)
A. C. McGiffert, History of Christianity in the Apostolic Age.
Initial text from Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion


"
Category:1st-century bishops Category:Christianity in Roman Corinth Category:Early Jewish Christians Category:People in the Pauline epistles Category:People celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendar Category:Seventy disciples Category:Converts to Christianity from Judaism Category:Biblical apostles Category:First Epistle to the Corinthians Category:Ancient Roman saints



J Murphy-O'Connor. Paul: A critical life. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996, p. 275
So the Alexandrian recension; the text in 

38 and Codex Bezae indicate that Apollos went to Corinth. Joseph Fitzmyer, The Acts of the Apostles (New York: Doubleday, 1998), p. 639.
It is possible, though, that, as Msgr. Ronald Knox assumes, the parties were actually two, one claiming to follow Paul, the other claiming to follow Apollos. "It is surely probable that the adherents of St. Paul [...] alleged in defence of his orthodoxy the fact that he was in full agreement with, and in some sense commissioned by, the Apostolic College. Hence 'I am for Cephas'. [...] What reply was the faction of Apollos to make? It devised an expedient which has been imitated by sectaries more than once in later times; appealed behind the Apostolic College itself to him from whom the Apostolic College derived its dignity; 'I am for Christ.'" (R. Knox, Enthusiasm, p. 13)
Jerome, Commentary on the Epistle to Titus 3:13
The NIV study bible, new international version; English (UK) edition; London, Hodder & Stoughton, 1987; p.1817.




