


Nonlinear optics




Nonlinear optics

Nonlinear optics (NLO) is the branch of optics that describes the behavior of light in nonlinear media, that is, media in which the dielectric polarization P responds nonlinearly to the electric field E of the light. This nonlinearity is typically only observed at very high light intensities (values of the electric field comparable to interatomic electric fields, typically 108 V/m) such as those provided by lasers. Above the Schwinger limit, the vacuum itself is expected to become nonlinear. In nonlinear optics, the superposition principle no longer holds.
Nonlinear optics remained unexplored until the discovery of Second harmonic generation shortly after demonstration of the first laser. (Peter Franken et al. at University of Michigan in 1961)
Nonlinear optical processes
Nonlinear optics gives rise to a host of optical phenomena:
Frequency mixing processes

Second harmonic generation (SHG), or frequency doubling, generation of light with a doubled frequency (half the wavelength), two photons are destroyed creating a single photon at two times the frequency.
Third harmonic generation (THG), generation of light with a tripled frequency (one-third the wavelength), three photons are destroyed creating a single photon at three times the frequency.
High harmonic generation (HHG), generation of light with frequencies much greater than the original (typically 100 to 1000 times greater)
Sum frequency generation (SFG), generation of light with a frequency that is the sum of two other frequencies (SHG is a special case of this)
Difference frequency generation (DFG), generation of light with a frequency that is the difference between two other frequencies
Optical parametric amplification (OPA), amplification of a signal input in the presence of a higher-frequency pump wave, at the same time generating an idler wave (can be considered as DFG)
Optical parametric oscillation (OPO), generation of a signal and idler wave using a parametric amplifier in a resonator (with no signal input)
Optical parametric generation (OPG), like parametric oscillation but without a resonator, using a very high gain instead
Spontaneous parametric down conversion (SPDC), the amplification of the vacuum fluctuations in the low gain regime
Optical rectification (OR), generation of quasi-static electric fields.
Nonlinear light-matter interaction with free electrons and plasmas1234

Other nonlinear processes

Optical Kerr effect, intensity dependent refractive index (a 
 
 
 
  effect)
 
Self-focusing, an effect due to the Optical Kerr effect (and possibly higher order nonlinearities) caused by the spatial variation in the intensity creating a spatial variation in the refractive index
Kerr-lens modelocking (KLM), the use of Self-focusing as a mechanism to mode lock laser.
Self-phase modulation (SPM), an effect due to the Optical Kerr effect (and possibly higher order nonlinearities) caused by the temporal variation in the intensity creating a temporal variation in the refractive index
Optical solitons, An equilibrium solution for either an optical pulse (temporal soliton) or Spatial mode (spatial soliton) that does not change during propagation due to a balance between dispersion and the Kerr effect (e.g. Self-phase modulation for temporal and Self-focusing for spatial solitons).

Cross-phase modulation (XPM)
Four-wave mixing (FWM), can also arise from other nonlinearities
Cross-polarized wave generation (XPW), a 
 
 
 
  effect in which a wave with polarization vector perpendicular to the input one is generated
Modulational instability
Raman amplification
Optical phase conjugation
Stimulated Brillouin scattering, interaction of photons with acoustic phonons
Multi-photon absorption, simultaneous absorption of two or more photons, transferring the energy to a single electron
Multiple photoionisation, near-simultaneous removal of many bound electrons by one photon
Chaos in Optical Systems

Related processes
In these processes, the medium has a linear response to the light, but the properties of the medium are affected by other causes:

Pockels effect, the refractive index is affected by a static electric field; used in electro-optic modulators;
Acousto-optics, the refractive index is affected by acoustic waves (ultrasound); used in acousto-optic modulators.
Raman scattering, interaction of photons with optical phonons;

Parametric processes
Nonlinear effects fall into two qualitatively different categories, parametric and non-parametric effects. A parametric non-linearity is an interaction in which the quantum state of the nonlinear material is not changed by the interaction with the optical field. As a consequence of this, the process is 'instantaneous'; Energy and momentum conserving in the optical field, making phase matching important; and polarization dependent.5 6
Theory
Parametric and lossy 'instantaneous' (i.e. electronic) nonlinear optical phenomena, in which the optical fields are not too large, can be described by a Taylor series expansion of the dielectric Polarization density (dipole moment per unit volume) P(t) at time t in terms of the electrical field E(t):



Here, the coefficients χ(n) are the n-th order susceptibilities of the medium and the presence of such a term is generally referred to as an n-th order nonlinearity. In general χ(n) is an n+1 order tensor representing both the polarization dependent nature of the parametric interaction as well as the symmetries (or lack thereof) of the nonlinear material.
Wave-equation in a nonlinear material
Central to the study of electromagnetic waves is the wave equation. Starting with Maxwell's equations in an isotropic space containing no free charge, it can be shown that:


 
  where PNL is the nonlinear part of the Polarization density and n is the refractive index which comes from the linear term in P.
Note one can normally use the vector identity


 
  and Gauss's law (assuming no free charges, 
 
 
 
 ),


 
  to obtain the more familiar wave equation


 
  For nonlinear medium Gauss's law does not imply that the identity


 
  is true in general, even for an isotropic medium. However even when this term is not identically 0, it is often negligibly small and thus in practice is usually ignored giving us the standard nonlinear wave-equation:



Nonlinearities as a wave mixing process
The nonlinear wave-equation is an inhomogeneous differential equation. The general solution comes from the study of ordinary differential equations and can be solved by the use of a Green's function. Physically one gets the normal electromagnetic wave solutions to the homogeneous part of the wave equation:


 
  and the inhomogeneous term


 
  acts as a driver/source of the electromagnetic waves. One of the consequences of this is a nonlinear interaction that will result in energy being mixed or coupled between different frequencies which is often called a 'wave mixing'.
In general an n-th order will lead to n+1-th wave mixing. As an example, if we consider only a second order nonlinearity (three-wave mixing), then the polarization, P, takes the form


 
  If we assume that E(t) is made up of two components at frequencies ω1 and ω2, we can write E(t) as


 
  and using Euler's formula to convert to exponentials


 
  where c.c. stands for complex conjugate. Plugging this into the expression for P gives


 
 
  which has frequency components at 2ω1, 2ω2, ω1+ω2, ω1-ω2, and 0. These three-wave mixing processes correspond to the nonlinear effects known as second harmonic generation, sum frequency generation, difference frequency generation and optical rectification respectively.
Note: Parametric generation and amplification is a variation of difference frequency generation, where the lower-frequency of one of the two generating fields is much weaker (parametric amplification) or completely absent (parametric generation). In the latter case, the fundamental quantum-mechanical uncertainty in the electric field initiates the process.
Phase matching
 The above ignores the position dependence of the electrical fields. In a typical situation, the electrical fields are traveling waves described by



at position 
 
 
 
 , with the wave vector 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the velocity of light in vacuum and 
 
 
 
  is the index of refraction of the medium at angular frequency 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the second-order polarization at angular frequency 
 
 
 
  is



At each position 
 
 
 
  within the nonlinear medium, the oscillating second-order polarization radiates at angular frequency 
 
 
 
  and a corresponding wave vector 
 
 
 
 . Constructive interference, and therefore a high intensity 
 
 
 
  field, will occur only if



The above equation is known as the phase matching condition. Typically, three-wave mixing is done in a birefringent crystalline material (I.e., the refractive index depends on the polarization and direction of the light that passes through.), where the polarizations of the fields and the orientation of the crystal are chosen such that the phase-matching condition is fulfilled. This phase matching technique is called angle tuning. Typically a crystal has three axes, one or two of which have a different refractive index than the other one(s). Uniaxial crystals, for example, have a single preferred axis, called the extraordinary (e) axis, while the other two are ordinary axes (o) (see crystal optics). There are several schemes of choosing the polarizations for this crystal type. If the signal and idler have the same polarization, it is called "Type-I phase-matching", and if their polarizations are perpendicular, it is called "Type-II phase-matching". However, other conventions exist that specify further which frequency has what polarization relative to the crystal axis. These types are listed below, with the convention that the signal wavelength is shorter than the idler wavelength.




Phase-matching types



(
 
 
 
 )



Polarizations



Pump



e



e



e



e



o



o



o



o



Most common nonlinear crystals are negative uniaxial, which means that the e axis has a smaller refractive index than the o axes. In those crystals, type I and II phasematching are usually the most suitable schemes. In positive uniaxial crystals, types VII and VIII are more suitable. Types II and III are essentially equivalent, except that the names of signal and idler are swapped when the signal has a longer wavelength than the idler. For this reason, they are sometimes called IIA and IIB. The type numbers V–VIII are less common than I and II and variants.
One undesirable effect of angle tuning is that the optical frequencies involved do not propagate collinearly with each other. This is due to the fact that the extraordinary wave propagating through a birefringent crystal possesses a Poynting vector that is not parallel with the propagation vector. This would lead to beam walk-off which limits the nonlinear optical conversion efficiency. Two other methods of phase matching avoids beam walk-off by forcing all frequencies to propagate at a 90 degree angle with respect to the optical axis of the crystal. These methods are called temperature tuning and quasi-phase-matching.
Temperature tuning is where the pump (laser) frequency polarization is orthogonal to the signal and idler frequency polarization. The birefringence in some crystals, in particular Lithium Niobate is highly temperature dependent. The crystal is controlled at a certain temperature to achieve phase matching conditions.
The other method is quasi-phase matching. In this method the frequencies involved are not constantly locked in phase with each other, instead the crystal axis is flipped at a regular interval Λ, typically 15 micrometres in length. Hence, these crystals are called periodically poled. This results in the polarization response of the crystal to be shifted back in phase with the pump beam by reversing the nonlinear susceptibility. This allows net positive energy flow from the pump into the signal and idler frequencies. In this case, the crystal itself provides the additional wavevector k=2π/λ (and hence momentum) to satisfy the phase matching condition. Quasi-phase matching can be expanded to chirped gratings to get more bandwidth and to shape an SHG pulse like it is done in a dazzler. SHG of a pump and Self-phase modulation (emulated by second order processes) of the signal and an optical parametric amplifier can be integrated monolithically.
Higher-order frequency mixing
 The above holds for 
 
 
 
  processes. It can be extended for processes where 
 
 
 
  is nonzero, something that is generally true in any medium without any symmetry restrictions; in particular resonantly enhanced sum or difference frequency mixing in gasses is frequently used for extreme or "vacuum" Ultra Violet light generation.7 In common scenarios, such as mixing in dilute gases, the non-linearity is weak and so the light beams are focused which, unlike the plane wave approximation used above, introduces a pi phase shift on each light beam, complicating the phase matching requirements.8 Conveniently, difference frequency mixing with 
 
 
 
  cancels this focal phase shift and often has a nearly self-canceling overall phase matching condition, which relatively simplifies broad wavelength tuning compared to sum frequency generation.

 In 
 
 
 
  all four frequencies are mixing simultaneously, as opposed to sequential mixing via two 
 
 
 
  processes.
The Kerr effect can be described as a 
 
 
 
  as well. At high peak powers the Kerr effect can cause filamentation of light in air, in which the light travels without dispersion or divergence in a self-generated waveguide.9 At even high intensities the Taylor series, which led the domination of the lower orders, does not converge anymore and instead a time based model is used. When a noble gas atom is hit by an intense laser pulse, which has an electric field strength comparable to the Coulomb field of the atom, the outermost electron may be ionized from the atom. Once freed, the electron can be accelerated by the electric field of the light, first moving away from the ion, then back toward it as the field changes direction. The electron may then recombine with the ion, releasing its energy in the form of a photon. The light is emitted at every peak of the laser light field which is intense enough, producing a series of attosecond light flashes. The photon energies generated by this process can extend past the 800th harmonic order up to a few KeV. This is called high-order harmonic generation. The laser must be linearly polarized, so that the electron returns to the vicinity of the parent ion. High-order harmonic generation has been observed in noble gas jets, cells, and gas-filled capillary waveguides.
Example uses of nonlinear optics
Frequency doubling
One of the most commonly used frequency-mixing processes is frequency doubling or second-harmonic generation. With this technique, the 1064-nm output from Nd:YAG lasers or the 800-nm output from Ti:sapphire lasers can be converted to visible light, with wavelengths of 532 nm (green) or 400 nm (violet), respectively.
Practically, frequency-doubling is carried out by placing a nonlinear medium in a laser beam. While there are many types of nonlinear media, the most common media are crystals. Commonly used crystals are BBO (β-barium borate), KDP (potassium dihydrogen phosphate), KTP (potassium titanyl phosphate), and lithium niobate. These crystals have the necessary properties of being strongly birefringent (necessary to obtain phase matching, see below), having a specific crystal symmetry and of course being transparent for both the impinging laser light and the frequency doubled wavelength, and have high damage thresholds which make them resistant against the high-intensity laser light. However, organic polymeric materials are set to take over from crystals as they are cheaper to make, have lower drive voltages and superior performance. 
Optical phase conjugation
It is possible, using nonlinear optical processes, to exactly reverse the propagation direction and phase variation of a beam of light. The reversed beam is called a conjugate beam, and thus the technique is known as optical phase conjugation1011 (also called time reversal, wavefront reversal and retroreflection).
One can interpret this nonlinear optical interaction as being analogous to a real-time holographic process.12 In this case, the interacting beams simultaneously interact in a nonlinear optical material to form a dynamic hologram (two of the three input beams), or real-time diffraction pattern, in the material. The third incident beam diffracts off this dynamic hologram, and, in the process, reads out the phase-conjugate wave. In effect, all three incident beams interact (essentially) simultaneously to form several real-time holograms, resulting in a set of diffracted output waves that phase up as the "time-reversed" beam. In the language of nonlinear optics, the interacting beams result in a nonlinear polarization within the material, which coherently radiates to form the phase-conjugate wave.
 The most common way of producing optical phase conjugation is to use a four-wave mixing technique, though it is also possible to use processes such as stimulated Brillouin scattering. A device producing the phase conjugation effect is known as a phase conjugate mirror (PCM).
For the four-wave mixing technique, we can describe four beams (j = 1,2,3,4) with electric fields:



where Ej are the electric field amplitudes. Ξ1 and Ξ2 are known as the two pump waves, with Ξ3 being the signal wave, and Ξ4 being the generated conjugate wave.
If the pump waves and the signal wave are superimposed in a medium with a non-zero χ(3), this produces a nonlinear polarization field:



resulting in generation of waves with frequencies given by ω = ±ω1 ±ω2 ±ω3 in addition to third harmonic generation waves with ω = 3ω1, 3ω2, 3ω3.
As above, the phase-matching condition determines which of these waves is the dominant. By choosing conditions such that ω = ω1 + ω2 - ω3 and k = k1 + k2 - k3, this gives a polarization field:



This is the generating field for the phase conjugate beam, Ξ4. Its direction is given by k4 = k1 + k2 - k3, and so if the two pump beams are counterpropagating (k1 = -k2), then the conjugate and signal beams propagate in opposite directions (k4 = -k3). This results in the retroreflecting property of the effect.
Further, it can be shown for a medium with refractive index n and a beam interaction length l, the electric field amplitude of the conjugate beam is approximated by



(where c is the speed of light). If the pump beams E1 and E2 are plane (counterpropagating) waves, then:



that is, the generated beam amplitude is the complex conjugate of the signal beam amplitude. Since the imaginary part of the amplitude contains the phase of the beam, this results in the reversal of phase property of the effect.
Note that the constant of proportionality between the signal and conjugate beams can be greater than 1. This is effectively a mirror with a reflection coefficient greater than 100%, producing an amplified reflection. The power for this comes from the two pump beams, which are depleted by the process.
The frequency of the conjugate wave can be different from that of the signal wave. If the pump waves are of frequency ω1 = ω2 = ω, and the signal wave higher in frequency such that ω3 = ω + Δω, then the conjugate wave is of frequency ω4 = ω — Δω. This is known as frequency flipping.
Common SHG materials
(Second Harmonic Generation)
(Figure)
Dark-Red Gallium Selenide in its bulk form.


800 nm light : BBO
806 nm light : lithium iodate (LiIO3)
860 nm light : potassium niobate (KNbO3)
980 nm light : KNbO3
1064 nm light : monopotassium phosphate (KH2PO4, KDP), lithium triborate (LBO) and β-barium borate (BBO).
1300 nm light : gallium selenide (GaSe)
1319 nm light : KNbO3, BBO, KDP, potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP), lithium niobate (LiNbO3), LiIO3, and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (ADP)
1550 nm light : potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP), lithium niobate (LiNbO3)

See also

Born-Infeld action
Filament propagation
:Category:Nonlinear optical materials
Parametric process (optics)

Notes
References





External links

Encyclopedia of laser physics and technology, with content on nonlinear optics, by Rüdiger Paschotta
An Intuitive Explanation of Phase Conjugation
AdvR - NLO Frequency Conversion in KTP Waveguides
SNLO - Nonlinear Optics Design Software
Topics on photo-physics and nonlinear optics

"
*



Experimental observation of relativistic nonlinear Thomson scattering : Abstract : Nature
Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3116 (1996) - Observation of Nonlinear Effects in Compton Scattering
1
http://www.nature.com/nphys/journal/v3/n6/full/nphys595.html

See Section Parametric versus Nonparametric Processes, Nonlinear Optics by Robert W. Boyd (3rd ed.), pp. 13-15.



Scientific American, December 1985, "Phase Conjugation," by Vladimir Shkunov and Boris Zel'dovich.
Scientific American, January 1986, "Applications of Optical Phase Conjugation," by David M. Pepper.
Scientific American, October 1990, "The Photorefractive Effect," by David M. Pepper, Jack Feinberg, and Nicolai V. Kukhtarev.




