   Omega      Omega   Omega ( capital : Ω , lowercase : ω ; Greek Ωμέγα) is the 24th and last letter of the Greek alphabet . In the Greek numeric system , it has a value of 800. The word literally means "great O" ( ō mega , mega meaning 'great'), as opposed to omicron , which means "little O" ( o mikron , micron meaning "little"). 1 This name is Byzantine ; in Classical Greek , the letter was called ō (), whereas the omicron was called ou (). 2 The form of the uppercase letter derives from that of an omicron (Ο) broken up at the side (), with the edges subsequently turned outward (, , ). 3 The modern lowercase shape goes back to the uncial form , a form that developed during the 3rd century BC in ancient handwriting on papyrus, from a flattened-out form of the letter () that had its edges curved even further upward. 4  In phonetic terms, the Ancient Greek Ω is a long  open-mid o , comparable to the vowel of British English raw . In Modern Greek , Ω represents the same sound as omicron . The letter omega is transcribed  ō or simply o .  In addition to the Greek alphabet, Omega was also adopted into the early Cyrillic alphabet . See Cyrillic omega (, ). A Raetic variant is conjectured to be at the origin or parallel evolution of the Elder Futhark  ᛟ . Omega was also adopted into the Latin alphabet, as a letter of the 1982 revision to the African reference alphabet . It has had little use. See Latin omega .  As the last letter of the Greek alphabet, Omega is often used to denote the last, the end, or the ultimate limit of a set , in contrast to alpha , the first letter of the Greek alphabet. Omega is also used in Christianity, as a part of the Alpha and Omega metaphor.  The symbol Ω (uppercase letter)  The uppercase letter Ω is used as a symbol:   In chemistry :  For oxygen-18 , a natural, stable isotope of oxygen . 5   In physics :  For ohm – SI unit of electrical resistance; formerly also used upside down () to represent mho , the old name for the inverse of an ohm (now siemens with symbol S) used for electrical conductance. Unicode has a separate code point for the ohm sign (U+2126, Ω), but it is included only for backward compatibility, and the Greek uppercase omega character (U+03A9, Ω) is preferred. 6  In statistical mechanics , Ω refers to the multiplicity (number of microstates) in a system.  The solid angle or the rate of precession in a gyroscope.  In particle physics to represent the Omega baryons .  In astronomy ( cosmology ), Ω refers to the density of the universe, also called the density parameter .  In astronomy ( orbital mechanics ), Ω refers to the longitude of the ascending node of an orbit.     In mathematics and computer science :  In complex analysis , the Omega constant , a solution of Lambert's W function  A variable for a 2-dimensional region in calculus, usually corresponding to the domain of a double integral.  In topos theory , the (codomain of the) subobject classifier of an elementary topos.  In combinatory logic , the looping combinator, (λ x. x x) (λ x. x x)  In group theory , the omega and agemo subgroups of a p -group, Ω( G ) and ℧( G )  In group theory , Cayley's Ω process as a partial differential operator.  In statistics , it is used as the symbol for the sample space , or total set of possible outcomes.  In number theory , Ω( n ) is the number of prime divisors of n .  In notation related to Big O notation to describe the asymptotic behavior of functions .  Chaitin's constant .     As part of logo or trademark:  The logo of Omega Watches SA.  Part of the Badge of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.  Part of the mission patch for STS-135, as it was the last mission of the Space Shuttle program.  The logo of the God of War video game series based on Greek mythology.  The logo of E-123 Omega , a Sonic the Hedgehog character.  The logo of the Heroes of Olympus series, based on Greek mythology.  the logo of the Ultramarines in Warhammer 40,000  The logo of Primal Groudon, the version mascot of Pokémon Omega Ruby .   Other  The symbol of the resistance movement against the Vietnam-era draft  Year or date of death  Used to refer to the lowest-ranked wolf in a pack  In eschatology , the symbol for the end of everything  In molecular biology , the symbol is used as shorthand to signify a genetic construct introduced by a two-point crossover    The symbol ω (lower case letter)  The minuscule letter ω is used as a symbol:   Biochemistry and chemistry:  Denotes the carbon atom furthest from the carboxyl group of a fatty acid  In biochemistry , for one of the RNA polymerase subunits  In biochemistry, for the dihedral angle associated with the peptide group, involving the backbone atoms Cα-C'-N-Cα  In genomics , as a measure of evolution at the protein level (also denoted as d N /d S or K a /K s ratio )   Physics  Angular velocity or angular frequency  In computational fluid dynamics , the specific turbulence dissipation rate  In meteorology , the change of pressure with respect to time of a parcel of air  In circuit analysis and signal processing to represent natural frequency , related to frequency  f by ω = 2π f  In astronomy , as a ranking of a star's brightness within a constellation  In orbital mechanics , as designation of the argument of periapsis of an orbit  In particle physics to represent the omega meson   Computer science:  In notation related to Big O notation , the asymptotically dominant nature of functions  In relational database theory to represent NULL , a missing or inapplicable value   Mathematics:  The first transfinite  ordinal number , often identified with the set of natural numbers including 0 (sometimes written    ω  0     subscript  ω  0    \omega_{0}   )  In set theory , the first uncountable ordinal number (more commonly written as ω 1 )  The complex cube roots of 1  The Wright Omega function  A generic differential form  In number theory , ω( n ) is the number of distinct prime divisors of n  In number theory , an arithmetic function  In combinatory logic , the self-application combinator, (λ x. x x)  In mathematical/options finance, the elasticity of financial options  In analytical investment management, the tracking error of an investment manager   Other:  Used in place of ん in Japanese typing shorthand.  In linguistics , the phonological word  In textual criticism , the archetype of a manuscript tradition  In sociology , used to refer to the lowest ranking member of a group  In shift_JIS art , used to represent the cat's mouth. (e.g. (´･ω･`) ｼｮﾎﾞｰﾝ)    Character encodings   Greek Omega / Coptic Oou   7   Cyrillic Omega    Latin / IPA Omega    Technical Omega symbols    Mathematical Omega   These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.  Notes    "  Category:Greek letters  Category:Vowel letters     The Greek Alphabet ↩  Herbert Weir Smyth. A Greek Grammar for Colleges . §1 ↩  Anne Jeffery (1961), The local scripts of archaic Greece , p.37–38. ↩  Edward M. Thompson (1912), Introduction to Greek and Latin paleography , Oxford: Clarendon. p.144 ↩  http://www.cedex.es/NR/rdonlyres/B8A9522A-5D6F-4675-921A-24BB8458187B/124720/Capilla_et_al_geoENV_2012_Valencia_Espa%C3%B1a_Extended.pdf ↩  Excerpts from The Unicode Standard, Version 4.0 . Retrieved 11 October 2006. ↩  Unicode Code Charts: Greek and Coptic (Range: 0370-03FF) ↩     