


Alternative algebra




Alternative algebra

In abstract algebra, an alternative algebra is an algebra in which multiplication need not be associative, only alternative. That is, one must have








for all x and y in the algebra.
Every associative algebra is obviously alternative, but so too are some strictly non-associative algebras such as the octonions. The sedenions, on the other hand, are not alternative.
The associator
Alternative algebras are so named because they are precisely the algebras for which the associator is alternating. The associator is a trilinear map given by


 
  By definition a multilinear map is alternating if it vanishes whenever two of its arguments are equal. The left and right alternative identities for an algebra are equivalent to1





 
  Both of these identities together imply that the associator is totally skew-symmetric. That is,


 
  for any permutation σ. It follows that


 
  for all x and y. This is equivalent to the flexible identity2


 
  The associator of an alternative algebra is therefore alternating. Conversely, any algebra whose associator is alternating is clearly alternative. By symmetry, any algebra which satisfies any two of:

left alternative identity
 
 

right alternative identity
 
 

flexible identity
 
 


is alternative and therefore satisfies all three identities.
An alternating associator is always totally skew-symmetric. The converse holds so long as the characteristic of the base field is not 2.
Examples

Every associative algebra is alternative.
The octonions form a non-associative alternative algebra, a normed division algebra of dimension 8 over the real numbers.3
More generally, any octonion algebra is alternative.

Properties
Artin's theorem states that in an alternative algebra the subalgebra generated by any two elements is associative.4 Conversely, any algebra for which this is true is clearly alternative. It follows that expressions involving only two variables can be written without parenthesis unambiguously in an alternative algebra. A generalization of Artin's theorem states that whenever three elements 
 
 
 
  in an alternative algebra associate (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) the subalgebra generated by those elements is associative.
A corollary of Artin's theorem is that alternative algebras are power-associative, that is, the subalgebra generated by a single element is associative.5 The converse need not hold: the sedenions are power-associative but not alternative.
The Moufang identities











hold in any alternative algebra.6
In a unital alternative algebra, multiplicative inverses are unique whenever they exist. Moreover, for any invertible element 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
  one has


 
  This is equivalent to saying the associator 
 
 
 
  vanishes for all such 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are invertible then 
 
 
 
  is also invertible with inverse 
 
 
 
 . The set of all invertible elements is therefore closed under multiplication and forms a Moufang loop. This loop of units in an alternative ring or algebra is analogous to the group of units in an associative ring or algebra.
Zorn's theorem states that any finite-dimensional non-associative alternative algebra is a generalised octonion algebra.7
Applications
The projective plane over any alternative division ring is a Moufang plane.
The close relationship of alternative algebras and composition algebras was given by Guy Roos in 2008: He shows (page 162) the relation for an algebra A with unit element e and an involutive anti-automorphism

 
  such that a + a* and aa* are on the line spanned by e for all a in A. Use the notation n(a) = aa*. Then if n is a non-singular mapping into the field of A, and A is alternative, then (A,n) is a composition algebra.
See also

Zorn ring
Maltsev algebra

References

Guy Roos (2008) "Exceptional symmetric domains", §1: Cayley algebras, in Symmetries in Complex Analysis by Bruce Gilligan & Guy Roos, volume 468 of Contemporary Mathematics, American Mathematical Society.


External links



fr:Alternativité"
Category:Non-associative algebras



Schafer (1995) p.27↩
Schafer (1995) p.28↩
↩
Schafer (1995) p.29↩
Schafer (1995) p.30↩

Schafer (1995) p.56↩




