


Pauli matrices




Pauli matrices

In mathematical physics and mathematics, the Pauli matrices are a set of three 
 
 
complex matrices which are Hermitian and unitary.1 Usually indicated by the Greek letter sigma (
 
 
 
 ), they are occasionally denoted by tau (
 
 
 
 ) when used in connection with isospin symmetries. They are



These matrices are named after the physicist Wolfgang Pauli. In quantum mechanics, they occur in the Pauli equation which takes into account the interaction of the spin of a particle with an external electromagnetic field.
Each Pauli matrix is Hermitian, and together with the identity matrix 
 
 
 
  (sometimes considered as the zeroth Pauli matrix ), the Pauli matrices (multiplied by real coefficients) span the full vector space of 
 
 
Hermitian matrices.
In the language of quantum mechanics, Hermitian matrices are observables, so the Pauli matrices span the space of observables of the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional complex Hilbert space. In the context of Pauli's work,  is the observable corresponding to spin along the 
 
 
 
 th coordinate axis in three-dimensional Euclidean space .
The Pauli matrices (after multiplication by 
 
 
 
  to make them anti-Hermitian), also generate transformations in the sense of Lie algebras: the matrices  form a basis for 
 
 
 
 , which exponentiates to the special unitary group SU(2). The algebra generated by the three matrices  is isomorphic to the Clifford algebra of , called the algebra of physical space.
Algebraic properties
All three of the Pauli matrices can be compacted into a single expression:



where 
 
 
 
  is the imaginary unit, and  is the Kronecker delta, which equals +1 if 
 
 
 
  and 0 otherwise. This expression is useful for "selecting" any one of the matrices numerically by substituting values of 
 
 
 
 , in turn useful when any of the matrices (but no particular one) is to be used in algebraic manipulations.
The matrices are involutory:



where 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix.

The determinants and traces of the Pauli matrices are:




From above we can deduce that the eigenvalues of each  are 
 
 
 
 .

Together with the 
 
 
 
  identity matrix 
 
 
 
  (sometimes written as ), the Pauli matrices form an orthogonal basis, in the sense of Hilbert–Schmidt, for the real Hilbert space of 
 
 
 
  complex Hermitian matrices, or the complex Hilbert space of all 
 
 
 
 
  matrices.

Eigenvectors and eigenvalues
Each of the (Hermitian) Pauli matrices has two eigenvalues, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding normalized eigenvectors are:



Pauli vector
The Pauli vector is defined by2



and provides a mapping mechanism from a vector basis to a Pauli matrix basis3 as follows,



using the summation convention. Further,



and also (see completeness, below)



Commutation relations
The Pauli matrices obey the following commutation relations:



and anticommutation relations:



where  is the Levi-Civita symbol, Einstein summation notation is used,  is the Kronecker delta, and 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
  identity matrix.
For example,



Relation to dot and cross product
Pauli vectors elegantly map these commutation and anticommutation relations to corresponding vector products. Adding the commutator to the anticommutator gives



so that, cancelling the factors of 2, 
Contracting each side of the equation with components of two 
 
 
 
 -vectors  and  (which commute with the Pauli matrices, i.e.,  σqap)}} for each matrix  and vector component  (and likewise with ), and relabeling indices 
 
 
 
 , to prevent notational conflicts, yields



Finally, translating the index notation for the dot product and cross product results in 
Exponential of a Pauli vector
For


 
  one has, for even powers,


 
  which can be shown first for the 
 
 
 
  case using the anticommutation relations.
Thus, for odd powers,



Matrix exponentiating, and using the Taylor series for sine and cosine,



and, in the last line, the first sum is the cosine, while the second sum is the sine; so, finally, 
which is analogous to Euler's formula. Note


 
 , while the determinant of the exponential itself is just 
 
 
 
 , which makes it the generic group element of SU(2).
A more abstract version of formula  for a general 
 
 
 
  matrix can be found in the article on matrix exponentials.
The group composition law of 
 
 

A straightforward application of this formula provides a parameterization of the composition law of the group 
 
 
 
 .4 One may directly solve for 
 
 
 
  in



which specifies the generic group multiplication, where, manifestly,



the spherical law of cosines. Given 
 
 
 
 , then,



Consequently, the composite rotation parameters in this group element (a closed form of the respective BCH expansion in this case) simply amount to5


 
  (Of course, when 
 
 
 
  is parallel to 
 
 
 
 , so is 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .)
The fact that any 
 
 
 
  complex Hermitian matrices can be expressed in terms of the identity matrix and the Pauli matrices also leads to the Bloch sphere representation of 
 
 
mixed states' density matrix, (
 
 
 
  positive semidefinite matrices with trace 
 
 
 
 ). This can be seen by simply first writing an arbitrary Hermitian matrix as a real linear combination of  as above, and then imposing the positive-semidefinite and trace

 
  conditions.
Completeness relation
An alternative notation that is commonly used for the Pauli matrices is to write the vector index 
 
 
 
  in the superscript, and the matrix indices as subscripts, so that the element in row 
 
 
 
  and column 
 
 
 
  of the 
 
 
 
 -th Pauli matrix is .
In this notation, the completeness relation for the Pauli matrices can be written





Proof


The fact that the Pauli matrices, along with the identity matrix I, form an orthogonal basis for the complex Hilbert space of all 2 × 2 matrices means that we can express any matrix M as



where c is a complex number, and a is a 3-component complex vector. It is straightforward to show, using the properties listed above, that



where "tr" denotes the trace, and hence that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
This therefore gives



which can be rewritten in terms of matrix indices as



where summation is implied over the repeated indices γ and δ. Since this is true for any choice of the matrix M, the completeness relation follows as stated above.


As noted above, it is common to denote the 2 × 2 unit matrix by σ0, so σ0αβ = δαβ. The completeness relation can therefore alternatively be expressed as


 
 .
Relation with the permutation operator
Let  be the transposition (also known as a permutation) between two spins  and  living in the tensor product space ,



This operator can also be written more explicitly as Dirac's spin exchange operator,



Its eigenvalues are therefore6 1 or −1. It may thus be utilized as an interaction term in a Hamiltonian, splitting the energy eigenvalues of its symmetric versus antisymmetric eigenstates.
SU(2)
The group SU(2) is the Lie group of unitary 2×2 matrices with unit determinant; its Lie algebra is the set of all 2×2 anti-Hermitian matrices with trace 0. Direct calculation, as above, shows that the Lie algebra

 
  is the 3-dimensional real algebra spanned by the set }. In compact notation,



As a result, each  can be seen as an infinitesimal generator of SU(2). The elements of SU(2) are exponentials of linear combinations of these three generators, and multiply as indicated above in discussing the Pauli vector. Although this suffices to generate SU(2), it is not a proper representation of 
 
 
, as the Pauli eigenvalues are scaled unconventionally. The conventional normalization is 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 , so that



As SU(2) is a compact group, its Cartan decomposition is trivial.
SO(3)
The Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 , which corresponds to the Lie group SO(3), the group of rotations in three-dimensional space. In other words, one can say that the  are a realization (and, in fact, the lowest-dimensional realization) of infinitesimal rotations in three-dimensional space. However, even though 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are isomorphic as Lie algebras, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not isomorphic as Lie groups. 
 
 
 
  is actually a double cover of 
 
 
 
 , meaning that there is a two-to-one group homomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , see relationship between SO(3) and SU(2).
Quaternions
The real linear span of  is isomorphic to the real algebra of quaternions

 
 . The isomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to this set is given by the following map (notice the reversed signs for the Pauli matrices):



Alternatively, the isomorphism can be achieved by a map using the Pauli matrices in reversed order,7



As the quaternions of unit norm is group-isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 , this gives yet another way of describing 
 
 
 
  via the Pauli matrices. The two-to-one homomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  can also be explicitly given in terms of the Pauli matrices in this formulation.
Quaternions form a division algebra—every non-zero element has an inverse—whereas Pauli matrices do not. For a quaternionic version of the algebra generated by Pauli matrices see biquaternions, which is a venerable algebra of eight real dimensions.
Physics
Quantum mechanics
In quantum mechanics, each Pauli matrix is related to an angular momentum operator that corresponds to an observable describing the spin of a spin ½ particle, in each of the three spatial directions. As an immediate consequence of the Cartan decomposition mentioned above,  are the generators of a projective representation (spin representation) of the rotation group SO(3) acting on non-relativistic particles with spin ½. The states of the particles are represented as two-component spinors. In the same way, the Pauli matrices are related to the isospin operator
An interesting property of spin ½ particles is that they must be rotated by an angle of 4
 
 
 
  in order to return to their original configuration. This is due to the two-to-one correspondence between SU(2) and SO(3) mentioned above, and the fact that, although one visualizes spin up/down as the north/south pole on the 2-sphere

2, they are actually represented by orthogonal vectors in the two dimensional complex Hilbert space.
For a spin ½ particle, the spin operator is given by 
 
 
 
 , the fundamental representation of SU(2). By taking Kronecker products of this representation with itself repeatedly, one may construct all higher irreducible representations. That is, the resulting spin operators for higher spin systems in three spatial dimensions, for arbitrarily large j, can be calculated using this spin operator and ladder operators. They can be found in Rotation group SO(3)#A note on representations. The analog formula to the above generalization of Euler's formula for Pauli matrices, the group element in terms of spin matrices, is tractable, but less simple.8
Also useful in the quantum mechanics of multiparticle systems, the general Pauli group  is defined to consist of all 
 
 
 
 -fold tensor products of Pauli matrices.
Quantum information

In quantum information, single-qubit quantum gates are 2 × 2 unitary matrices. The Pauli matrices are some of the most important single-qubit operations. In that context, the Cartan decomposition given above is called the Z–Y decomposition of a single-qubit gate. Choosing a different Cartan pair gives a similar X–Y decomposition of a single-qubit gate.

See also

For higher spin generalizations of the Pauli matrices, see spin (physics) § Higher spins
Gamma matrices
Angular momentum
Gell-Mann matrices
Poincaré group
Generalizations of Pauli matrices
Bloch sphere
Euler's four-square identity

Remarks
Notes


References





"
Category:Lie groups Category:Matrices Category:Rotational symmetry Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Mathematical physics



↩
The Pauli vector is a formal device. It may be thought of as an element of , where the tensor product space is endowed with a mapping .↩
See the spinor map.↩
N.B. The relation among 
 
 
 
  derived here in the 
 
 
 
  representation holds for all representations of 
 
 
 
 , being a group identity.↩
cf. J W Gibbs (1884). Elements of Vector Analysis, New Haven, 1884, p. 67↩
Explicitly, in the convention of "right-space matrices into elements of left-space matrices", it is 
 
 
↩
, [http://books.google.com/books?id=cH-XQB0Ex5wC&pg;;=PR22 pp. xxii].↩
↩




