


Quasigroup




Quasigroup

In mathematics, especially in abstract algebra, a quasigroup is an algebraic structure resembling a group in the sense that "division" is always possible. Quasigroups differ from groups mainly in that they need not be associative.
A quasigroup with an identity element is called a loop.
Definitions
There are at least two equivalent formal definitions of quasigroup. One defines a quasigroup as a set with one binary operation, and the other, from universal algebra, defines a quasigroup as having three primitive operations. We begin with the first definition.
A quasigroup  is a set, Q, with a binary operation, ∗, (that is, a magma), obeying the Latin square property. This states that, for each a and b in Q, there exist unique elements x and y in Q such that:

a ∗ x = b ;
y ∗ a = b .

(In other words: Each element of the set occurs exactly once in each row and exactly once in each column of the quasigroup's multiplication table, or Cayley table. This property ensures that the Cayley table of a finite quasigroup is a Latin square.)
 The unique solutions to these equations are written  and . The operations '\' and '/' are called, respectively, left and right division.
The empty set equipped with the empty binary operation satisfies this definition of a quasigroup. Some authors accept the empty quasigroup but others explicitly exclude it.12
Universal algebra
Given some algebraic structure, an identity is an equation in which all variables are tacitly universally quantified, and in which all operations are among the primitive operations proper to the structure. Algebraic structures axiomatized solely by identities are called varieties. Many standard results in universal algebra hold only for varieties. Quasigroups are varieties if left and right division are taken as primitive.
A quasigroup  is a type (2,2,2) algebra satisfying the identities:

y = x ∗ (x \ y) ;
y = x \ (x ∗ y) ;
y = (y / x) ∗ x ;
y = (y ∗ x) / x .

Hence if  is a quasigroup according to the first definition, then  is the same quasigroup in the sense of universal algebra.
Loop
 A loop is a quasigroup with an identity element; that is, an element, e, such that:

x ∗ e = x and e ∗ x = x for all x in Q.

It follows that the identity element, e, is unique, and that every element of Q has a unique left and right inverse. Since the presence of an identity element is essential, a loop cannot be empty.
A quasigroup with an idempotent element is called a pique ("pointed idempotent quasigroup"); this is a weaker notion than loop but common nonetheless because given an abelian group, (A, +), its subtraction operation (as quasigroup multiplication) yields a pique (A, -) with the abelian group's zero/identity turned into a "pointed idempotent"; i.e., there's a principal isotopy

 
 .
A loop which is associative is a group. A group can have a non-associative pique isotope, but it cannot have a nonassociative loop isotope. There are also some weaker associativity-like properties which have been given special names.
A Bol loop is a loop that satisfies, for each x, y and z in Q, one of the two identities:

x ∗ (y ∗ (x ∗ z)) = (x ∗ (y ∗ x)) ∗ z(a left Bol loop), or
((z ∗ x) ∗ y) ∗ x = z ∗ ((x ∗ y) ∗ x)(a right Bol loop).

A loop that is both a left and right Bol loop is a Moufang loop. This is equivalent to any one of the following single Moufang identities:

x ∗ (y ∗ (x ∗ z)) = ((x ∗ y) ∗ x) ∗ z,
z ∗ (x ∗ (y ∗ x)) = ((z ∗ x) ∗ y) ∗ x,
(x ∗ y) ∗ (z ∗ x) = x ∗ ((y ∗ z) ∗ x), or
(x ∗ y) ∗ (z ∗ x) = (x ∗ (y ∗ z)) ∗ x.

Symmetries
Smith (2007) names the following important subclasses:
Semisymmetry
A quasigroup is semisymmetric if the following equivalent identities hold:

xy = y / x
yx = x \ y
x = (yx)y
x = y(xy)

Although this class may seem special, every quasigroup Q induces a semisymmetric quasigroup QΔ on the direct product cube Q3 via following operation:



where "//" and "\\" are the conjugate division operations; the latter formula more explicitly shows that the construction is exploiting an orbit of S3.
Triality
Total symmetry
A narrower class that is a total symmetric quasigroup (sometimes abbreviated TS-quasigroup) in which all conjugates coincide as one operation: xy = x/y = x\y. Another way to define (the same notion of) totally symmetric quasigroup is as a semisymmetric quasigroup which additionally is commutative, i.e. xy=yx.
Idempotent total symmetric quasigroups are precisely (i.e. in a bijection with) Steiner triples, so such a quasigroups is also called a Steiner quasigroups, and sometimes the latter is even abbreviated as squag; the term sloop is defined similarly for a Steiner quasigroup that is also a loop. Without idempotency, total symmetric quasigroups correspond to the geometric notion of extended Steiner triple, also called Generalized Elliptic Cubic Curve (GECC).
Total antisymmetry
A quasigroup  is called totally anti-symmetric if for all , the following implications hold:3

(c ∗ x) ∗ y = (c ∗ y) ∗ x ⇒ x = y
x ∗ y = y ∗ x ⇒ x = y,

and it is called weakly totally anti-symmetric if only the first implication holds.4
This property is required, for example, in the Damm algorithm.
Examples

Every group is a loop, because  if and only if , and  if and only if .
The integers Z with subtraction (−) form a quasigroup.
The nonzero rationals Q× (or the nonzero reals R×) with division (÷) form a quasigroup.
Any vector space over a field of characteristic not equal to 2 forms an idempotent, commutative quasigroup under the operation .
Every Steiner triple system defines an idempotent, commutative quasigroup:  is the third element of the triple containing a and b. These quasigroups also satisfy  for all x and y in the quasigroup. These quasigroups are known as Steiner quasigroups.5
The set } where  and with all other products as in the quaternion group forms a nonassociative loop of order 8. See hyperbolic quaternions for its application. (The hyperbolic quaternions themselves do not form a loop or quasigroup).
The nonzero octonions form a nonassociative loop under multiplication. The octonions are a special type of loop known as a Moufang loop.
An associative quasigroup is either empty or is a group, since if there is at least one element, the existence of inverses and associativity imply the existence of an identity.
The following construction is due to Hans Zassenhaus. On the underlying set of the four-dimensional vector space F4 over the 3-element Galois field  define


(x1, x2, x3, x4) ∗ (y1, y2, y3, y4) = (x1, x2, x3, x4) + (y1, y2, y3, y4) + (0, 0, 0, (x3 − y3)(x1y2 − x2y1)).
 
Then,  is a commutative Moufang loop that is not a group.6



More generally, the set of nonzero elements of any division algebra form a quasigroup.

Properties

In the remainder of the article we shall denote quasigroup multiplication simply by juxtaposition.


Quasigroups have the cancellation property: if , then . This follows from the uniqueness of left division of ab or ac by a. Similarly, if , then .
Multiplication operators
The definition of a quasigroup can be treated as conditions on the left and right multiplication operators , defined by



The definition says that both mappings are bijections from Q to itself. A magma Q is a quasigroup precisely when all these operators, for every x in Q, are bijective. The inverse mappings are left and right division, that is,



In this notation the identities among the quasigroup's multiplication and division operations (stated in the section on universal algebra) are



where 1 denotes the identity mapping on Q.
Latin squares
The multiplication table of a finite quasigroup is a Latin square: an  table filled with n different symbols in such a way that each symbol occurs exactly once in each row and exactly once in each column.
Conversely, every Latin square can be taken as the multiplication table of a quasigroup in many ways: the border row (containing the column headers) and the border column (containing the row headers) can each be any permutation of the elements. See small Latin squares and quasigroups.
Inverse properties
Every loop element has a unique left and right inverse given by






A loop is said to have (two-sided) inverses if 
 
 
 
  for all x. In this case the inverse element is usually denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
There are some stronger notions of inverses in loops which are often useful:

A loop has the left inverse property if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Equivalently, 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
A loop has the right inverse property if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Equivalently, 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
A loop has the antiautomorphic inverse property if 
 
 
 
  or, equivalently, if 
 
 
 
 .
A loop has the weak inverse property when 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 . This may be stated in terms of inverses via 
 
 
 
  or equivalently 
 
 
 
 .

A loop has the inverse property if it has both the left and right inverse properties. Inverse property loops also have the antiautomorphic and weak inverse properties. In fact, any loop which satisfies any two of the above four identities has the inverse property and therefore satisfies all four.
Any loop which satisfies the left, right, or antiautomorphic inverse properties automatically has two-sided inverses.
Morphisms
A quasigroup or loop homomorphism is a map  between two quasigroups such that . Quasigroup homomorphisms necessarily preserve left and right division, as well as identity elements (if they exist).
Homotopy and isotopy
Let Q and P be quasigroups. A quasigroup homotopy from Q to P is a triple  of maps from Q to P such that


 
  for all x, y in Q. A quasigroup homomorphism is just a homotopy for which the three maps are equal.
An isotopy is a homotopy for which each of the three maps  is a bijection. Two quasigroups are isotopic if there is an isotopy between them. In terms of Latin squares, an isotopy  is given by a permutation of rows α, a permutation of columns β, and a permutation on the underlying element set γ.
An autotopy is an isotopy from a quasigroup to itself. The set of all autotopies of a quasigroup form a group with the automorphism group as a subgroup.
Each quasigroup is isotopic to a loop. If a loop is isotopic to a group, then it is isomorphic to that group and thus is itself a group. However, a quasigroup which is isotopic to a group need not be a group. For example, the quasigroup on R with multiplication given by  is isotopic to the additive group , but is not itself a group. Every medial quasigroup is isotopic to an abelian group by the Bruck–Toyoda theorem.
Conjugation (parastrophe)
Left and right division are examples of forming a quasigroup by permuting the variables in the defining equation. From the original operation ∗ (i.e., ) we can form five new operations:  (the opposite operation), / and \, and their opposites. That makes a total of six quasigroup operations, which are called the conjugates or parastrophes of ∗. Any two of these operations are said to be "conjugate" or "parastrophic" to each other (and to themselves).
Paratopy
If the set Q has two quasigroup operations, ∗ and ·, and one of them is isotopic to a conjugate of the other, the operations are said to be paratopic to each other. There are also many other names for this relation of "paratopy", e.g., isostrophe.
Generalizations
Polyadic or multiary quasigroups
An n-ary quasigroup is a set with an n-ary operation,  with , such that the equation  has a unique solution for any one variable if all the other n variables are specified arbitrarily. Polyadic or multiary means n-ary for some nonnegative integer n.
A 0-ary, or nullary, quasigroup is just a constant element of Q. A 1-ary, or unary, quasigroup is a bijection of Q to itself. A binary, or 2-ary, quasigroup is an ordinary quasigroup.
An example of a multiary quasigroup is an iterated group operation, ; it is not necessary to use parentheses to specify the order of operations because the group is associative. One can also form a multiary quasigroup by carrying out any sequence of the same or different group or quasigroup operations, if the order of operations is specified.
There exist multiary quasigroups that cannot be represented in any of these ways. An n-ary quasigroup is irreducible if its operation cannot be factored into the composition of two operations in the following way:


 
  where  and . Finite irreducible n-ary quasigroups exist for all ; see Akivis and Goldberg (2001) for details.
An n-ary quasigroup with an n-ary version of associativity is called an n-ary group.
Right- and left-quasigroups
A right-quasigroup  is a type (2,2) algebra satisfying the identities:

y = (y / x) ∗ x;
y = (y ∗ x) / x.

Similarly, a left-quasigroup  is a type (2,2) algebra satisfying the identities:

y = x ∗ (x \ y);
y = x \ (x ∗ y).

Number of small quasigroups and loops
The number of isomorphism classes of small quasigroups  and loops  is given here:7




Order

Number of quasigroups

Number of loops



0

1

0



1

1

1



2

1

1



3

5

1



4

35

2



5

1,411

6



6

1,130,531

109



7

12,198,455,835

23,746



8

2,697,818,331,680,661

106,228,849



9

15,224,734,061,438,247,321,497

9,365,022,303,540



10

2,750,892,211,809,150,446,995,735,533,513

20,890,436,195,945,769,617



11

19,464,657,391,668,924,966,791,023,043,937,578,299,025

1,478,157,455,158,044,452,849,321,016





See also

Bol loop
Division ring – a ring in which every non-zero element has a multiplicative inverse
Semigroup – an algebraic structure consisting of a set together with an associative binary operation
Monoid – a semigroup with an identity element
Planar ternary ring – has an additive and multiplicative loop structure
Small Latin squares and quasigroups
Problems in loop theory and quasigroup theory
Mathematics of Sudoku

Notes
References


Bruck, R.H. (1958), A Survey of Binary Systems. Springer-Verlag.
Chein, O., H. O. Pflugfelder, and J.D.H. Smith, eds. (1990), Quasigroups and Loops: Theory and Applications. Berlin: Heldermann. ISBN 3-88538-008-0.

Dudek, W.A., and Glazek, K. (2008), "Around the Hosszu-Gluskin Theorem for n-ary groups," Discrete Math. 308: 4861-4876.
Pflugfelder, H.O. (1990), Quasigroups and Loops: Introduction. Berlin: Heldermann. ISBN 3-88538-007-2.
Smith, J.D.H. (2007), An Introduction to Quasigroups and their Representations. Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. ISBN 1-58488-537-8.
Smith, J.D.H. and Anna B. Romanowska (1999), Post-Modern Algebra. Wiley-Interscience. ISBN 0-471-12738-8.

External links

quasigroups


"
Category:Non-associative algebra Category:Group theory Category:Latin squares








.





