


Riesz representation theorem




Riesz representation theorem

There are several well-known theorems in functional analysis known as the Riesz representation theorem. They are named in honour of Frigyes Riesz.
This article will describe his theorem concerning the dual of a Hilbert space, which is sometimes called the Fréchet-Riesz theorem. For the theorems relating linear functionals to measures, see Riesz–Markov–Kakutani representation theorem.
The Hilbert space representation theorem
This theorem establishes an important connection between a Hilbert space and its (continuous) dual space. If the underlying field is the real numbers, the two are isometrically isomorphic; if the underlying field is the complex numbers, the two are isometrically anti-isomorphic. The (anti-) isomorphism is a particular, natural one as will be described next.
Let H be a Hilbert space, and let H* denote its dual space, consisting of all continuous linear functionals from H into the field R or C. If x is an element of H, then the function φx, for all y in H defined by



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the inner product of the Hilbert space, is an element of H*. The Riesz representation theorem states that every element of H* can be written uniquely in this form.
Theorem. The mapping 
 
 
 
 : H → H* defined by 
 
 
 
 (x) = 
 
 
x is an isometric (anti-) isomorphism, meaning that:



 
  is bijective.
The norms of x and 
 
 
 
 (x) agree
 
 
 
 .


 
  is additive
 
 
 
 .
If the base field is R, then 
 
 
 
  for all real numbers λ.
If the base field is C, then 
 
 
 
  for all complex numbers λ, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the complex conjugation of λ.

The inverse map of 
 
 
 
  can be described as follows. Given a non-zero element 
 
 
 
 
  of H*, the orthogonal complement of the kernel of 
 
 
 
  is a one-dimensional subspace of H. Take a non-zero element z in that subspace, and set 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 (x) = 
 
 
 
 .
Historically, the theorem is often attributed simultaneously to Riesz and Fréchet in 1907 (see references).
In the mathematical treatment of quantum mechanics, the theorem can be seen as a justification for the popular bra–ket notation. When the theorem holds, every ket 
 
 
 
 
  has a corresponding bra 
 
 
 
 , and the correspondence is unambiguous. cf. also Rigged Hilbert space
References

M. Fréchet (1907). Sur les ensembles de fonctions et les opérations linéaires. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 144, 1414–1416.
F. Riesz (1907). Sur une espèce de géométrie analytique des systèmes de fonctions sommables. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 144, 1409–1411.
F. Riesz (1909). Sur les opérations fonctionnelles linéaires. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 149, 974–977.
P. Halmos Measure Theory, D. van Nostrand and Co., 1950.
P. Halmos, A Hilbert Space Problem Book, Springer, New York 1982 (problem 3 contains version for vector spaces with coordinate systems).


Walter Rudin, Real and Complex Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1966, ISBN 0-07-100276-6.


"
Category:Theorems in functional analysis Category:Duality theories Category:Integral representations


