   Schrödinger's cat      Schrödinger's cat     Schrödinger's cat is a thought experiment , sometimes described as a paradox , devised by Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger in 1935. 1 It illustrates what he saw as the problem of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics applied to everyday objects. The scenario presents a cat which may be simultaneously both alive and dead, 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 a state known as a quantum superposition , as a result of being linked to a random subatomic event that may or may not occur. The thought experiment is also often featured in theoretical discussions of the interpretations of quantum mechanics . Schrödinger coined the term Verschränkung ( entanglement ) in the course of developing the thought experiment.  Origin and motivation  Schrödinger intended his thought experiment as a discussion of the EPR article —named after its authors Einstein , Podolsky , and Rosen —in 1935. 9 The EPR article highlighted the strange nature of quantum superpositions , in which a quantum system such as an atom or photon can exist as a combination of multiple states corresponding to different possible outcomes. The prevailing theory, called the Copenhagen interpretation , said that a quantum system remained in this superposition until it interacted with, or was observed by, the external world, at which time the superposition collapses into one or another of the possible definite states. The EPR experiment showed that a system with multiple particles separated by large distances could be in such a superposition. Schrödinger and Einstein exchanged letters about Einstein's EPR article, in the course of which Einstein pointed out that the state of an unstable keg of gunpowder will, after a while, contain a superposition of both exploded and unexploded states.  To further illustrate, Schrödinger described how one could, in principle, create a superposition in a large-scale system by making it dependent on a quantum particle that was in a superposition. He proposed a scenario with a cat in a sealed box, wherein the cat's life or death depended on the state of a radioactive atom, whether it had decayed and emitted radiation or not. According to Schrödinger, the Copenhagen interpretation implies that the cat remains both alive and dead until the box is opened. Schrödinger did not wish to promote the idea of dead-and-alive cats as a serious possibility; on the contrary, he intended the example to illustrate the absurdity of the existing view of quantum mechanics. 10 However, since Schrödinger's time, other interpretations of the mathematics of quantum mechanics have been advanced by physicists, some of which regard the "alive and dead" cat superposition as quite real. Intended as a critique of the Copenhagen interpretation (the prevailing orthodoxy in 1935), the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment remains a defining touchstone for modern interpretations of quantum mechanics . Physicists often use the way each interpretation deals with Schrödinger's cat as a way of illustrating and comparing the particular features, strengths, and weaknesses of each interpretation.  The thought experiment  Schrödinger wrote: 11 12   Schrödinger's famous thought experiment poses the question, " when does a quantum system stop existing as a superposition of states and become one or the other?" (More technically, when does the actual quantum state stop being a linear combination of states, each of which resembles different classical states, and instead begin to have a unique classical description?) If the cat survives, it remembers only being alive. But explanations of the EPR experiments that are consistent with standard microscopic quantum mechanics require that macroscopic objects, such as cats and notebooks, do not always have unique classical descriptions. The thought experiment illustrates this apparent paradox. Our intuition says that no observer can be in a mixture of states—yet the cat, it seems from the thought experiment, can be such a mixture. Is the cat required to be an observer, or does its existence in a single well-defined classical state require another external observer? Each alternative seemed absurd to Albert Einstein, who was impressed by the ability of the thought experiment to highlight these issues. In a letter to Schrödinger dated 1950, he wrote: Note that the charge of gunpowder is not mentioned in Schrödinger's setup, which uses a Geiger counter as an amplifier and hydrocyanic poison instead of gunpowder. The gunpowder had been mentioned in Einstein's original suggestion to Schrödinger 15 years before, and Einstein carried it forward to the present discussion.  Interpretations of the experiment  Since Schrödinger's time, other interpretations of quantum mechanics have been proposed that give different answers to the questions posed by Schrödinger's cat of how long superpositions last and when (or whether ) they collapse.  Copenhagen interpretation  The most commonly held interpretation of quantum mechanics is the Copenhagen interpretation . 13 In the Copenhagen interpretation, a system stops being a superposition of states and becomes either one or the other when an observation takes place. This thought experiment makes apparent the fact that the nature of measurement , or observation, is not well-defined in this interpretation. The experiment can be interpreted to mean that while the box is closed, the system simultaneously exists in a superposition of the states "decayed nucleus/dead cat" and "undecayed nucleus/living cat", and that only when the box is opened and an observation performed does the wave function collapse into one of the two states.  However, one of the main scientists associated with the Copenhagen interpretation, Niels Bohr , never had in mind the observer-induced collapse of the wave function, so that Schrödinger's cat did not pose any riddle to him. The cat would be either dead or alive long before the box is opened by a conscious observer. 14 Analysis of an actual experiment found that measurement alone (for example by a Geiger counter) is sufficient to collapse a quantum wave function before there is any conscious observation of the measurement. 15 The view that the "observation" is taken when a particle from the nucleus hits the detector can be developed into objective collapse theories . The thought experiment requires an "unconscious observation" by the detector in order for magnification to occur. In contrast, the many worlds approach denies that collapse ever occurs.  Many-worlds interpretation and consistent histories  In 1957, Hugh Everett formulated the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics , which does not single out observation as a special process. In the many-worlds interpretation, both alive and dead states of the cat persist after the box is opened, but are decoherent from each other. In other words, when the box is opened, the observer and the possibly-dead cat split into an observer looking at a box with a dead cat, and an observer looking at a box with a live cat. But since the dead and alive states are decoherent, there is no effective communication or interaction between them.  When opening the box, the observer becomes entangled with the cat, so "observer states" corresponding to the cat's being alive and dead are formed; each observer state is entangled or linked with the cat so that the "observation of the cat's state" and the "cat's state" correspond with each other. Quantum decoherence ensures that the different outcomes have no interaction with each other. The same mechanism of quantum decoherence is also important for the interpretation in terms of consistent histories . Only the "dead cat" or the "alive cat" can be a part of a consistent history in this interpretation.  Roger Penrose criticises this: However, the mainstream view (without necessarily endorsing many-worlds) is that decoherence is the mechanism that forbids such simultaneous perception. 16 17  A variant of the Schrödinger's cat experiment, known as the quantum suicide machine, has been proposed by cosmologist Max Tegmark . It examines the Schrödinger's cat experiment from the point of view of the cat, and argues that by using this approach, one may be able to distinguish between the Copenhagen interpretation and many-worlds.  Ensemble interpretation  The ensemble interpretation states that superpositions are nothing but subensembles of a larger statistical ensemble. The state vector would not apply to individual cat experiments, but only to the statistics of many similarly prepared cat experiments. Proponents of this interpretation state that this makes the Schrödinger's cat paradox a trivial matter, or a non-issue.  This interpretation serves to discard the idea that a single physical system in quantum mechanics has a mathematical description that corresponds to it in any way.  Relational interpretation  The relational interpretation makes no fundamental distinction between the human experimenter, the cat, or the apparatus, or between animate and inanimate systems; all are quantum systems governed by the same rules of wavefunction evolution , and all may be considered "observers". But the relational interpretation allows that different observers can give different accounts of the same series of events, depending on the information they have about the system. 18 The cat can be considered an observer of the apparatus; meanwhile, the experimenter can be considered another observer of the system in the box (the cat plus the apparatus). Before the box is opened, the cat, by nature of its being alive or dead, has information about the state of the apparatus (the atom has either decayed or not decayed); but the experimenter does not have information about the state of the box contents. In this way, the two observers simultaneously have different accounts of the situation: To the cat, the wavefunction of the apparatus has appeared to "collapse"; to the experimenter, the contents of the box appear to be in superposition. Not until the box is opened, and both observers have the same information about what happened, do both system states appear to "collapse" into the same definite result, a cat that is either alive or dead.  Objective collapse theories  According to objective collapse theories , superpositions are destroyed spontaneously (irrespective of external observation) when some objective physical threshold (of time , mass , temperature , irreversibility , etc.) is reached. Thus, the cat would be expected to have settled into a definite state long before the box is opened. This could loosely be phrased as "the cat observes itself", or "the environment observes the cat".  Objective collapse theories require a modification of standard quantum mechanics to allow superpositions to be destroyed by the process of time evolution. This process, known as " decoherence ", is among the fastest processes currently known to physics. 19  Applications and tests  thumb|upright=1.5|Schrödinger's cat quantum superposition of states and effect of the environment through decoherence  The experiment as described is a purely theoretical one, and the machine proposed is not known to have been constructed. However, successful experiments involving similar principles, e.g. superpositions of relatively large (by the standards of quantum physics) objects have been performed. 20 These experiments do not show that a cat-sized object can be superposed, but the known upper limit on "cat states" has been pushed upwards by them. In many cases the state is short-lived, even when cooled to near absolute zero .   A "cat state" has been achieved with photons . 21  A beryllium  ion has been trapped in a superposed state. 22  An experiment involving a superconducting quantum interference device ("SQUID") has been linked to the theme of the thought experiment: "The superposition state does not correspond to a billion electrons flowing one way and a billion others flowing the other way. Superconducting electrons move en masse. All the superconducting electrons in the SQUID flow both ways around the loop at once when they are in the Schrödinger's cat state." 23  A piezoelectric " tuning fork " has been constructed, which can be placed into a superposition of vibrating and non vibrating states. The resonator comprises about 10 trillion atoms. 24  An experiment involving a flu virus has been proposed. 25   In quantum computing the phrase " cat state " often refers to the special entanglement of qubits wherein the qubits are in an equal superposition of all being 0 and all being 1; e.g.,  $$| \psi \rangle = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \bigg( | 00\ldots0 \rangle + |11\ldots1 \rangle \bigg).$$  Extensions  Wigner's friend is a variant on the experiment with two human observers: the first makes an observation on whether a flash of light is seen and then communicates his observation to a second observer. The issue here is, does the wave function "collapse" when the first observer looks at the experiment, or only when the second observer is informed of the first observer's observations?  In another extension, prominent physicists have gone so far as to suggest that astronomers observing dark energy in the universe in 1998 may have "reduced its life expectancy" through a pseudo-Schrödinger's cat scenario, although this is a controversial viewpoint. 26 27  In popular culture  See also  References  External links   Erwin Schrödinger (1935) The Present Situation in Quantum Mechanics (translation of 3-part  and pp. 823–828, 844–849) Schrödinger's cat paper  A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen (1935) Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete? , Physical Review, Vol. 47, p. 777. The EPR paper  Phillip Yam (October 10, 2012) Bringing Schrödinger's Cat to Life , Scientific American. Describes investigations of quantum "cat states" and wavefunction collapse by Serge Haroche and David J. Wineland for which they won the 2012 Nobel Prize in Physics  Tony Leggett (August 2000) New Life for Schrödinger's Cat , Physics World, p. 23-24. Article on experiments with "cat state" superpositions in superconducting rings, in which the electrons go around the ring in two directions simultaneously.  Information Philosopher on Schrödinger's cat More diagrams and an information creation explanation.   Schrödinger's cat in audio produced by Sift  J.Foukzon, A.A.Potapov, S.A.Podosenov SCHRODINGER'S CAT PARADOX RESOLUTION USING GRW COLLAPSE MODEL ,International Journal of Recent advances in Physics (IJRAP) Vol.3, No.3, August 2014.   "  Category:Schrödinger's cat  Category:Concepts in physics  Category:Physical paradoxes  Category:Quantum measurement  Category:Fictional cats  Category:Thought experiments in quantum mechanics  Category:Articles containing video clips     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete? A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935) ↩    Schroedinger: "The Present Situation in Quantum Mechanics." 5. Are the Variables Really Blurred? ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  Wojciech H. Zurek , Decoherence, einselection , and the quantum origins of the classical, Reviews of Modern Physics 2003, 75, 715 or 1 ↩  Wojciech H. Zurek , "Decoherence and the transition from quantum to classical", Physics Today , 44, pp. 36–44 (1991) ↩  ↩  ↩  What is the World's Biggest Schrödinger Cat? ↩  Schrödingers Cat Now Made of Light ↩  C. Monroe, et al. A "Schrödinger Cat" Superposition State of an Atom ↩  Physics World: Schrödinger's cat comes into view ↩  Scientific American :'' Macro-Weirdness: "Quantum Microphone" Puts Naked-Eye Object in 2 Places at Once: A new device tests the limits of Schrödinger's cat'' ↩  How to Create Quantum Superpositions of Living Things ↩  ↩  ↩     