


Cut locus (Riemannian manifold)




Cut locus (Riemannian manifold)

In Riemannian geometry, the cut locus of a point 
 
 
 
  in a manifold is roughly the set of all other points for which there are multiple minimizing geodesics connecting them from 
 
 
 
 , but it may contain additional points where the minimizing geodesic is unique, under certain circumstances. The distance function from p is a smooth function except at the point p itself and the cut locus.
Definition
Fix a point 
 
 
 
  in a complete Riemannian manifold 
 
 
 
 , and consider the tangent space

 
 . It is a standard result that for sufficiently small 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the curve defined by the Riemannian exponential map, 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  belonging to the interval 
 
 
 
  is a minimizing geodesic, and is the unique minimizing geodesic connecting the two endpoints. Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the exponential map from 
 
 
 
 . The cut locus of 
 
 
 
  in the tangent space is defined to be the set of all vectors 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a minimizing geodesic for 
 
 
 
  but fails to be minimizing for 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 . The cut locus of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 is defined to be image of the cut locus of 
 
 
 
  in the tangent space under the exponential map at 
 
 
 
 . Thus, we may interpret the cut locus of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  as the points in the manifold where the geodesics starting at 
 
 
 
  stop being minimizing.
The least distance from p to the cut locus is the injectivity radius at p. On the open ball of this radius, the exponential map at p is a diffeomorphism from the tangent space to the manifold, and this is the largest such radius. The global injectivity radius is defined to be the infimum of the injectivity radius at p, over all points of the manifold.
Characterization
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is in the cut locus of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . A standard result1 is that either (1) there is more than one minimizing geodesic joining 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , or (2) 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are conjugate along some geodesic which joins them. It is possible for both (1) and (2) to hold.
Examples
On the standard round n-sphere, the cut locus of a point consists of the single point opposite of it (i.e., the antipodal point). On an infinitely long cylinder, the cut locus of a point consists of the line opposite the point.
Applications
The significance of the cut locus is that the distance function from a point 
 
 
 
  is smooth, except on the cut locus of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, it makes sense to take the gradient and Hessian of the distance function away from the cut locus. This idea is used in the local Laplacian comparison theorem and the local Hessian comparison theorem. These are used in the proof of the local version of the Toponogov theorem, and many other important theorems in Riemannian geometry.
Cut locus of a subset
One can similarly define the cut locus of a submanifold of the Riemannian manifold, in terms of its normal exponential map.
See also

Caustic (mathematics)

References
"
Category:Riemannian geometry



↩




