


Metric space aimed at its subspace




Metric space aimed at its subspace

In mathematics, a metric space aimed at its subspace is a categorical construction that has a direct geometric meaning. It is also a useful step toward the construction of the metric envelope, or tight span, which are basic (injective) objects of the category of metric spaces.
Following , a notion of a metric space Y aimed at its subspace X is defined.
Informally, imagine terrain Y, and its part X, such that wherever in Y you place a sharpshooter, and an apple at another place in Y, and then let the sharpshooter fire, the bullet will go through the apple and will always hit a point of X, or at least it will fly arbitrarily close to points of X – then we say that Y is aimed at X.
A priori, it may seem plausible that for a given X the superspaces Y that aim at X can be arbitrarily large or at least huge. We will see that this is not the case. Among the spaces, which aim at a subspace isometric to X there is a unique (up to isometry) universal one, Aim(X), which in a sense of canonical isometric embeddings contains any other space aimed at (an isometric image of) X. And in the special case of an arbitrary compact metric space X every bounded subspace of an arbitrary metric space Y aimed at X is totally bounded (i.e. its metric completion is compact).
Definitions
Let 
 
 
 
  be a metric space. Let 
 
 
 
  be a subset of 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 
  (the set 
 
 
 
  with the metric from 
 
 
 
  restricted to 
 
 
 
 ) is a metric subspace of 
 
 
 
 . Then
Definition.  Space 
 
 
 
 
  aims at 
 
 
 
  if and only if, for all points 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , and for every real 
 
 
 
 , there exists a point 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that



Let 
 
 
 
  be the space of all real valued metric maps (non-contractive) of 
 
 
 
 . Define



Then



for every 
 
 
 
  is a metric on 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
 , is an isometric embedding of 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 ; this is essentially a generalisation of the Kuratowski-Wojdysławski embedding of bounded metric spaces 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 , where we here consider arbitrary metric spaces (bounded or unbounded). It is clear that the space 
 
 
 
 
  is aimed at 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
Let 
 
 
 
  be an isometric embedding. Then there exists a natural metric map 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 :








for every 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

Theorem The space Y above is aimed at subspace X if and only if the natural mapping 
 
 
 
  is an isometric embedding.
 

Thus it follows that every space aimed at X can be isometrically mapped into Aim(X), with some additional (essential) categorical requirements satisfied.
The space Aim(X) is injective (hyperconvex in the sense of Aronszajn-Panitchpakdi) – given a metric space M, which contains Aim(X) as a metric subspace, there is a canonical (and explicit) metric retraction of M onto Aim(X) .
References



"
Category:Metric geometry


