


Ocean heat content




Ocean heat content

  thumb|thumbtime=40|This animation uses Earth science data from a variety of sensors on NASA Earth observing satellites to measure physical oceanography parameters such as ocean currents, ocean winds, sea surface height and sea surface temperature. These measurements can help scientists understand the ocean's impact on weather and climate. (in HD)
Oceanic heat content (OHC) is the heat stored in the ocean. Oceanography and climatology are the science branches which study ocean heat content. Changes in the ocean heat content play an important role in the sea level rise, because of thermal expansion. It is with high confidence that ocean warming accounts for 90% of the energy accumulation from global warming between 1971 and 2010.1
Definition and measurement
Ocean heat content is defined as:2


 
  - water density, 
 
 
 
  - sea water specific heat capacity, h2 - bottom depth, h1 - top depth, 
 
 
 
  - temperature profile.
OHC is computed from temperature measurements often taken with a Nansen bottle. The ARGO float project deployed 3000 floaters around the world's oceans which periodically dive to take temperature and salinity measurements. The World Ocean Database Project is the largest database for temperature profiles from all of the world’s oceans.
Recent changes
Several studies in recent years have found a multidecadal increase in OHC of the deep and upper ocean regions and attribute the heat uptake to anthropogenic warming.3 Studies based on ARGO indicate that ocean surface winds, especially the subtropical trade winds in the Pacific Ocean, change ocean heat vertical distribution.4 This results in changes among ocean currents, and an increase of the subtropical overturning, which is also related to the El Niño and La Niña phenomenon. Depending on stochastic natural variability fluctuations, during La Niña years around 30% more heat from the upper ocean layer is transported into the deeper ocean. Model studies indicate that ocean currents transport more heat into deeper layers during La Niña years, following changes in wind circulation.5 Years with increased ocean heat uptake have been associated with negative phases of the interdecadal Pacific oscillation (IPO).6 This is of particular interest to climate scientists who use the data to estimate the ocean heat uptake.
A study in 2015 concluded that ocean heat content increases by the Pacific Ocean, were compensated by an abrupt distribution of OHC into the Indian Ocean.7
See also

Sea surface temperature

References
8. Cheng, L. J. and J. Zhu, 2014: Artifacts in variations of ocean heat content induced by the observation system changes, Geophysical Research Letters, 41(20), 7276-7283, DOI: 10.1002/2014GL061881
External links

NOAA Global Ocean Heat and Salt Content

"
Category:Basic meteorological concepts and phenomena Category:Climate change Category:Climatology Category:Oceanography Category:Articles containing video clips






 Essay







