


Pollard's kangaroo algorithm




Pollard's kangaroo algorithm

In computational number theory and computational algebra, Pollard's kangaroo algorithm (aka Pollard's lambda algorithm, see Naming below) is an algorithm for solving the discrete logarithm problem. The algorithm was introduced in 1978 by the number theorist J. M. Pollard, in the same paper 1 as his better-known ρ algorithm for solving the same problem. Although Pollard described the application of his algorithm to the discrete logarithm problem in the multiplicative group of units modulo a prime p, it is in fact a generic discrete logarithm algorithm—it will work in any finite cyclic group.
The algorithm
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a finite cyclic group of order 
 
 
 
  which is generated by the element 
 
 
 
 , and we seek to find the discrete logarithm 
 
 
 
  of the element 
 
 
 
  to the base 
 
 
 
 . In other words, we seek 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . The lambda algorithm allows us to search for 
 
 
 
  in some subset 
 
 
 
 . We may search the entire range of possible logarithms by setting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , although in this case Pollard's rho algorithm is more efficient. We proceed as follows:
1. Choose a set 
 
 
 
  of integers and define a pseudorandom map 
 
 
 
 .
2. Choose an integer 
 
 
 
  and compute a sequence of group elements 
 
 
 
  according to:








3. Compute


 
 . Observe that:


 
  4. Begin computing a second sequence of group elements 
 
 
 
  according to:








and a corresponding sequence of integers 
 
 
 
  according to:


 
 . Observe that:


 
  5. Stop computing terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  when either of the following conditions are met:

A) 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . If the sequences 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  "collide" in this manner, then we have:
 
 :


x \equiv b+d-d_j \pmod{n}

and so we are done.
 


B) 
 
 
 
 . If this occurs, then the algorithm has failed to find 
 
 
 
 . Subsequent attempts can be made by changing the choice of 
 
 
 
  and/or 
 
 
 
 .
 

Complexity
Pollard gives the time complexity of the algorithm as 
 
 
 
 , based on a probabilistic argument which follows from the assumption that f acts pseudorandomly. Note that when the size of the set {a, …, b} to be searched is measured in bits, as is normal in complexity theory, the set has size log(b − a), and so the algorithm's complexity is 
 
 
 
 , which is exponential in the problem size. For this reason, Pollard's lambda algorithm is considered an exponential time algorithm. For an example of a subexponential time discrete logarithm algorithm, see the index calculus algorithm.
Naming
The algorithm is well known by two names.
The first is "Pollard's kangaroo algorithm". This name is a reference to an analogy used in the paper presenting the algorithm, where the algorithm is explained in terms of using a tame kangaroo to trap a wild kangaroo. Pollard has explained2 that this analogy was inspired by a "fascinating" article published in the same issue of Scientific American as an exposition of the RSA public key cryptosystem. The article3 described an experiment in which a kangaroo's "energetic cost of locomotion, measured in terms of oxygen consumption at various speeds, was determined by placing kangaroos on a treadmill".
The second is "Pollard's lambda algorithm". Much like the name of another of Pollard's discrete logarithm algorithms, Pollard's rho algorithm, this name refers to the similarity between a visualisation of the algorithm and the Greek letter lambda (
 
 
 
 ). The shorter stroke of the letter lambda corresponds to the sequence 
 
 
 
 , since it starts from the position b to the right of x. Accordingly, the longer stroke corresponds to the sequence 
 
 
 
 , which "collides with" the first sequence (just like the strokes of a lambda intersect) and then follows it subsequently.
Pollard has expressed a preference for the name "kangaroo algorithm",4 as this avoids confusion with some parallel versions of his rho algorithm, which have also been called "lambda algorithms".
See also

Rainbow table

References


"
Category:Number theoretic algorithms Category:Computer algebra Category:Logarithms



J. Pollard, Monte Carlo methods for index computation mod p, Mathematics of Computation, Volume 32, 1978↩
J. M. Pollard, Kangaroos, Monopoly and Discrete Logarithms, Journal of Cryptology, Volume 13, pp 437-447, 2000↩
T. J. Dawson, Kangaroos, Scientific American, August 1977, pp. 78-89↩
http://sites.google.com/site/jmptidcott2/↩




