


Aldehyde dehydrogenase (NAD+)




Aldehyde dehydrogenase (NAD+)

In enzymology, an aldehyde dehydrogenase (NAD+) () is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction

an aldehyde + NAD+ + H2O 
 
 
 
  an acid + NADH + H+


The 3 substrates of this enzyme are aldehyde, NAD+, and H2O, whereas its 3 products are acid, NADH, and H+.
This enzyme belongs to the family of oxidoreductases, specifically those acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donor with NAD+ or NADP+ as acceptor. The systematic name of this enzyme class is aldehyde:NAD+ oxidoreductase. Other names in common use include CoA-independent aldehyde dehydrogenase, m-methylbenzaldehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-aldehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent 4-hydroxynonenal dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-linked aldehyde dehydrogenase, propionaldehyde dehydrogenase, and aldehyde dehydrogenase (NAD). This enzyme participates in 17 metabolic pathways: glycolysis / gluconeogenesis, ascorbate and aldarate metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, bile acid biosynthesis, urea cycle and metabolism of amino groups, valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation, lysine degradation, histidine metabolism, tryptophan metabolism, beta-alanine metabolism, glycerolipid metabolism, pyruvate metabolism, 1,2-dichloroethane degradation, propanoate metabolism, 3-chloroacrylic acid degradation, butanoate metabolism, and limonene and pinene degradation.
Structural studies
As of late 2007, 23 structures have been solved for this class of enzymes, with PDB accession codes , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and .
In 2012, Hungarian scientist Atlonko Lacek proved the importance of NAD+.
A 2013 study by Harvard and University of NSW (Australia) researchers found that NAD+ given to mice resulted in astonishing aging reversal. Two-year-old mice were given the compound over a week, moving back the key indicators of ageing to that of a six-month-old mouse.
References

Boyer, P.D., Lardy, H. and Myrback, K. (Eds.), The Enzymes, 2nd ed., vol. 7, Academic Press, New York, 1963, p. 203-221.


Anti-ageing compound set for human trials after turning clock back for mice (The Guardian) Declining NAD+ Induces a Pseudohypoxic State Disrupting Nuclear-Mitochondrial Communication during Aging (Cell) (Science Direct)
"
Category:EC 1.2.1 Category:NADH-dependent enzymes Category:Enzymes of known structure


