


Absorbing element




Absorbing element

In mathematics, an absorbing element is a special type of element of a set with respect to a binary operation on that set. The result of combining an absorbing element with any element of the set is the absorbing element itself. In semigroup theory, the absorbing element is called a zero element12 because there is no risk of confusion with  other notions of zero. In this article the two notions are synonymous. An absorbing element may also be called an annihilating element.
Definition
Formally, let (S, ∘) be a set S with a closed binary operation ∘ on it (known as a magma). A zero element is an element z such that for all s in S, z∘s=s∘z=z. A refinement3 are the notions of left zero, where one requires only that z∘s=z, and right zero, where s∘z=z.
Absorbing elements are particularly interesting for semigroups, especially the multiplicative semigroup of a semiring. In the case of a semiring with 0, the definition of an absorbing element is sometimes relaxed so that it is not required to absorb 0; otherwise, 0 would be the only absorbing element.4
Properties

If a magma has both a left zero 
 
 
 
  and a right zero 
 
 
 
 , then it has a zero, since 
 
 
 
 .
If a magma has a zero element, then the zero element is unique.

Examples

The most well known example of an absorbing element in algebra is multiplication, where any number multiplied by zero equals zero. Zero is thus an absorbing element.
Floating point arithmetics as defined in IEEE-754 standard contains a special value called Not-a-Number ("NaN"). It is an absorbing element for every operation; i.e., x + NaN = NaN + x = NaN, x − NaN = NaN − x = NaN etc.
The set of binary relations over a set X, together with the composition of relations forms a monoid with zero, where the zero element is the empty relation (empty set).
The closed interval H=[0, 1] with x∘y=min(x,y) is also a monoid with zero, and the zero element is 0.
More examples:





Set

Operation

Absorber





Real numbers

· (multiplication)

0



Nonnegative integers

greatest common divisor

1



n-by-n square matrices

· (multiplication)

Matrix of all zeroes



Extended real numbers

minimum/infimum

−∞



Extended real numbers

maximum/supremum

+∞



Sets

∩ (intersection)

{ } (empty set)



Subsets of a set M

∪ (union)

M



Boolean logic

∧ (logical and)

⊥ (falsity)



Boolean logic

∨ (logical or)

⊤ (truth)



See also

Identity element
Null semigroup

Notes
References


M. Kilp, U. Knauer, A.V. Mikhalev, Monoids, Acts and Categories with Applications to Wreath Products and Graphs, De Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics vol. 29, Walter de Gruyter, 2000, ISBN 3-11-015248-7.


External links

Absorbing element at PlanetMath

__NOTOC__"
Category:Semigroup theory *Absorbing element



J.M. Howie, p. 2-3
M. Kilp, U. Knauer, A.V. Mikhalev p. 14-15

J.S. Golan p. 67




