


Gromov product




Gromov product

In mathematics, the Gromov product is a concept in the theory of metric spaces named after the mathematician Mikhail Gromov. The Gromov product can also be used to define δ-hyperbolic metric spaces in the sense of Gromov.
Definition
Let (X, d) be a metric space and let x, y, z ∈ X. Then the Gromov product of y and z at x, denoted (y, z)x, is defined by



Motivation
Given three points x, y, z in the metric space X, by the triangle inequality there exist non negative numbers a, b, c such that 
 
 
 
 . Then the Gromov products are 
 
 
 
 . In the case that the points x, y, z are the outer nodes of a tripod then these Gromov products are the lengths of the edges.
(Figure)
A tripod with edges of lengths a, b, c. The distance form node x to node y is a+b. The Gromov product (y, z)x equals a.

In Euclidean space, the Gromov product (y, z)x equals the distance between x and the point where the inscribed circle of the triangle xyz touches the edge xy.
Properties

The Gromov product is symmetric: (y, z)x = (z, y)x.


The Gromov product degenerates at the endpoints: (y, z)y = (y, z)z = 0.


For any points p, q, x, y and z,


















Points at infinity
Consider hyperbolic space Hn. Fix a base point p and let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two distinct points at infinity. Then the limit








exists and is finite, and therefore can be considered as a generalized Gromov product. It is actually given by the formula








where 
 
 
 
  is the angle between the geodesic rays 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .1
δ-hyperbolic spaces and divergence of geodesics
The Gromov product can be used to define δ-hyperbolic spaces in the sense of Gromov.: (X, d) is said to be δ-hyperbolic if, for all p, x, y and z in X,








In this case. Gromov product measures how long geodesics remain close together. Namely, if x, y and z are three points of a δ-hyperbolic metric space then the initial segments of length (y, z)x of geodesics from x to y and x to z are no further than 2δ apart (in the sense of the Hausdorff distance between closed sets).
References




"
Category:Metric geometry








