


Elastic instability




Elastic instability

(Figure)
Elastic instability of a rigid beam supported by an angular spring.

Elastic instability is a form of instability occurring in elastic systems, such as buckling of beams and plates subject to large compressive loads.
Single degree of freedom-systems
Consider as a simple example a rigid beam of length L, hinged in one end and free in the other, and having an angular spring attached to the hinged end. The beam is loaded in the free end by a force F acting in the compressive axial direction of the beam, see the figure to the right.
Moment equilibrium condition
Assuming a clockwise angular deflection 
 
 
 
 , the clockwise moment exerted by the force becomes 
 
 
 
 . The moment equilibrium equation is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the spring constant of the angular spring (Nm/radian). Assuming 
 
 
 
  is small enough, implementing the Taylor expansion of the sine function and keeping the two first terms yields



which has three solutions, the trivial 
 
 
 
 , and



which is imaginary (i.e. not physical) for 
 
 
 
  and real otherwise. This implies that for small compressive forces, the only equilibrium state is given by 
 
 
 
 , while if the force exceeds the value 
 
 
 
  there is suddenly another mode of deformation possible.
Energy method
The same result can be obtained by considering energy relations. The energy stored in the angular spring is



and the work done by the force is simply the force multiplied by the vertical displacement of the beam end, which is 
 
 
 
 . Thus,



The energy equilibrium condition 
 
 
 
  now yields 
 
 
 
  as before (besides from the trivial 
 
 
 
 ).
Stability of the solutions
Any solution 
 
 
 
  is stable iff a small change in the deformation angle 
 
 
 
  results in a reaction moment trying to restore the original angle of deformation. The net clockwise moment acting on the beam is



An infinitesimal clockwise change of the deformation angle 
 
 
 
  results in a moment



which can be rewritten as



since 
 
 
 
  due to the moment equilibrium condition. Now, a solution 
 
 
 
  is stable iff a clockwise change 
 
 
 
  results in a negative change of moment 
 
 
 
  and vice versa. Thus, the condition for stability becomes



The solution 
 
 
 
  is stable only for 
 
 
 
 , which is expected. By expanding the cosine term in the equation, the approximate stability condition is obtained:



for 
 
 
 
 , which the two other solutions satisfy. Hence, these solutions are stable.
Multiple degrees of freedom-systems
(Figure)
Elastic instability, 2 degrees of freedom

By attaching another rigid beam to the original system by means of an angular spring a two degrees of freedom-system is obtained. Assume for simplicity that the beam lengths and angular springs are equal. The equilibrium conditions become




where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the angles of the two beams. Linearizing by assuming these angles are small yields



The non-trivial solutions to the system is obtained by finding the roots of the determinant of the system matrix, i.e. for



Thus, for the two degrees of freedom-system there are two critical values for the applied force F. These correspond to two different modes of deformation which can be computed from the nullspace of the system matrix. Dividing the equations by 
 
 
 
  yields



For the lower critical force the ratio is positive and the two beams deflect in the same direction while for the higher force they form a "banana" shape. These two states of deformation represent the buckling mode shapes of the system.
See also

Buckling
Cavitation (elastomers)
Drucker stability

Further reading

Theory of elastic stability, S. Timoshenko and J. Gere

"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Structural analysis Category:Mechanics


