


Oscillator strength




Oscillator strength
In spectroscopy, '''oscillator strength''' is a dimensionless quantity that expresses the probability of [
 [Absorption (electromagnetic radiation)|absorption]] or emission of electromagnetic radiation in transitions between energy levels of an atom or molecule.123
Theory
An atom or a molecule can absorb light and undergo a transition from one quantum state to another.
The oscillator strength 
 
 
 
 
  of a transition from a lower state 
 
 
 
  to an upper state 
 
 
 
  may be defined by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the mass of an electron and 
 
 
 
  is the reduced Planck constant. The quantum states

 
  1,2, are assumed to have several degenerate sub-states, which are labeled by 
 
 
 
 . "Degenerate" means that they all have the same energy 
 
 
 
 . The operator 
 
 
 
  is the sum of the x-coordinates 
 
 
 
  of all 
 
 
 
  electrons in the system, etc.:


 
  The oscillator strength is the same for each sub-state 
 
 
 
 .
Thomas–Reiche–Kuhn sum rule
To make equations of the previous section applicable to the states belonging to the continuum spectrum, they should be rewritten in terms of matrix elements of the momentum 
 
 
 
 . In absence of magnetic field, the Hamiltonian can be written as 
 
 
 
 , and calculating a commutator 
 
 
 
  in the basis of eigenfunctions of 
 
 
 
  results in the relation between matrix elements


 
 .
Next, calculating matrix elements of a commutator 
 
 
 
  in the same basis and eliminating matrix elements of 
 
 
 
 , we arrive at



Because 
 
 
 
 , the above expression results in a sum rule



where 
 
 
 
  are oscillator strengths for quantum transitions between the states 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This is the Thomas-Reiche-Kuhn sum rule, and the term with 
 
 
 
  has been omitted because in confined systems such as atoms or molecules the diagonal matrix element 
 
 
 
  due to the time inversion symmetry of the Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 . Excluding this term eliminates divergency because of the vanishing denominator.4
Sum rule and electron effective mass in crystals
In crystals, energy spectrum of electrons has a band structure

 
 . Near the minimum of an isotropic energy band, electron energy can be expanded in powers of 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the electron effective mass. It can be shown5 that it satisfies the equation



Here the sum runs over all bands with 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, the ratio 
 
 
 
  of the free electron mass 
 
 
 
  to its effective mass 
 
 
 
  in a crystal can be considered as the oscillator strength for the transition of an electron from the quantum state at the bottom of the 
 
 
 
  band into the same state.
See also

Atomic spectral line
Sum rule in quantum mechanics
Electronic band structure

References
"
Category:Spectroscopy Category:Atoms Category:Crystals



↩
↩
↩
↩
J. M. Luttinger and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 97, 869 (1955)↩




