   O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase      O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase   O 6 -alkylguanine DNA alkyltransferase (also known as AGT, MGMT or AGAT) is a protein that in humans is encoded by the O 6 -methylguanine DNA methyltransferase ( MGMT ) gene . 1 2 O 6 -methylguanine DNA methyltransferase is crucial for genome stability. It repairs the naturally occurring mutagenic DNA lesion O 6 -methylguanine back to guanine and prevents mismatch and errors during DNA replication and transcription . Accordingly, loss of MGMT increases the carcinogenic risk in mice after exposure to alkylating agents. 3 The two bacterial isozymes are Ada and Ogt .  Function and mechanism  Although alkylating  mutagens preferentially modify the guanine base at the N7 position, O 6 -alkyl-guanine is a major carcinogenic lesion in DNA . This DNA adduct is removed by the repair protein O 6 -alkylguanine DNA alkyltransferase through a SN2 reaction mechanism. This protein is not a true enzyme since it removes the alkyl group from the lesion in a stoichiometric reaction and the active enzyme is not regenerated after it is alkylated (referred to as suicide enzyme). The methyl-acceptor residue in the protein is a cysteine . 4       →  MGMT      MGMT  normal-→    \mathrm{\ \xrightarrow{MGMT}}       Demethylation of 6-O-Methylguanosine to Guanosine      Clinical significance  Methylation of the gene's promoter may play a significant role in carcinogenesis . In patients with glioblastoma multiforme , a severe type of brain tumor, the methylation state of the MGMT gene determined whether tumor cells would be responsive to temozolomide ; if the promoter was methylated, temozolomide was more effective. 5 On a clinical level, this translates into a prolonged survival of glioblastoma patients with a methylated MGMT promoter. In addition, MGMT methylation can be used to predict patient survival in clinical prediction models. 6 For testing of the MGMT promoter methylation status in the clinical setting, DNA-based methods such as methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MS-PCR) or pyrosequencing are preferred over immunohistochemical or RNA- based assays. 7  MGMT has also been shown to be a useful tool increasing gene therapy efficiency. By using a two component vector consisting of a transgene of interest and MGMT , in vivo drug selection can be utilized to select for successfully transduced cells. 8  Interactions  O 6 -methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase has been shown to interact with estrogen receptor alpha . 9  See also   Ada  Ogt  6-O-Methylguanine  DNA methyltransferase  Methyltransferase   References  Further reading     "     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     