


Slope deflection method




Slope deflection method

The slope deflection method is a structural analysis method for beams and frames introduced in 1914 by George A. Maney.1 The slope deflection method was widely used for more than a decade until the moment distribution method was developed.
Introduction
By forming slope deflection equations and applying joint and shear equilibrium conditions, the rotation angles (or the slope angles) are calculated. Substituting them back into the slope deflection equations, member end moments are readily determined.
Slope deflection equations
The slope deflection equations can also be written using the stiffness factor 
 
 
 
  and the chord rotation 
 
 
 
 :
Derivation of slope deflection equations
When a simple beam of length 
 
 
 
  and flexural rigidity 
 
 
 
  is loaded at each end with clockwise moments 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , member end rotations occur in the same direction. These rotation angles can be calculated using the unit dummy force method or Darcy's Law.






Rearranging these equations, the slope deflection equations are derived.
Equilibrium conditions
Joint equilibrium
Joint equilibrium conditions imply that each joint with a degree of freedom should have no unbalanced moments i.e. be in equilibrium. Therefore,


 
  Here, 
 
 
 
  are the member end moments, 
 
 
 
  are the fixed end moments, and 
 
 
 
  are the external moments directly applied at the joint.
Shear equilibrium
When there are chord rotations in a frame, additional equilibrium conditions, namely the shear equilibrium conditions need to be taken into account.
Example
 The statically indeterminate beam shown in the figure is to be analysed.

Members AB, BC, CD have the same length 
 
 
 
 .
Flexural rigidities are EI, 2EI, EI respectively.
Concentrated load of magnitude 
 
 
 
  acts at a distance 
 
 
 
  from the support A.
Uniform load of intensity 
 
 
 
  acts on BC.
Member CD is loaded at its midspan with a concentrated load of magnitude 
 
 
 
 .

In the following calculations, clockwise moments and rotations are positive.
Degrees of freedom
Rotation angles 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , of joints A, B, C, respectively are taken as the unknowns. There are no chord rotations due to other causes including support settlement.
Fixed end moments
Fixed end moments are:


















Slope deflection equations
The slope deflection equations are constructed as follows:


















Joint equilibrium equations
Joints A, B, C should suffice the equilibrium condition. Therefore









Rotation angles
The rotation angles are calculated from simultaneous equations above.









Member end moments
Substitution of these values back into the slope deflection equations yields the member end moments (in kNm):


















See also

Beam theory

Notes
References





"
Category:Structural analysis



↩




