


Padua points




Padua points

In polynomial interpolation of two variables, the Padua points are the first known example (and up to now the only one) of a unisolvent point set (that is, the interpolating polynomial is unique) with minimal growth of their Lebesgue constant, proven to be O(log2 n) .1 Their name is due to the University of Padua, where they were originally discovered.2
The points are defined in the domain

 
 . It is possible to use the points with four orientations, obtained with subsequent 90-degree rotations: this way we get four different families of Padua points.
The four families
 
We can see the Padua point as a "sampling" of a parametric curve, called generating curve, which is slightly different for each of the four families, so that the points for interpolation degree 
 
 
 
  and family 
 
 
 
  can be defined as



Actually, the Padua points lie exactly on the self-intersections of the curve, and on the intersections of the curve with the boundaries of the square 
 
 
 
 . The cardinality of the set 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, for each family of Padua points, two points lie on consecutive vertices of the square 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  points lie on the edges of the square, and the remaining points lie on the self-intersections of the generating curve inside the square.34
The four generating curves are closed parametric curves in the interval 
 
 
 
 , and are a special case of Lissajous curves.
The first family
The generating curve of Padua points of the first family is



If we sample it as written above, we have:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 
  is even or odd but 
 
 
 
  is even, 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both odd
with



From this follows that the Padua points of first family will have two vertices on the bottom if 
 
 
 
  is even, or on the left if 
 
 
 
  is odd.
The second family
The generating curve of Padua points of the second family is



which leads to have vertices on the left if 
 
 
 
  is even and on the bottom if 
 
 
 
  is odd.
The third family
The generating curve of Padua points of the third family is



which leads to have vertices on the top if 
 
 
 
  is even and on the right if 
 
 
 
  is odd.
The fourth family
The generating curve of Padua points of the fourth family is



which leads to have vertices on the right if 
 
 
 
  is even and on the top if 
 
 
 
  is odd.
The interpolation formula
The explicit representation of their fundamental Lagrange polynomial is based on the reproducing kernel

 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , of the space

 
  equipped with the inner product



defined by



with 
 
 
 
  representing the normalized Chebyshev polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  (that is, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the classical Chebyshev polynomial of first kind of degree 
 
 
 
 ).5 For the four families of Padua points, which we may denote by 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , the interpolation formula of order 
 
 
 
  of the function 
 
 
 
  on the generic target point 
 
 
 
  is then



where 
 
 
 
  is the fundamental Lagrange polynomial



The weights 
 
 
 
  are defined as



References


External links

List of publications related to the Padua points and some interpolation software.

"
Category:Interpolation



↩
↩
↩
↩





