   Nitrous-oxide reductase      Nitrous-oxide reductase   In enzymology , a nitrous oxide reductase also known as nitrogen:acceptor oxidoreductase (N 2 O-forming) is an enzyme that catalyzes the final step in bacterial denitrification , the reduction of nitrous oxide to dinitrogen . 1 2   N 2 O + 2 reduced cytochome c    ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons   N 2 + H 2 O + 2 cytochrome c    It plays a critical role in preventing release of a potent greenhouse gas into the atmosphere.  Function  N 2 O is an inorganic metabolite of the prokaryotic cell during denitrification. Thus, denitrifiers comprise the principal group of N 2 O producers, with roles played also by nitrifiers, methanotrophic bacteria , and fungi . Among them, only denitrifying prokaryotes have the ability to convert N 2 O to N 2 . 3 Conversion of N 2 O into N 2 is the last step of a complete nitrate denitrification process and is an autonomous form of respiration. N 2 O is generated in the denitrifying cell by the activity of respiratory NO reductase . 4  Structure  Nitrous-oxide reductase is a homodimer that is located in the bacterial periplasm. X-ray structures of the enzymes from Pseudomonas nautica and Paracoccus denitrificans have revealed that each subunit (MW=65 kDa) is organized into two domains. 5 One cupredoxin-like domain contains a binuclear copper protein known as Cu A .  The second domain comprises a 7-bladed propeller of β-sheets that contains the catalytic site called Cu Z , which is a tetranuclear copper-sulfide cluster . 6 The distance between the Cu A and Cu Z centers within a single subunit is greater than 30Å, a distance that precludes physiologically relevant rates of intra-subunit electron transfer . However, the two subunits are orientated "head to tail" such that the Cu A center in one subunit lies only 10 Å from the Cu Z center in the second ensuring that pairs of redox centers in opposite subunits form the catalytically competent unit. 7 The Cu A center can undergo a one-electron redox change and hence has a function similar to that in the well-known aa 3 -type cytochrome c oxidases () where it serves to receive an electron from soluble cytochromes c . 8  Inhibitors  Acetylene is the most specific inhibitor of nitrous-oxide reductase . 9 Other inhibitors include azide anion, 10 thiocyanate, carbon monoxide, iodide, and cyanide. 11  References  "  Category:EC 1.7.99  Category:Copper enzymes  Category:Enzymes of known structure     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  Pomowski, A., Zumft, W. G., Kroneck, P. M. H., Einsle, O., "N2O binding at a [lsqb]4Cu:2S copper-sulphur cluster in nitrous oxide reductase", Nature 2011, 477, 234. ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     