


Portal:Chemistry/Useful equations and links




Portal:Chemistry/Useful equations and links

Note: I am developing this page as a study aid for myself. I may later find a home for it at the chemistry portal or at Wikibooks or Wikiversity. Shalom (Hello • Peace) 00:18, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
Chemical elements

Periodic table
IUPAC nomenclature for organic and inorganic compounds
Stoichiometry

Ions

Ionization energy
Ionic radius


Gases

Main article: Gas laws


Ideal gas law

Combined gas law





Ideal gas law



 
 , where

P is the pressure (SI unit: pascal)
 
V is the volume (SI unit: cubic metre)
 
n is the number of moles of gas

R is the ideal gas constant (SI: 8.3145 J/(mol K))
 
T is the thermodynamic temperature (SI unit: kelvin).
 

An equivalent formulation of this law is:



where

N is the number of molecules
 
k is the Boltzmann constant.
 

Graham's Law

Graham's law of effusion




where:

Rate1 is the rate of effusion of the first gas.
 
Rate2 is the rate of effusion for the second gas.
 
M1 is the molar mass of gas 1
 
M2 is the molar mass of gas 2.
 

Kinetic theory

Kinetic theory of gases




Also, as Nm is the total mass of the gas, and mass divided by volume is density



where ρ is the density of the gas.
This result is interesting and significant, because it relates pressure, a macroscopic property, to the average (translational) kinetic energy per molecule (1/2mvrms2), which is a microscopic property.
The root mean square velocity of a molecule is



with v in m/s, T in kelvins, and R is the gas constant. The molar mass is given as kg/mol.
Dalton's Law

Dalton's law of partial pressures

The pressure of a mixture of gases can be defined as the summation


 
        or      
 
 

 where 
 
 
 
  represent the partial pressure of each component.
It is assumed that the gases do not react with each other.



where 
 
 
 
  the mole fraction of the i-the component in the total mixture of m components .
Van der Waals equation

Van der Waals equation of state



 
 , where

p is the pressure of the fluid
 
V is the total volume of the container containing the fluid
 
a is a measure of the attraction between the particles 
 
 

b is the volume excluded by a mole of particles 
 
 

n is the number of moles
 
R is the gas constant, 
 
 


Solutions

Solution (chemistry)
Concentration

Molarity (moles per liter)
Molality (moles of solute per mass of solvent)
Normality (chemistry) (equivalents in a chemical reaction)

Acids and bases

Bronsted-Lowry acid-base theory
Lewis acids and bases

pH
Distribution coefficient, also called the partition coefficient

The partition coefficient is the ratio of concentrations of un-ionized compound between the two solutions. To measure the partition coefficient of ionizable solutes, the pH of the aqueous phase is adjusted such that the predominant form of the compound is un-ionized. The logarithm of the ratio of the concentrations of the un-ionized solute in the solvents is called log P:


:* 
 
 


Equilibrium

Chemical equilibrium

Equilibrium constant (Keq)
Acid dissociation constant (Ka)
Solubility product (Ksp)


Electrochemistry

Electrochemistry
Electrolysis
Galvanic cell
Half reaction
Redox reaction

Oxidation
Reduction

Oxidizing agent
Reducing agent

Isomerism

Isomerism
cis-trans isomerism
structural isomerism
diastereomer
linkage isomer

Chirality

Chirality (chemistry)
Cahn Ingold Prelog priority rules for R/S isomerism
Enantiomer
Axial chirality

Analytical chemistry

Primary standard

Spectroscopy

IR spectroscopy
UV-vis spectroscopy
NMR spectroscopy

Proton NMR
Carbon-13 NMR


Nuclear chemistry

Nuclear chemistry
Nuclear decay
Alpha particle
Beta particle

Radiocarbon dating

Carbon-14 dating

The radioactive decay of carbon-14 follows an exponential decay. A quantity is said to be subject to exponential decay if it decreases at a rate proportional to its value. Symbolically, this can be expressed as the following differential equation, where N is the quantity and λ is a positive number called the decay constant:



The solution to this equation is:


 
 , where, for a given sample of carbonaceous matter:


 
  = number of radiocarbon atoms at 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the origin of the disintegration time,


 
  = number of radiocarbon atoms remaining after radioactive decay during the time

 
 ,


 
 radiocarbon decay or disintegration constant.

Two related times can be defined:
 
mean- or average-life: mean or average time each radiocarbon atom spends in a given sample until it decays.
half-life: time lapsed for half the number of radiocarbon atoms in a given sample, to decay,



It can be shown that:


 
  = 
 
 
 
  = radiocarbon mean- or average-life = 8033 years (Libby value)


 
  = 
 
 
 
  = radiocarbon half-life = 5568 years (Libby value)
Notice that dates are customarily given in years BP which implies t(BP) = -t because the time arrow for dates runs in reverse direction from the time arrow for the corresponding ages. From these considerations and the above equation, it results:
For a raw radiocarbon date:


 
  and for a raw radiocarbon age:



Thermodynamics
Laws of thermodynamics

Laws of thermodynamics

:* Zeroth law of thermodynamics
:*
 
 

:* First law of thermodynamics
:*
 
 

:* Second law of thermodynamics
:*
 
 

:* Third law of thermodynamics
:*
 
 

Identities

Work (thermodynamics)

Chemical thermodynamics studies PV work, which occurs when the volume of a fluid changes. PV work is represented by the following differential equation:



where:

W = work done on the system
P = external pressure
V = volume

Therefore, we have:




Entropy

Entropy (classical thermodynamics)


Clausius defined the change in entropy ds of a thermodynamic system, during a reversible process, as


 
  where

δQ is a small amount of heat introduced to the system,
 
T is a constant absolute temperature


Note that the small amount 
 
 
 
  of energy transferred by heating is denoted by 
 
 
 
  rather than 
 
 
 
 , because Q is not a state function while the entropy is.

Enthalpy

The function H was introduced by the Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in early 20th century in the following form:



where E represents the energy of the system. In the absence of an external field, the enthalpy may be defined, as it is generally known, by:




Internal energy

The internal energy is essentially defined by the first law of thermodynamics which states that energy is conserved:



where

ΔU is the change in internal energy of a system during a process.
 


Q is heat added to a system (measured in joules in SI); that is, a positive value for Q represents heat flow into a system while a negative value denotes heat flow out of a system.
 


W is the mechanical work done on a system (measured in joules in SI)
 


''W' '' is energy added by all other processes
 

Although the internal energy is not exactly measurable, it may be expressed in terms of other similarly unmeasurable quantities. Using the above two equations in the first law of thermodynamics to construct one possible expression for the internal energy of a closed system gives:




Gibbs free energy



 
  for constant temperature









and rearranging gives









which relates the electrical potential of a reaction to the equilibrium coefficient for that reaction.
where
ΔG = change in Gibbs free energy, ΔH = change in enthalpy, T = absolute temperature, ΔS = change in entropy, R = gas constant, ln = natural logarithm, K = equilibrium constant, Q = reaction quotient, n = number of electrons per mole product, F = Faraday constant (coulombs per mole), and ΔE = electrical potential of the reaction. Moreover, we also have:






which relates the equilibrium constant with Gibbs free energy.

Helmholtz free energy

The Helmholtz energy is defined as:


1
From the first law of thermodynamics we have:



where 
 
 
 
  is the internal energy, 
 
 
 
  is the energy added by heating and 
 
 
 
  is the work done by the system. From the second law of thermodynamics, for a reversible process we may say that 
 
 
 
 . Differentiating the expression for 
 
 
 
   we have:









Maxwell relations
The four most common Maxwell relations are the equalities of the second derivatives of each of the four thermodynamic potentials, with respect to their thermal natural variable (temperature T  or entropy S ) and their mechanical natural variable (pressure p  or volume V ):












where the potentials as functions of their natural thermal and mechanical variables are:


 
  - The internal energy


 
  - The Enthalpy


 
  - The Helmholtz free energy


 
  - The Gibbs free energy
Boltzmann distribution

Boltzmann distribution

In physics, the Boltzmann distribution predicts the distribution function for the fractional number of particles Ni / N occupying a set of states i which each respectively possess energy Ei:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature (assumed to be a sharply well-defined quantity), 
 
 
 
  is the degeneracy, or number of states having energy 
 
 
 
 , N is the total number of particles:



and Z(T) is called the partition function, which can be seen to be equal to



Chemical kinetics

Chemical kinetics
Reaction rate
Rate law
Rate equation






Zero Order

First Order

Second Order

n-th Order





Rate Law



















Integrated Rate Law















[Except first order]



Units of Rate Constant 
 
 




















Linear Plot to determine 
 
 
















[Except first order]



Half-life















[Except first order]




Half-life

It can be shown that, for exponential decay, the half-life 
 
 
 
  obeys this relation:


 
  where
:* 
 
 
 
  is the natural logarithm of 2 (approximately 0.693), and
:* λ is the decay constant, a positive constant used to describe the rate of exponential decay.
The half-life is related to the mean lifetime τ by the following relation:




Activation energy
Arrhenius equation

In short, the Arrhenius equation is an expression that shows the dependence of the rate constant k of chemical reactions on the temperature T (in Kelvin) and activation energy Ea, as shown below:2



where A is the pre-exponential factor or simply the prefactor and R is the gas constant.
Chromatography

Chromatography
van Deemter equation

The Van Deemter equation for the plate height (H) is:



Where

A = Eddy-diffusion
B = Longitudinal diffusion
C = mass transfer kinetics of the analyte between mobile and stationary phase
u = Linear Velocity.

A is equal to the multiple paths taken by the chemical compound, in open tubular capillaries this term will be zero as there are no multiple paths. The multiple paths occur in packed columns where several routes through the column packing, which results in band spreading.
B/u is equal to the longitudinal diffusion of the particles of the compound.
Cu is equal to the equilibration point. In a column, there is an interaction between the mobile and stationary phases, Cu accounts for this.
Electronic transitions

Molecular electronic transition
Selection rules for infrared (vibrational) spectroscopy
Spectral lines
Rydberg formula




Where


 
  is the wavelength of the light emitted in vacuum,


 
  is the Rydberg constant for hydrogen,


 
  and 
 
 
 
  are integers such that 
 
 
 
 ,
By setting 
 
 
 
  to 1 and letting 
 
 
 
  run from 2 to infinity, the spectral lines known as the Lyman series converging to 91nm are obtained, in the same manner:













Name


Converge toward




1







Lyman series


91.13 nm




2







Balmer series


364.51 nm




3







Paschen series


820.14 nm




4







Brackett series


1458.03 nm




5







Pfund series


2278.17 nm




6







Humphreys series


3280.56 nm



The Lyman series is in the ultraviolet while the Balmer series is in the visible and the Paschen, Brackett, Pfund, and Humphreys series are in the infrared.
Quantum mechanics

Quantum mechanics
Eigenfunction and eigenvalue
Quantum mechanical operator
Schrodinger equation
Particle in a box in three dimensions:

The same separation of variables technique can be applied to the three-dimensional case to give the energy eigenfunctions:





 
  with




Rigid rotor

Other

Oxidation state
Isoelectronicity
Crystal structure
Bond enthalpy or bond energy
Complex (chemistry)

low spin and high spin

Dipole moment and dielectric constant
Melting point and boiling point
Jahn-Teller effect
Huckel's rule
Ziegler-Natta catalyst
Lindemann mechanism and the steady-state approximation
Chain reaction
Photoelectric effect
Adenosine diphosphate and adenosine triphosphate
Octet rule and 18 electron rule
Semiconductors

n-type semiconductor
p-type semiconductor

Photochemistry
Franck-Condon principle
Hydrogen bonding

Molecules

glyceride
peptide
nucleotide
saccharide
terpene"
 




Levine, Ira. N. (1978). "Physical Chemistry" McGraw Hill: University of Brooklyn
Arrhenius activation energy - IUPAC Goldbook definition




