   DTDP-4-dehydrorhamnose 3,5-epimerase      DTDP-4-dehydrorhamnose 3,5-epimerase   In enzymology , a dTDP-4-dehydrorhamnose 3,5-epimerase () is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction   dTDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-D-glucose   ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons   dTDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-L-mannose   Hence, this enzyme has one substrate , dTDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-D-glucose , and one product , dTDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-L-mannose .  This enzyme belongs to the family of isomerases , specifically those racemases and epimerases acting on carbohydrates and derivatives. The systematic name of this enzyme class is dTDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-D-glucose 3,5-epimerase . Other names in common use include dTDP-L-rhamnose synthetase , dTDP-L-rhamnose synthetase , thymidine diphospho-4-ketorhamnose 3,5-epimerase , TDP-4-ketorhamnose 3,5-epimerase , dTDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-D-glucose 3,5-epimerase , and TDP-4-keto-L-rhamnose-3,5-epimerase . This enzyme participates in 3 metabolic pathways : nucleotide sugars metabolism , streptomycin biosynthesis , and polyketide sugar unit biosynthesis .  Structural studies  The crystal structure of RmlC from Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum was determined in the presence and absence of a substrate  analogue . RmlC is a homodimer comprising a central jelly roll motif, which extends in two directions into longer beta-sheets . Binding of dTDP is stabilised by ionic interactions to the phosphate group and by a combination of ionic and hydrophobic interactions with the base. The active site , which is located in the centre of the jelly roll, is formed by residues that are conserved in all known RmlC sequence  homologues . The active site is lined with a number of charged residues and a number of residues with hydrogen-bonding potentials, which together comprise a potential network for substrate binding and catalysis . The active site is also lined with aromatic residues which provide favourable environments for the base moiety of dTDP and potentially for the sugar moiety of the substrate . 1  As of late 2007, 14 structures have been solved for this class of enzymes, with PDB accession codes , , , , , , , , , , , , , and .  References  Further reading      "  Category:EC 5.1.3  Category:Enzymes of known structure     ↩     