


Spacetime topology




Spacetime topology

Spacetime topology is the topological structure of spacetime, a topic studied primarily in general relativity. This physical theory models gravitation as a Lorentzian manifold (a spacetime) and the concepts of topology thus become important in analysing local as well as global aspects of spacetime. The study of spacetime topology is especially important in physical cosmology.
Types of topology
There are two main types of topology for a spacetime 
 
 
 
 :
Manifold topology
As with any manifold, a spacetime possesses a natural manifold topology. Here the open sets are the image of open sets in 
 
 
 
 .
Path or Zeeman topology
Definition:1 The topology 
 
 
 
  in which a subset 
 
 
 
  is open if for every timelike curve

 
  there is a set 
 
 
 
  in the manifold topology such that 
 
 
 
 .
It is the finest topology which induces the same topology as 
 
 
 
  does on timelike curves.
Properties
Strictly finer than the manifold topology. It is therefore Hausdorff, separable but not locally compact.
A base for the topology is sets of the form 
 
 
 
  for some point 
 
 
 
  and some convex normal neighbourhood 
 
 
 
 .
(
 
 
 
  denote the chronological past and future).
Alexandrov topology
The Alexandrov topology on spacetime, is the coarsest topology such that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are open for all subsets 
 
 
 
 .
Here the base of open sets for the topology are sets of the form 
 
 
 
  for some points 
 
 
 
 .
This topology coincides with the manifold topology if and only if the manifold is strongly causal but in general it is coarser.
Note, that in mathematics, an Alexandrov topology on a partial order is usually taken to be the coarsest topology in which only the upper sets 
 
 
 
  are required to be open. This topology goes back to Pavel Alexandrov. Nowadays, the correct mathematical term for the Alexandrov topology on spacetime (which goes back to Alexandr D. Alexandrov) would be the interval topology, but when Kronheimer and Penrose introduced the term this difference in nomenclature was not as clear, and in physics the term Alexandrov topology remains in use.
See also

Spacetime
Causal structure
Gravitational singularity

References



E. C. Zeeman Causality Implies the Lorentz Group J. Math. Phys. April 1964 Volume 5, Issue 4, pp. 490–493


E. C. Zeeman The Topology of Minkowski Space Topology Volume 6, Issue 2, April 1967, Pages 161-170


S. W. Hawking, A. R. King, P. J. McCarthy A new topology for curved space–time which incorporates the causal, differential, and conformal structures J. Math. Phys. February 1976 Volume 17, Issue 2, pp. 174–181

,
"
Category:General relativity Category:Lorentzian manifolds



Luca Bombelli website↩




