


Nasik magic hypercube




Nasik magic hypercube

A Nasik magic hypercube is a magic hypercube with the added restriction that all possible lines through each cell sum correctly to 
 
 
 
  where S = the magic constant, m = the order and n = the dimension, of the hypercube.
Or, to put it more concisely, all pan-r-agonals sum correctly for r = 1...n.
The above definition is the same as the Hendricks definition of perfect, but different from the Boyer/Trump definition. See Perfect magic cube
Definitions
A Nasik magic cube is a magic cube with the added restriction that all 13m2 possible lines sum correctly to the magic constant. This class of magic cube is commonly called perfect (John Hendricks definition.). See Magic cube classes. However, the term perfect is ambiguous because it is also used for other types of magic cubes. Perfect magic cube demonstrates just one example of this.
 The term nasik would apply to all dimensions of magic hypercubes in which the number of correctly summing paths (lines) through any cell of the hypercube is P = (3n- 1)/2
A pandiagonal magic square then would be a nasik square because 4 magic line pass through each of the m2cells. This was A.H. Frost’s original definition of nasik.
 A nasik magic cube would have 13 magic lines passing through each of its m3 cells. (This cube also contains 9m pandiagonal magic squares of order m.)
 A nasik magic tesseract would have 40 lines passing through each of its m4 cells.
  And so on.
History
In 1866 and 1878, Rev. A. H. Frost coined the term Nasik for the type of magic square we commonly call pandiagonal and often call perfect. He then demonstrated the concept with an order-7 cube we now class as pandiagonal, and an order-8 cube we class as pantriagonal.12
 In another 1878 paper he showed another pandiagonal magic cube and a cube where all 13m lines sum correctly3 i.e. Hendricks perfect.4 He referred to all of these cubes as nasik!
  as a respect to the great Indian Mathematician D R Kaprekar who hails from Deolali in Nasik District in Maharashtra, India. In 1905 Dr. Planck expanded on the nasik idea in his Theory of Paths Nasik. In the introductory to his paper, he wrote; 
In 1917, Dr. Planck wrote again on this subject. 
In 1939, B. Rosser and R. J. Walker published a series of papers on diabolic (perfect) magic squares and cubes. They specifically mentioned that these cubes contained 13m2 correctly summing lines. They also had 3m pandiagonal magic squares parallel to the faces of the cube, and 6m pandiagonal magic squares parallel to the triagonal planes.5
See also

Magic hypercube
Magic cube
Magic cube classes
Perfect magic cube
John R. Hendricks

References
External links

History, definitions, and examples of perfect magic cubes and other dimensions.
An alternative definition of Perfect, with history of recent discoveries
More on this alternative definition.
A Magic Hypercube encyclopedia with a broad range of material
A Unified classification system for hypercubes
An ambitious ongoing work on classifications of magic cubes and tesseracts
A variety of John R. Hendricks material, written under his direction

"
Category:Recreational mathematics Category:Magic squares



Frost, A. H., Invention of Magic Cubes, Quarterly Journal of Mathematics, 7,1866, pp92-102
Frost, A. H., On the General Properties of Nasik Squares, QJM, 15, 1878, pp 34-49
Frost, A. H. On the General Properties of Nasik Cubes, QJM, 15, 1878, pp 93-123
Heinz, H.D., and Hendricks, J.R., Magic Square Lexicon: Illustrated, 2000, 0-9687985-0-0 pp 119-122
Rosser, B. and Walker, R. J., Magic Squares: Published papers and Supplement, 1939. A bound volume at Cornell University, catalogued as QA 165 R82+pt.1-4




