   Multiple-instance learning      Multiple-instance learning   In machine learning , multiple-instance learning (MIL) is a variation on supervised learning . Instead of receiving a set of instances which are individually labeled, the learner receives a set of labeled bags , each containing many instances. In the simple case of multiple-instance binary classification , a bag may be labeled negative if all the instances in it are negative. On the other hand, a bag is labeled positive if there is at least one instance in it which is positive. From a collection of labeled bags, the learner tries to either (i) induce a concept that will label individual instances correctly or (ii) learn how to label bags without inducing the concept.  Take image classification for example in . Given an image, we want to know its target class based on its visual content. For instance, the target class might be "beach", where the image contains both "sand" and "water". In MIL terms, the image is described as a bag     X  =   {   X  1   ,  .  .  ,   X  N   }      fragments  X    fragments  normal-{   subscript  X  1   normal-,  normal-.  normal-.  normal-,   subscript  X  N   normal-}     X=\{X_{1},..,X_{N}\}   , where each    X  i     subscript  X  i    X_{i}   is the feature vector (called instance ) extracted from the corresponding i-th region in the image and N is the total regions (instances) partitioning the image. The bag is labeled positive ("beach") if it contains both "sand" region instances and "water" region instances.  Multiple-instance learning was originally proposed under this name by , but earlier examples of similar research exist, for instance in the work on handwritten  digit  recognition by . Recent reviews of the MIL literature include , which provides an extensive review and comparative study of the different paradigms, and , which provides a thorough review of the different assumptions used by different paradigms in the literature.  Examples of where MIL is applied are:   Molecule activity  Predicting binding sites of Calmodulin binding proteins 1  Predicting function for alternatively spliced isoforms ,  Image classification  Text or document categorization   Numerous researchers have worked on adapting classical classification techniques, such as support vector machines or boosting , to work within the context of multiple-instance learning.  See also   Multi-label classification   References    .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   "  Category:Machine learning     ↩     