


Local flatness




Local flatness

In topology, a branch of mathematics, local flatness is a property of a submanifold in a topological manifold of larger dimension. In the category of topological manifolds, locally flat submanifolds play a role similar to that of embedded submanifolds in the category of smooth manifolds.
Suppose a d dimensional manifold N is embedded into an n dimensional manifold M (where d x \in N, we say N is locally flat at x if there is a neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of x such that the topological pair

 
  is homeomorphic to the pair 
 
 
 
 , with a standard inclusion of 
 
 
 
  as a subspace of 
 
 
 
 . That is, there exists a homeomorphism 
 
 
 
  such that the image of 
 
 
 
  coincides with 
 
 
 
 .
The above definition assumes that, if M has a boundary, x is not a boundary point of M. If x is a point on the boundary of M then the definition is modified as follows. We say that N is locally flat at a boundary point x of M if there is a neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of x such that the topological pair 
 
 
 
  is homeomorphic to the pair 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a standard half-space and 
 
 
 
  is included as a standard subspace of its boundary. In more detail, we can set 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
We call N locally flat in M if N is locally flat at every point. Similarly, a map 
 
 
 
  is called locally flat, even if it is not an embedding, if every x in N has a neighborhood U whose image 
 
 
 
  is locally flat in M.
Local flatness of an embedding implies strong properties not shared by all embeddings. Brown (1962) proved that if d = n − 1, then N is collared; that is, it has a neighborhood which is homeomorphic to N × [0,1] with N itself corresponding to N × 1/2 (if N is in the interior of M) or N × 0 (if N is in the boundary of M).
See also

Neat submanifold

References

Brown, Morton (1962), Locally flat imbeddings of topological manifolds. Annals of Mathematics, Second series, Vol. 75 (1962), pp. 331-341.
Mazur, Barry. On embeddings of spheres. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, Vol. 65 (1959), no. 2, pp. 59-65. http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.bams/1183523034.

"
Category:Topology Category:Geometric topology


