


Timoshenko beam theory




Timoshenko beam theory

 The Timoshenko beam theory was developed by Russian scientist and engineer of Ukrainian ethnicity Stephen Timoshenko early in the 20th century.12 The model takes into account shear deformation and rotational inertia effects, making it suitable for describing the behaviour of short beams, sandwich composite beams or beams subject to high-frequency excitation when the wavelength approaches the thickness of the beam. The resulting equation is of 4th order, but unlike ordinary beam theory - i.e. Euler–Bernoulli beam theory - there is also a second order partial derivative present. Physically, taking into account the added mechanisms of deformation effectively lowers the stiffness of the beam, while the result is a larger deflection under a static load and lower predicted eigenfrequencies for a given set of boundary conditions. The latter effect is more noticeable for higher frequencies as the wavelength becomes shorter, and thus the distance between opposing shear forces decreases. 
If the shear modulus of the beam material approaches infinity - and thus the beam becomes rigid in shear - and if rotational inertia effects are neglected, Timoshenko beam theory converges towards ordinary beam theory.
Quasistatic Timoshenko beam
 In static Timoshenko beam theory without axial effects, the displacements of the beam are assumed to be given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the coordinates of a point in the beam, 
 
 
 
  are the components of the displacement vector in the three coordinate directions, 
 
 
 
  is the angle of rotation of the normal to the mid-surface of the beam, and 
 
 
 
  is the displacement of the mid-surface in the 
 
 
 
 -direction.
The governing equations are the following uncoupled system of ordinary differential equations:



The Timoshenko beam theory for the static case is equivalent to the Euler-Bernoulli theory when the last term above is neglected, an approximation that is valid when


 
  where



 
  is the length of the beam.


 
  is the cross section area.


 
  is the elastic modulus.


 
  is the shear modulus.


 
  is the second moment of area.


 
 , called the Timoshenko shear coefficient, depends on the geometry. Normally, 
 
 
 
  for a rectangular section.

Combining the two equations gives, for a homogeneous beam of constant cross-section,



The bending moment 
 
 
 
  and the shear force 
 
 
 
  in the beam are related to the displacement 
 
 
 
  and the rotation 
 
 
 
 . These relations, for a linear elastic Timoshenko beam, are:









Derivation of quasistatic Timoshenko beam equations





From the kinematic assumptions for a Timoshenko beam, the displacements of the beam are given by


 
  Then, from the strain-displacement relations for small strains, the non-zero strains based on the Timoshenko assumptions are


 
  Since the actual shear strain in the beam is not constant over the cross section we introduce a correction factor 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  The variation in the internal energy of the beam is


 
  Define


 
  Then


 
  Integration by parts, and noting that because of the boundary conditions the variations are zero at the ends of the beam, leads to


 
  The variation in the external work done on the beam by a transverse load 
 
 
 
  per unit length is


 
  Then, for a quasistatic beam, the principle of virtual work gives


 
  The governing equations for the beam are, from the fundamental theorem of variational calculus,


 
  For a linear elastic beam


 
 
  Therefore the governing equations for the beam may be expressed as


 
 
  Combining the two equations together gives








Boundary conditions
The two equations that describe the deformation of a Timoshenko beam have to be augmented with boundary conditions if they are to be solved. Four boundary conditions are needed for the problem to be well-posed. Typical boundary conditions are:

Simply supported beams: The displacement 
 
 
 
  is zero at the locations of the two supports. The bending moment 
 
 
 
  applied to the beam also has to be specified. The rotation 
 
 
 
  and the transverse shear force 
 
 
 
  are not specified.
Clamped beams: The displacement 
 
 
 
  and the rotation 
 
 
 
  are specified to be zero at the clamped end. If one end is free, shear force 
 
 
 
  and bending moment 
 
 
 
  have to be specified at that end.

Example: Cantilever beam
 For a cantilever beam, one boundary is clamped while the other is free. Let us use a right handed coordinate system where the 
 
 
 
  direction is positive towards right and the 
 
 
 
  direction is positive upward. Following normal convention, we assume that positive forces act in the positive directions of the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  axes and positive moments act in the clockwise direction. We also assume that the sign convention of the stress resultants (
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) is such that positive bending moments compress the material at the bottom of the beam (lower 
 
 
 
  coordinates) and positive shear forces rotate the beam in a counterclockwise direction.
Let us assume that the clamped end is at 
 
 
 
  and the free end is at 
 
 
 
 . If a point load 
 
 
 
  is applied to the free end in the positive 
 
 
 
  direction, a free body diagram of the beam gives us


 
  and


 
  Therefore, from the expressions for the bending moment and shear force, we have


 
  Integration of the first equation, and application of the boundary condition 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 , leads to


 
  The second equation can then be written as


 
  Integration and application of the boundary condition 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  gives


 
  The axial stress is given by



Dynamic Timoshenko beam
In Timoshenko beam theory without axial effects, the displacements of the beam are assumed to be given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the coordinates of a point in the beam, 
 
 
 
  are the components of the displacement vector in the three coordinate directions, 
 
 
 
  is the angle of rotation of the normal to the mid-surface of the beam, and 
 
 
 
  is the displacement of the mid-surface in the 
 
 
 
 -direction.
Starting from the above assumption, the Timoshenko beam theory, allowing for vibrations, may be described with the coupled linear partial differential equations:3






where the dependent variables are 
 
 
 
 , the translational displacement of the beam, and 
 
 
 
 , the angular displacement. Note that unlike the Euler-Bernoulli theory, the angular deflection is another variable and not approximated by the slope of the deflection. Also,



 
  is the density of the beam material (but not the linear density).


 
  is the cross section area.


 
  is the elastic modulus.


 
  is the shear modulus.


 
  is the second moment of area.


 
 , called the Timoshenko shear coefficient, depends on the geometry. Normally, 
 
 
 
  for a rectangular section.


 
  is a distributed load (force per length).







These parameters are not necessarily constants.
For a linear elastic, isotropic, homogeneous beam of constant cross-section these two equations can be combined to give45









Derivation of combined Timoshenko beam equation





The equations governing the bending of a homogeneous Timoshenko beam of constant cross-section are


 
 
  From equation (1), assuming appropriate smoothness, we have


 
 
  From (3), assuming appropriate smoothness,


 
  Differentiating equation (2) gives


 
  From equations (4) and (6)


 
  From equations (3) and (7)


 
  Plugging equation (5) into (8) gives


 
  Rearrange to get








Axial effects
If the displacements of the beam are given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an additional displacement in the 
 
 
 
 -direction, then the governing equations of a Timoshenko beam take the form


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is an externally applied axial force. Any external axial force is balanced by the stress resultant


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the axial stress and the thickness of the beam has been assumed to be 
 
 
 
 .
The combined beam equation with axial force effects included is



Damping
If, in addition to axial forces, we assume a damping force that is proportional to the velocity with the form


 
  the coupled governing equations for a Timoshenko beam take the form





 
  and the combined equation becomes


 
 
  A caveat to this Ansatz damping force (resembling viscosity) is that, whereas viscosity leads to a frequency-dependent and amplitude-independent damping rate of beam oscillations, the empirically measured damping rates are frequency-insensitive, but depend on the amplitude of beam deflection.
Shear coefficient
Determining the shear coefficient is not straightforward (nor are the determined values widely accepted, i.e. there's more than one answer); generally it must satisfy:



The shear coefficient depends on the Poisson's ratio. The attempts to provide precise expressions were made by many scientists, including Stephen Timoshenko, Raymond D. Mindlin, G. R. Cowper, John W. Hutchinson, etc (see also the derivation of the Timoshenko beam theory as refined beam theory based on the variational-asymptotic method in the book by Khanh C. Le leading to the different shear coefficients in the static and dynamic cases). In engineering practice, the expressions by Stephen Timoshenko6 are sufficient in most cases.
For solid rectangular cross-section,



For solid circular cross-section,



See also

Bending moment
Bending
Euler–Bernoulli beam theory
Sandwich theory
Plate theory

References




"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Structural analysis



Timoshenko, S. P., 1921, On the correction factor for shear of the differential equation for transverse vibrations of bars of uniform cross-section, Philosophical Magazine, p. 744.
Timoshenko, S. P., 1922, On the transverse vibrations of bars of uniform cross-section, Philosophical Magazine, p. 125.
Timoshenko's Beam Equations
Thomson, W. T., 1981, Theory of Vibration with Applications
Rosinger, H. E. and Ritchie, I. G., 1977, On Timoshenko's correction for shear in vibrating isotropic beams, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 10, pp. 1461-1466.
Stephen Timoshenko, James M. Gere. Mechanics of Materials. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1972. Pages 207.




