


Virtual black hole




Virtual black hole

In quantum gravity, a virtual black hole is a black hole that exists temporarily as a result of a quantum fluctuation of spacetime.1 It is an example of quantum foam and is the gravitational analog of the virtual electron–positron pairs found in quantum electrodynamics. Theoretical arguments suggest that virtual black holes should have mass on the order of the Planck mass, lifetime around the Planck time, and occur with a number density of approximately one per Planck volume.2
The emergence of virtual black holes at the Planck scale is a consequence of the uncertainty relation


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the radius of curvature of space-time small domain; 
 
 
 
  is the coordinate small domain; 
 
 
 
  is the Planck length; 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac constant; 
 
 
 
  - Newton's gravitational constant; 
 
 
 
  is the speed of light. These uncertainty relations are another form of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle at the Planck scale. =-2i\,\ell^2_{P}\frac{d}{dx^{\mu}}
Then commutator operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is


 
  From here follow the specified uncertainty relations 
Substituting the values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and cutting right and left of the same symbols, we obtain the Heisenberg uncertainty principle



In the particular case of a static spherically symmetric field and static distribution of matter 
 
 
 
  and have remained


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Schwarzschild radius, 
 
 
 
  is the radial coordinate.
Last uncertainty relation allows make us some estimates of the equations of general relativity at the Planck scale. For example, the equation for the invariant interval

 
  в in the Schwarzschild solution has the form


 
  Substitute according to the uncertainty relations 
 
 
 
 . We obtain


 
  It is seen that at the Planck scale

 
  space-time metric is bounded below by the Planck length, and on this scale, there are real and virtual Planckian black holes.
Similar estimates can be made in other equations of general relativity. For example, analysis of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation for a centrally symmetric gravitational field in spaces of different dimensions (with help of the resulting uncertainty relation) indicates a preference for three-dimensional space for the emergence of virtual black holes (quantum foam).
Prescribed above uncertainty relation valid for strong gravitational fields, as in any sufficiently small domain of a strong field space-time is essentially flat.
 |frame-style=border: 1px solid rgb(200,200,200); |
 title-style=color: black; background-color: rgb(255,255,221); font-weight: bold; text-align: left;| 
 content-style=color: black; background-color: white; text-align: left; |
 hidden=1
}}
If virtual black holes exist, they provide a mechanism for proton decay. This is because when a black hole's mass increases via mass falling into the hole, and then decreases when Hawking radiation is emitted from the hole, the elementary particles emitted are, in general, not the same as those that fell in. Therefore, if two of a proton's constituent quarks fall into a virtual black hole, it is possible for an antiquark and a lepton to emerge, thus violating conservation of baryon number.3
The existence of virtual black holes aggravates the black hole information loss paradox, as any physical process may potentially be disrupted by interaction with a virtual black hole.4
See also

Quantum foam

References
"
Category:Quantum gravity Category:Black holes



S. W. Hawking(1995)"Virtual Black Holes"
Fred C. Adams, Gordon L. Kane, Manasse Mbonye, and Malcolm J. Perry (2001), [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001IJMPA..16.2399A Proton Decay, Black Holes, and Large Extra Dimensions], Intern. J. Mod. Phys. A, 16, 2399.

The black hole information paradox, Steven B. Giddings, arXiv:hep-th/9508151v1.




