


Generalized forces




Generalized forces

Generalized forces find use in Lagrangian mechanics, where they play a role conjugate to generalized coordinates. They are obtained from the applied forces, Fi, i=1,..., n, acting on a system that has its configuration defined in terms of generalized coordinates. In the formulation of virtual work, each generalized force is the coefficient of the variation of a generalized coordinate.
Virtual work
Generalized forces can be obtained from the computation of the virtual work, δW, of the applied forces.1
The virtual work of the forces, Fi, acting on the particles Pi, i=1,..., n, is given by


 
  where δri is the virtual displacement of the particle Pi.
Generalized coordinates
Let the position vectors of each of the particles, ri, be a function of the generalized coordinates, qj, j=1,...,m. Then the virtual displacements δri are given by


 
  where δqj is the virtual displacement of the generalized coordinate qj.
The virtual work for the system of particles becomes


 
  Collect the coefficients of δqj so that



Generalized forces
The virtual work of a system of particles can be written in the form


 
  where


 
  are called the generalized forces associated with the generalized coordinates qj, j=1,...,m.
Velocity formulation
In the application of the principle of virtual work it is often convenient to obtain virtual displacements from the velocities of the system. For the n particle system, let the velocity of each particle Pi be Vi, then the virtual displacement δri can also be written in the form2



This means that the generalized force, Qj, can also be determined as



D'Alembert's principle
D'Alembert formulated the dynamics of a particle as the equilibrium of the applied forces with an inertia force (apparent force), called D'Alembert's principle. The inertia force of a particle, Pi, of mass mi is


 
  where Ai is the acceleration of the particle.
If the configuration of the particle system depends on the generalized coordinates qj, j=1,...,m, then the generalized inertia force is given by



D'Alembert's form of the principle of virtual work yields



References
See also

Lagrangian mechanics
Generalized coordinates
Degrees of freedom (physics and chemistry)
Virtual work

"
Category:Mechanics Category:Classical mechanics Category:Lagrangian mechanics



↩
T. R. Kane and D. A. Levinson, Dynamics, Theory and Applications, McGraw-Hill, NY, 2005.↩




