


Template:HAZMAT Class 6 Packing Groups




Template:HAZMAT Class 6 Packing Groups

{| class="wikitable" width=90% align=center |- ! Class 6 Packing Groups and Hazard Zones |- | The packing group of Division 6.1 materials shall be as assigned in Column 5 of the 49CFR 172.101 Table. When the 49CFR 172.101 Table provides more than one packing group or hazard zone for a hazardous material, the packing group and hazard zone shall be determined by applying the following criteria:
 1. The packing group assignment for routes of administration other than inhalation of vapors shall be in accordance with the following table:
2. The packing group and hazard zone assignments for liquids (see 49CFR 173.115(c) of this subpart for gases) based on inhalation of vapors shall be in accordance with the following Table:
3. When the packing group determined by applying these criteria is different for two or more (oral, dermal or inhalation) routes of administration, the packing group assigned to the material shall be that indicated for the highest degree of toxicity for any of the routes of administration.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, the packing group and hazard zone of a tear gas substance is as assigned in Column 5 of the 49CFR 172.101 Table. |- | The packing group and hazard zone for Division 6.1 mixtures that are poisonous (toxic) by inhalation may be determined by one of the following methods:

Where 
 
 
 
  data is available on each of the poisonous (toxic) substances comprising the mixture:
 



1. The 
 
 
 
  of the mixture is estimated using the formula:
 











::*where 
 
 
 
  = mole fraction of the 
 
 
 
  component of the liquid
::*
 
 
 
  = means lethal concentration of the 
 
 
 
  component substance in 
 
 



2. The volatility of each component substance is estimated using the formula:
 













where
 
 
 
  = partial pressure of the 
 
 
 
  component substance in kPa at 20°C and one atmospheric pressure. 
 
 
 
  may be calculated according to Raoult's Law using appropriate activity coefficients. Where activity coefficients are not available, the coefficient may be assumed to be 1.0.
 




3. The ratio of the volatility to the LC50 is calculated using the formula:
 










4. Using the calculated values LC50 (mixture) and R, the packing group for the mixture is determined as follows:
 

In the absence of LC50 data on the poisonous (toxic) constituent substances, the mixture may be assigned a packing group and hazard zone based on simplified threshold toxicity tests. When these threshold tests are used, the most restrictive packing group and hazard zone must be determined and used for the transportation of the mixture. |} "
Category:Hazmat templates


