


Panjer recursion




Panjer recursion

The Panjer recursion is an algorithm to compute the probability distribution approximation of a compound random variable

 
 . where both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are random variables and of special types. In more general cases the distribution of S is a compound distribution. The recursion for the special cases considered was introduced in a paper 1 by Harry Panjer (Emeritus professor, University of Waterloo2). It is heavily used in actuarial science (see also systemic risk).
Preliminaries
We are interested in the compound random variable 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  fulfill the following preconditions.
Claim size distribution
We assume the 
 
 
 
  to be i.i.d. and independent of 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore the 
 
 
 
  have to be distributed on a lattice 
 
 
 
  with latticewidth 
 
 
 
 .



In actuarial practice, 
 
 
 
  is obtain by discretisation of the claim density function (upper, lower...).
Claim number distribution
The number of claims N is a random variable, which is said to have a "claim number distribution", and which can take values 0, 1, 2, .... etc.. For the "Panjer recursion", the probability distribution of N has to be a member of the Panjer class, otherwise known as the (a,b,0) class of distributions. This class consists of all counting random variables which fulfill the following relation:


 
  for some a and b which fulfill 
 
 
 
 . The initial value 
 
 
 
  is determined such that 
 
 

The Panjer recursion makes use of this iterative relationship to specify a recursive way of constructing the probability distribution of S. In the following 
 
 
 
  denotes the probability generating function of N: for this see the table in (a,b,0) class of distributions.
In the case of claim number is known, please note the De Pril algorithm. This algorithm is suitable to compute the sum distribution of 
 
 
 
  discrete random variables.3
Recursion
The algorithm now gives a recursion to compute the 
 
 
 
 .
The starting value is 
 
 
 
  with the special cases



and



and proceed with



Example
The following example shows the approximated density of 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with lattice width h = 0.04. (See Fréchet distribution.)
(Figure)
Expba07.jpg

References


External links

Panjer recursion and the distributions it can be used with

"
Category:Actuarial science Category:Compound distributions Category:Theory of probability distributions



↩
CV, actuaries.org; Staff page, math.uwaterloo.ca↩
↩




