


Magnetic anomaly




Magnetic anomaly

 In geophysics, a magnetic anomaly is a local variation in the Earth's magnetic field resulting from variations in the chemistry or magnetism of the rocks. Mapping of variation over an area is valuable in detecting structures obscured by overlying material. The magnetic variation in successive bands of ocean floor parallel with mid-ocean ridges is important evidence supporting the theory of seafloor spreading, central to plate tectonics.
Measurement
Magnetic anomalies are generally a small fraction of the magnetic field. The total field ranges from 25,000 to 65,000 nanoteslas (nT).1 To measure anomalies, magnetometers need a sensitivity of 10 nT or less. There are three main types of magnetometer used to measure magnetic anomalies:23

The fluxgate magnetometer was developed during World War II to detect submarines.45 It measures the component along a particular axis of the sensor, so it needs to be oriented. On land, it is often oriented vertically, while in aircraft, ships and satellites it is usually oriented so the axis is in the direction of the field. It measures the magnetic field continuously, but drifts over time. One way to correct for drift is to take repeated measurements at the same place during the survey.67
The proton precession magnetometer measures the strength of the field but not its direction, so it does not need to be oriented. Each measurement takes a second or more. It is used in most ground surveys except for boreholes and high-resolution gradiometer surveys.89
Optically pumped magnetometers, which use alkali gases (most commonly rubidium and cesium) have high sample rates and sensitivities of 0.001 nT or less, but are more expensive than the other types of magnetometers. They are used on satellites and in most aeromagnetic surveys.10

Data acquisition
Ground-based
In ground-based surveys, measurements are made at a series of stations, typically 15 to 60 m apart. Usually a proton precession magnetometer is used and it is often mounted on a pole. Raising the magnetometer reduces the influence of small ferrous objects that were discarded by humans. To further reduce unwanted signals, they do not carry objects such as keys, knives or compasses. In addition, objects such as motor vehicles, railway lines, and barbed wire fences are avoided. If some such contaminant is overlooked, it often shows up as a sharp spike in the anomaly, so such features are treated with suspicion. The main application for ground-based surveys is detailed search for minerals.1112
Aeromagnetic
 Airborne magnetic surveys are often used in oil surveys to provide preliminary information for seismic surveys. In some countries such as Canada, government agencies have made systematic surveys of large areas. The survey generally involves making a series of parallel runs at a constant height and intervals of anywhere from a hundred meters to several kilometers. These are crossed by occasional tie lines, perpendicular to the main survey, to check for errors. The plane is a source of magnetism, so sensors are either mounted on a boom (as in the figure) or towed behind on a cable. Aeromagnetic surveys have a lower spatial resolution of ground surveys, but this can be an advantage for a regional survey of deeper rocks.1314
Shipborne
In shipborne surveys, a magnetometer is towed a few hundred meters behind a ship in a device called a fish. The sensor is kept at a constant depth of about 15 m. Otherwise, the procedure is similar to that used in aeromagnetic surveys.1516
Spacecraft
American and Russian satellites began measuring the Earth's field in the 1960s.17 In the fall of 1979, Magsat was launched and jointly operated by NASA and USGS until the spring of 1980. It had a cesium vapor scalar magnetometer and a fluxgate vector magnetometer.18 CHAMP, a German satellite, made precise gravity and magnetic measurements from 2001 to 2010.1920 A Danish satellite, Ørsted, was launched in 1999 and is still in operation, while the Swarm mission of the European Space Agency involves a "constellation" of three satellites that were launched in November, 2013.212223
Data reduction
There are two main corrections that are needed for magnetic measurements. The first is remove short-term variations in the field from external sources. There are diurnal variations that have a period of 24 hours and magnitudes of up to 30 nT, probably from the action of the solar wind on the ionosphere.24 In addition, magnetic storms can have peak magnitudes of 1000 nT and can last for several days. Their contribution can be measured by returning to a base station repeatedly or by having another magnetometer that periodically measures the field at a fixed location.25
The anomaly is the local contribution to the magnetic field, so the main geomagnetic field must be subtracted from it. Usually the International Geomagnetic Reference Field is used for this purpose. This is a large-scale, time-averaged mathematical model of the Earth's field based on measurements from satellites, magnetic observatories and other surveys.26
Some corrections that are needed for gravity anomalies are less important for magnetic anomalies. For example, the vertical gradient of the magnetic field is 0.03 nT/m or less, so an elevation correction is generally not needed.27
Interpretation




Magnetic susceptibilities of common rocks and minerals28



Type





Sedimentary



Limestones



Sandstones



Shales



Igneous



Basalt



Gabbro



Granite



Rhyolite



Metamorphic



Gneiss



Serpentine



Slate



Minerals



Graphite



Quartz



Coal



Clays



Pyrrhotite



Magnetite



The magnetization in the surveyed rock is a vector sum of induced and remanent magnetization:


 
  The induced magnetization of many minerals is the product of the ambient magnetic field and their magnetic susceptibility

 
 :


 
  Some susceptibilities are given in the table.
Minerals that are diamagnetic or paramagnetic only have an induced magnetization. Ferromagnetic minerals such as magnetite also can carry a remanent magnetization or remanence. This remanence can last for millions of years, so it may be in a completely different direction from the present Earth's field. If a remanence is present, it is difficult to separate from the induced magnetization unless samples of the rock are measured. The ratio of the magnitudes,  Mr/Mi}}, is called the Koenigsberger ratio.2930
Applications
Ocean floor stripes
 Magnetic surveys over the oceans have revealed a characteristic pattern of anomalies around mid-ocean ridges. They involve a series of positive and negative anomalies in the intensity of the magnetic field, forming stripes running parallel to each ridge. They are often symmetric about the axis of the ridge. The stripes are generally tens of kilometers wide, and the anomalies are a few hundred nanoteslas. The source of these anomalies is primarily permanent magnetization carried by titanomagnetite minerals in basalt and gabbros. They are magnetized when ocean crust is formed at the ridge. As magma rises to the surface and cools, the rock acquires a thermoremanent magnetization in the direction of the field. Then the rock is carried away from the ridge by the motions of the tectonic plates. Every few hundred thousand years, the direction of the magnetic field reverses. Thus, the pattern of stripes is a global phenomenon and can be used to calculate the velocity of seafloor spreading.3132
In fiction
In the Space Odyssey series by Arthur C. Clarke, a series of monoliths are left by extraterrestrials for humans to find them. One near the crater Tycho is found by its unnaturally powerful magnetic field and named Tycho Magnetic Anomaly 1 (TMA-1).33 One orbiting Jupiter is named TMA-2, and one in the Olduvai Gorge is found in 2513 and retroactively named TMA-0 because it was first encountered by primitive humans.
See also

Bangui magnetic anomaly
Geomagnetic reversal
Kursk Magnetic Anomaly
Magnetic anomaly detector
Temagami Magnetic Anomaly
World Digital Magnetic Anomaly Map (WDMAM)

References
Further reading







External links

Magnetic field of the lithosphere (CIRES)
Magnetic anomaly maps and data for North America (USGS)
World Digital Magnetic Anomaly Map: info
Magnetic anomaly map of the world
Asteroids may have delivered magnetic material to the Moon

"
Category:Geomagnetism



↩
↩


↩











↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




↩

↩
↩
↩
↩




