


Lehmer's conjecture




Lehmer's conjecture

Lehmer's conjecture, also known as the Lehmer's Mahler measure problem, is a problem in number theory raised by Derrick Henry Lehmer.1 The conjecture asserts that there is an absolute constant 
 
 
 
  such that every polynomial with integer coefficients 
 
 
 
  satisfies one of the following properties:

The Mahler measure

 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  is greater than or equal to 
 
 
 
 .




 
  is an integral multiple of a product of cyclotomic polynomials or the monomial 
 
 
 
 , in which case 
 
 
 
 . (Equivalently, every complex root of 
 
 
 
 
  is a root of unity or zero.)

There are a number of definitions of the Mahler measure, one of which is to factor 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  as



and then set



The smallest known Mahler measure (greater than 1) is for "Lehmer's polynomial"



for which the Mahler measure is the Salem number2



It is widely believed that this example represents the true minimal value: that is, 
 
 
 
  in Lehmer's conjecture.34
Motivation
Consider Mahler measure for one variable and Jensen's formula shows that if 
 
 
 
  then


 
  In this paragraph denote　
 
 
 
 
  , which is also called Mahler measure.
If 
 
 
 
  has integer coefficients, this shows that 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic number so 
 
 
 
  is the logarithm of an algebraic integer. It also shows that 
 
 
 
  and that if 
 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is a product of cyclotomic polynomials i.e. monic polynomials whose all roots are roots of unity, or a monomial polynomial of 
 
 
 
  i.e. a power 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
  .
Lehmer noticed56 that 
 
 
 
 
  is an important value in the study of the integer sequences 
 
 
 
  for monic 
 
 
 
  . If 
 
 
 
  does not vanish on the circle then 
 
 
 
  and this statement might be true even if 
 
 
 
 
  does vanish on the circle. By this he was led to ask

whether there is a constant 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  provided 
 
 
 
  is not cyclotomic?,
 

or

given 
 
 
 
 , are there 
 
 
 
 
  with integer coefficients for which 

Some positive answers have been provided as follows, but Lehmer's conjecture is not yet completely proved and is still a question of much interest.
Partial results
Let 
 
 
 
  be an irreducible monic polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
 .
Smyth 7 proved that Lehmer's conjecture is true for all polynomials that are not reciprocal, i.e., all polynomials satisfying 
 
 
 
 .
Blanksby and Montgomery8 and Stewart9 independently proved that there is an absolute constant 
 
 
 
  such that either 
 
 
 
 
  or10



Dobrowolski 11 improved this to



Dobrowolski obtained the value C ≥ 1/1200 and asymptotically C > 1-ε for all sufficiently large D. Voutier obtained C ≥ 1/4 for D ≥ 2.12
Elliptic analogues
Let 
 
 
 
  be an elliptic curve defined over a number field 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
 
  be the canonical height function. The canonical height is the analogue for elliptic curves of the function 
 
 
 
 . It has the property that 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is a torsion point in 
 
 
 
 . The elliptic Lehmer conjecture asserts that there is a constant 
 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  for all non-torsion points 
 
 
 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
 . If the elliptic curve E has complex multiplication, then the analogue of Dobrowolski's result holds:



due to Laurent.13 For arbitrary elliptic curves, the best known result is14



due to Masser.15 For elliptic curves with non-integral j-invariant, this has been improved to16



by Hindry and Silverman.17
Restricted results
Stronger results are known for restricted classes of polynomials or algebraic numbers.
If P(x) is not reciprocal then



and this is clearly best possible.18 If further all the coefficients of P are odd then19



If the field Q(α) is a Galois extension of Q then Lehmer's conjecture holds.20
References



External links

http://www.cecm.sfu.ca/~mjm/Lehmer/ is a nice reference about the problem.


"
Category:Polynomials Category:Theorems in number theory Category:Conjectures





Smyth (2008) p.324


David Boyd (1981). "Speculations concerning the range of Mahler's measure" Canad. Math. Bull. Vol. 24(4)



Smyth (2008) p.325

Smyth (2008) p.326
Smyth (2008) p.327




Smyth (2008) p.328

Smyth (2008) p.329




