


HPO formalism




HPO formalism

The History Projection Operator (HPO) formalism is an approach to temporal quantum logic developed by Chris Isham. It deals with the logical structure of quantum mechanical propositions asserted at different points in time.
Introduction
In standard quantum mechanics a physical system is associated with a Hilbert space

 
 . States of the system at a fixed time are represented by normalised vectors in the space and physical observables are represented by Hermitian operators on 
 
 
 
 .
A physical proposition 
 
 
 
  about the system at a fixed time can be represented by a projection operator

 
  on 
 
 
 
  (See quantum logic). This representation links together the lattice operations in the lattice of logical propositions and the lattice of projection operators on a Hilbert space (See quantum logic).
The HPO formalism is a natural extension of these ideas to propositions about the system that are concerned with more than one time.
History Propositions
Homogeneous Histories
A homogeneous history proposition

 
  is a sequence of single-time propositions 
 
 
 
  specified at different times 
 
 
 
 . These times are called the temporal support of the history. We shall denote the proposition 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  and read it as
"
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  is true and then 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  is true and then 
 
 
 
  and then 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  is true"
Inhomogeneous Histories
Not all history propositions can be represented by a sequence of single-time propositions are different times. These are called inhomogeneous history propositions. An example is the proposition 
 
 
 
  OR 
 
 
 
  for two homogeneous histories 
 
 
 
 .
History Projection Operators
The key observation of the HPO formalism is to represent history propositions by projection operators on a history Hilbert space. This is where the name "History Projection Operator" (HPO) comes from.
For a homogeneous history 
 
 
 
  we can use the tensor product to define a projector



where 
 
 
 
  is the projection operator on 
 
 
 
  that represents the proposition 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
 .
This 
 
 
 
  is a projection operator on the tensor product "history Hilbert space" 
 
 

Not all projection operators on 
 
 
 
  can be written as the sum of tensor products of the form 
 
 
 
 . These other projection operators are used to represent inhomogeneous histories by applying lattice operations to homogeneous histories.
Temporal Quantum Logic
Representing history propositions by projectors on the history Hilbert space naturally encodes the logical structure of history propositions. The lattice operations on the set of projection operations on the history Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  can be applied to model the lattice of logical operations on history propositions.
If two homogeneous histories 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  don't share the same temporal support they can be modified so that they do. If 
 
 
 
  is in the temporal support of 
 
 
 
  but not 
 
 
 
  (for example) then a new homogeneous history proposition which differs from 
 
 
 
  by including the "always true" proposition at each time 
 
 
 
  can be formed. In this way the temporal supports of 
 
 
 
  can always be joined together. What shall therefore assume that all homogeneous histories share the same temporal support.
We now present the logical operations for homogeneous history propositions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

Conjunction (AND)
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two homogeneous histories then the history proposition "
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 " is also a homogeneous history. It is represented by the projection operator




Disjunction (OR)
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two homogeneous histories then the history proposition "
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 " is in general not a homogeneous history. It is represented by the projection operator



Negation (NOT)
The negation operation in the lattice of projection operators takes 
 
 
 
  to



where 
 
 
 
  is the identity operator on the Hilbert space. Thus the projector used to represent the proposition 
 
 
 
  (i.e. "not 
 
 
 
 ") is



where 
 
 
 
  is the identity operator on the history Hilbert space.
Example: Two-time history
As an example, consider the negation of the two-time homogeneous history proposition 
 
 
 
 . The projector to represent the proposition 
 
 
 
  is




The terms which appear in this expression:













 
 .

can each be interpreted as follows:



 
  is false and 
 
 
 
  is true




 
  is true and 
 
 
 
  is false


both 
 
 
 
  is false and 
 
 
 
  is false

These three homogeneous histories, joined together with the OR operation, include all the possibilities for how the proposition "
 
 
 
  and then 
 
 
 
 " can be false. We therefore see that the definition of 
 
 
 
  agrees with what the proposition 
 
 
 
  should mean.
References

C.J. Isham, Quantum Logic and the Histories Approach to Quantum Theory, J.Math.Phys. 35 (1994) 2157-2185, arXiv:gr-qc/9308006v1

"
Category:Logic Category:Quantum measurement


