


Fundamental discriminant




Fundamental discriminant

In mathematics, a fundamental discriminant D is an integer invariant in the theory of integral binary quadratic forms. If  is a quadratic form with integer coefficients, then  is the discriminant of Q(x, y). Conversely, every integer D with  is the discriminant of some binary quadratic form with integer coefficients. Thus, all such integers are referred to as discriminants in this theory. Every discriminant may be written as

D = D0f 2


with D0 a discriminant and f a positive integer. A discriminant D is called a fundamental discriminant if f = 1 in every such decomposition. Conversely, every discriminant D ≠ 0 can be written uniquely as D0f 2 where D0 is a fundamental discriminant. Thus, fundamental discriminants play a similar role for discriminants as prime numbers do for all integers.
There are explicit congruence conditions that give the set of fundamental discriminants. Specifically, D is a fundamental discriminant if, and only if, one of the following statements holds

D ≡ 1 (mod 4) and is square-free,
D = 4m, where m ≡ 2 or 3 (mod 4) and m is square-free.

The first ten positive fundamental discriminants are:

1, 5, 8, 12, 13, 17, 21, 24, 28, 29, 33 .
 

The first ten negative fundamental discriminants are:

−3, −4, −7, −8, −11, −15, −19, −20, −23, −24, −31 .
 

Connection with quadratic fields
There is a connection between the theory of integral binary quadratic forms and the arithmetic of quadratic number fields. A basic property of this connection is that D0 is a fundamental discriminant if, and only if, D0 = 1 or D0 is the discriminant of a quadratic number field. There is exactly one quadratic field for every fundamental discriminant D0 ≠ 1, up to isomorphism.
Caution: This is the reason why some authors consider 1 not to be a fundamental discriminant. One may interpret D0 = 1 as the degenerated "quadratic" field Q (the rational numbers).
Factorization
Fundamental discriminants may also be characterized by their factorization into positive and negative prime powers. Define the set


 
  where the prime numbers ≡ 1 (mod 4) are positive and those ≡ 3 (mod 4) are negative. Then, a number D0 ≠ 1 is a fundamental discriminant if, and only if, it is the product of pairwise relatively prime members of S.
References





See also

Quadratic integer

"
Category:Algebraic number theory


