


Fréchet distribution




Fréchet distribution

|
 cdf        =

  |
 mean       =

 |
 median     =

  |
 mode       =

|
 variance   = 

 |
 skewness   = 

 |
 g_k        =|
 kurtosis   = 

 |

|
 entropy    =

, where 

 is the Euler–Mascheroni constant.|
 mgf        = 1 Note: Moment 

 exists if 

  |
 char       = 2 |
}}
The Fréchet distribution is a special case of the generalized extreme value distribution. It has the cumulative distribution function


 
  where α > 0 is a shape parameter. It can be generalised to include a location parameter m (the minimum) and a scale parameter s > 0 with the cumulative distribution function



Named for Maurice Fréchet who wrote a related paper in 1927, further work was done by Fisher and Tippett in 1928 and by Gumbel in 1958.
Characteristics
The single parameter Fréchet with parameter 
 
 
 
  has standardized moment


 
  (with 
 
 
 
 ) defined only for 
 
 
 
 :


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Gamma function.
In particular:

For 
 
 
 
  the expectation is 
 
 

For 
 
 
 
  the variance is 
 
 


The quantile

 
  of order 
 
 
 
  can be expressed through the inverse of the distribution,


 
 . In particular the median is:



The mode of the distribution is 
 
 

Especially for the 3-parameter Fréchet, the first quartile is 
 
 
 
  and the third quartile 
 
 

Also the quantiles for the mean and mode are:






(Figure)
Fitted cumulative Fréchet distribution to extreme one-day rainfalls

Applications

In hydrology, the Fréchet distribution is applied to extreme events such as annually maximum one-day rainfalls and river discharges.3 The blue picture illustrates an example of fitting the Fréchet distribution to ranked annually maximum one-day rainfalls in Oman showing also the 90% confidence belt based on the binomial distribution. The cumulative frequencies of the rainfall data are represented by plotting positions as part of the cumulative frequency analysis. However, in most hydrological applications, the distribution fitting is via the generalized extreme value distribution as this avoids imposing the assumption that the distribution does not have a lower bound (as required by the Frechet distribution). 
One useful test to assess whether a multivariate distribution is asymptotically dependent or independent consists transforming the data into standard Frechet margins using transformation 
 
 
 
  and then mapping from the cartesian to pseudo-polar coordinates 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the extreme data for which at least only one component is large while 
 
 
 
  approximately 1 or 0 corresponds to only one component being extreme.

Related distributions

If 
 
 
 
  (Uniform distribution (continuous)) then 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

The cumulative distribution function of the Frechet distribution solves the maximum stability postulate equation
If 
 
 
 
  then its reciprocal is Weibull-distributed



Properties

The Frechet distribution is a max stable distribution
The negative of a random variable having a Frechet distribution is a min stable distribution

See also

Type-2 Gumbel distribution
Fisher–Tippett–Gnedenko theorem
CumFreq (application software for probability distributions including Fréchet)

References
Publications

Fréchet, M., (1927). "Sur la loi de probabilité de l'écart maximum." Ann. Soc. Polon. Math. 6, 93.
Fisher, R.A., Tippett, L.H.C., (1928). "Limiting forms of the frequency distribution of the largest and smallest member of a sample." Proc. Cambridge Philosophical Society 24:180–190.
Gumbel, E.J. (1958). "Statistics of Extremes." Columbia University Press, New York.
Kotz, S.; Nadarajah, S. (2000) Extreme value distributions: theory and applications, World Scientific. ISBN 1-86094-224-5

External links

Bank of England working paper
An application of a new extreme value distribution to air pollution data
Wave Analysis for Fatigue and Oceanography

"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Extreme value data Category:Probability distributions Category:Location-scale family probability distributions










