


Extension of scalars




Extension of scalars

In abstract algebra, extension of scalars is a means of producing a module over a ring

 
  from a module over another ring 
 
 
 
 , given a homomorphism

 
  between them. Intuitively, the new module admits multiplication by more scalars than the original one, hence the name extension.
Definition
In this definition the rings are assumed to be associative, but not necessarily commutative, or to have an identity. Also, modules are assumed to be left modules. The modifications needed in the case of right modules are straightforward.
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a homomorphism between two rings, and let 
 
 
 
  be a module over 
 
 
 
 . Consider the tensor product

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is regarded as a right 
 
 
 
 
 -module via 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is also a left module over itself, and the two actions commute, that is 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  (in a more formal language, 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -bimodule), 
 
 
 
  inherits a left action of 
 
 
 
 . It is given by 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This module is said to be obtained from 
 
 
 
  through extension of scalars.
Informally, extension of scalars is "the tensor product of a ring and a module"; more formally, it is a special case of a tensor product of a bimodule and a module – the tensor product of an 
 
 
 
  bimodule with an R-module is an S-module.
Examples
One of the simplest examples is complexification, which is extension of scalars from the real numbers to the complex numbers. More generally, given any field extension K x^2+1, is irreducible of degree 2 over the reals, but factors into 2 factors of degree 1 over the complex numbers – it has no real eigenvalues, but 2 complex eigenvalues.
Interpretation as a functor
Extension of scalars can be interpreted as a functor from 
 
 
 
 
 -modules to 
 
 
 
 -modules. It sends 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , as above, and an 
 
 
 
 -homomorphism 
 
 
 
 
  to the 
 
 
 
 -homomorphism 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
 .
Connection with restriction of scalars
Consider an 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
 
  and an 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
 . Given a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is viewed as an 
 
 
 
 
 -module via restriction of scalars, define 
 
 
 
  to be the composition


 
 , where the last map is 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 
 -homomorphism, and hence 
 
 
 
  is well-defined, and is a homomorphism (of abelian groups).
In case both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have an identity, there is an inverse homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , which is defined as follows. Let 
 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is the composition


 
 , where the first map is the canonical isomorphism

 
 .
This construction shows that the groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are isomorphic. Actually, this isomorphism depends only on the homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , and so is functorial. In the language of category theory, the extension of scalars functor is left adjoint to the restriction of scalars functor.
See also

Restriction of scalars
Tensor product of fields

References
NICOLAS BOURBAKI. Algebra I, Chapter II. LINEAR ALGEBRA.§5. Extension of the ring of scalaxs;§7. Vector spaces. 1974 by Hermann. "
Category:Module theory


