


Production (computer science)




Production (computer science)

A production or production rule in computer science is a rewrite rule specifying a symbol substitution that can be recursively performed to generate new symbol sequences. A finite set of productions 
 
 
 
  is the main component in the specification of a formal grammar (specifically a generative grammar). The other components are a finite set 
 
 
 
  of nonterminal symbols, a finite set (known as an alphabet) 
 
 
 
  of terminal symbols that is disjoint from 
 
 
 
  and a distinguished symbol 
 
 
 
  that is the start symbol.
In an unrestricted grammar, a production is of the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are arbitrary strings of terminals and nonterminals however 
 
 
 
  may not be the empty string. If 
 
 
 
  is the empty string, this is denoted by the symbol 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
  (rather than leave the right-hand side blank). So productions are of the form:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Kleene star operator, and 
 
 
 
  denotes set union.
The other types of formal grammar in the Chomsky hierarchy impose additional restrictions on what constitutes a production. Notably in a context-free grammar, the left-hand side of a production must be a single nonterminal symbol. So productions are of the form:



Grammar generation
To generate a string in the language, one begins with a string consisting of only a single start symbol, and then successively applies the rules (any number of times, in any order) to rewrite this string. This stops when we obtain a string containing only terminals. The language consists of all the strings that can be generated in this manner. Any particular sequence of legal choices taken during this rewriting process yields one particular string in the language. If there are multiple different ways of generating this single string, then the grammar is said to be ambiguous.
For example, assume the alphabet consists of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , with the start symbol 
 
 
 
 , and we have the following rules:

1. 
 
 

2. 
 
 


then we start with 
 
 
 
 , and can choose a rule to apply to it. If we choose rule 1, we replace 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and obtain the string 
 
 
 
 . If we choose rule 1 again, we replace 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and obtain the string 
 
 
 
 . This process is repeated until we only have symbols from the alphabet (i.e., 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ). If we now choose rule 2, we replace 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and obtain the string 
 
 
 
 , and are done. We can write this series of choices more briefly, using symbols
 
 
 
 . The language of the grammar is the set of all the strings that can be generated using this process
 
 
 
 .
See also

Formal grammar
Finite automata
Generative grammar
L-system
Rewrite rule
Backus–Naur form (A compact form for writing the productions of a context-free grammar.)
Phrase structure rule
Post canonical system (Emil Post's production systems- a model of computation.)

"
Category:Grammar Category:Natural language processing Category:Formal languages


