


Bramble–Hilbert lemma




Bramble–Hilbert lemma
In [[mathematics]], particularly [[numerical analysis]], the '''Bramble–Hilbert [[lemma (mathematics)|lemma]]''', named after [[James H. Bramble]] and [[Stephen Hilbert]], bounds the [[approxima
 tion error|error]] of an approximation of a function

 
  by a polynomial of order at most 
 
 
 
  in terms of derivatives of 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
 
 . Both the error of the approximation and the derivatives of 
 
 
 
  are measured by 

 
  norms on a bounded domain in 
 
 
 
 . This is similar to classical numerical analysis, where, for example, the error of linear interpolation

 
  can be bounded using the second derivative of 
 
 
 
 
 . However, the Bramble–Hilbert lemma applies in any number of dimensions, not just one dimension, and the approximation error and the derivatives of 
 
 
 
  are measured by more general norms involving averages, not just the maximum norm.
Additional assumptions on the domain are needed for the Bramble–Hilbert lemma to hold. Essentially, the boundary of the domain must be "reasonable". For example, domains that have a spike or a slit with zero angle at the tip are excluded. Lipschitz domains are reasonable enough, which includes convex domains and domains with continuously differentiable boundary.
The main use of the Bramble–Hilbert lemma is to prove bounds on the error of interpolation of function 
 
 
 
  by an operator that preserves polynomials of order up to 
 
 
 
 , in terms of the derivatives of 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
 
 . This is an essential step in error estimates for the finite element method. The Bramble–Hilbert lemma is applied there on the domain consisting of one element (or, in some superconvergence results, a small number of elements).
The one-dimensional case
Before stating the lemma in full generality, it is useful to look at some simple special cases. In one dimension and for a function 
 
 
 
  that has 
 
 
 
  derivatives on interval 
 
 
 
 , the lemma reduces to



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the space of all polynomials of order at most 
 
 
 
 .
In the case when 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  is twice differentiable, this means that there exists a polynomial 
 
 
 
  of degree one such that for all 
 
 
 
 ,



This inequality also follows from the well-known error estimate for linear interpolation by choosing 
 
 
 
  as the linear interpolant of 
 
 
 
 
 .
Statement of the lemma
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a bounded domain in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , with boundary 
 
 
 
  and diameter

 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is the Sobolev space of all function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  with weak derivatives

 
  of order 
 
 
 
 
  up to 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Here, 
 
 
 
  is a multiindex, 
 
 

 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denotes the derivative 
 
 
 
  times with respect to 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  times with respect to 
 
 
 
 
 , and so on. The Sobolev seminorm on 
 
 
 
  consists of the 
 
 
 
  norms of the highest order derivatives,



and



 
 
  is the space of all polynomials of order up to 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . and 
 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  has the same value for any 
 
 
 
 .
Lemma (Bramble and Hilbert) Under additional assumptions on the domain 
 
 
 
 , specified below, there exists a constant 
 
 
 
  independent of 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that for any 
 
 
 
  there exists a polynomial 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 




The original result
The lemma was proved by Bramble and Hilbert J. H. Bramble and S. R. Hilbert. Estimation of linear functionals on Sobolev spaces with application to Fourier transforms and spline interpolation. SIAM J. Numer. Anal., 7:112–124, 1970.
 under the assumption that 
 
 
 
  satisfies the strong cone property; that is, there exists a finite open covering 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and corresponding cones 
 
 
 
  with vertices at the origin such that 
 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 

 
 .
The statement of the lemma here is a simple rewriting of the right-hand inequality stated in Theorem 1 in.1 The actual statement in 2 is that the norm of the factorspace 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to the 
 
 
 
 
  seminorm. The 
 
 
 
  norm is not the usual one but the terms are scaled with 
 
 
 
  so that the right-hand inequality in the equivalence of the seminorms comes out exactly as in the statement here.
In the original result, the choice of the polynomial is not specified, and the value of constant and its dependence on the domain 
 
 
 
  cannot be determined from the proof.
A constructive form
An alternative result was given by Dupont and Scott 3 under the assumption that the domain 
 
 
 
  is star-shaped; that is, there exists a ball 
 
 
 
 
  such that for any 
 
 
 
 , the closed convex hull of 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is the supremum of the diameters of such balls. The ratio 
 
 
 
 
  is called the chunkiness of 
 
 
 
 .
Then the lemma holds with the constant 
 
 
 
 , that is, the constant depends on the domain 
 
 
 
  only through its chunkiness 
 
 
 
  and the dimension of the space 
 
 
 
 
 . In addition, 
 
 
 
  can be chosen as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the averaged Taylor polynomial, defined as



where



is the Taylor polynomial of degree at most 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  centered at 
 
 
 
  evaluated at 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  is a function that has derivatives of all orders, equals to zero outside of 
 
 
 
 , and such that



Such function 
 
 
 
  always exists.
For more details and a tutorial treatment, see the monograph by Brenner and Scott.Susanne C. Brenner and L. Ridgway Scott. The mathematical theory of finite element methods, volume 15 of Texts in Applied Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, second edition, 2002. ISBN 0-387-95451-1
 The result can be extended to the case when the domain 
 
 
 
  is the union of a finite number of star-shaped domains, which is slightly more general than the strong cone property, and other polynomial spaces than the space of all polynomials up to a given degree.4
Bound on linear functionals
This result follows immediately from the above lemma, and it is also called sometimes the Bramble–Hilbert lemma, for example by Ciarlet.Philippe G. Ciarlet. The finite element method for elliptic problems, volume 40 of Classics in Applied Mathematics. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, PA, 2002. Reprint of the 1978 original [North-Holland, Amsterdam]. ISBN 0-89871-514-8
 It is essentially Theorem 2 from.5
Lemma Suppose that 
 
 
 
 
  is a continuous linear functional on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  its dual norm. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Then there exists a constant 
 
 
 
 
  such that



References
External links


http://arxiv.org/abs/0710.5148 – Jan Mandel: The Bramble–Hilbert Lemma

"
Category:Lemmas Category:Approximation theory Category:Finite element method





Todd Dupont and Ridgway Scott. Polynomial approximation of functions in Sobolev spaces. Math. Comp., 34(150):441–463, 1980.






