


Appleton–Hartree equation




Appleton–Hartree equation
The '''Appleton–Hartree equation''', sometimes also referred to as the '''Appleton–Lassen equation''' is a mathem
 atical expression that describes the refractive index for electromagnetic wave propagation in a cold magnetized plasma. The Appleton–Hartree equation was developed independently by several different scientists, including Edward Victor Appleton, Douglas Hartree and German radio physicist H. K. Lassen.1 Lassen's work, completed two years prior to Appleton and five years prior to Hartree, included a more thorough treatment of collisional plasma; but, published only in German, it has not been widely read in the English speaking world of radio physics.2
Equation
The dispersion relation can be written as an expression for the frequency (squared), but it is also common to write it as an expression for the index of refraction

 
  .
Full Equation
The equation is typically given as follows:3



or, alternatively, with damping term Z = 0 and rearranging terms:4



Definition of Terms


 
  = complex refractive index


 
  = 
 
 




 
  = electron collision frequency


 
  (radial frequency)


 
  = wave frequency (cycles per second, or Hertz)


 
  = electron plasma frequency


 
  = electron gyro frequency


 
  = permittivity of free space


 
  = ambient magnetic field strength


 
  = electron charge


 
  = electron mass


 
  = angle between the ambient magnetic field vector and the wave vector
Modes of propagation
The presence of the 
 
 
 
  sign in the Appleton–Hartree equation gives two separate solutions for the refractive index.5 For propagation perpendicular to the magnetic field, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , the '+' sign represents the "ordinary mode," and the '−' sign represents the "extraordinary mode." For propagation parallel to the magnetic field, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , the '+' sign represents a left-hand circularly polarized mode, and the '−'' sign represents a right-hand circularly polarized mode. See the article on electromagnetic electron waves for more detail.


 
  is the vector of the propagation plane.
Reduced Forms
Propagation in a collisionless plasma
If the electron collision frequency 
 
 
 
  is negligible compared to the wave frequency of interest 
 
 
 
 , the plasma can be said to be "collisionless." That is, given the condition


 
 ,
we have


 
 ,
so we can neglect the 
 
 
 
  terms in the equation. The Appleton–Hartree equation for a cold, collisionless plasma is therefore,



Quasi-Longitudinal Propagation in a Collisionless Plasma
If we further assume that the wave propagation is primarily in the direction of the magnetic field, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , we can neglect the 
 
 
 
  term above. Thus, for quasi-longitudinal propagation in a cold, collisionless plasma, the Appleton–Hartree equation becomes,



References

Citations and notes

See also

Plasma (physics)
Waves in plasmas
List of plasma (physics) articles

"
Category:Electromagnetic radiation Category:Waves in plasmas



Lassen, H., I. Zeitschrift für Hochfrequenztechnik, 1926. Volume 28, pp. 109–113↩
C. Altman, K. Suchy. Reciprocity, Spatial Mapping and Time Reversal in Electromagnetics – Developments in Electromagnetic Theory and Application. Pp 13–15. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991. Also available online, Google Books Scan↩
↩
↩
↩




