


Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors




Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors

The topic of heteroscedasticity-consistent (HC) standard errors arises in statistics and econometrics in the context of linear regression as well as time series analysis. The alternative names of Huber–White standard errors, Eicker–White or Eicker–Huber–White1 are also frequently used in relation to the same ideas.
In regression and time-series modelling, basic forms of models make use of the assumption that the errors or disturbances ui have the same variance across all observation points. When this is not the case, the errors are said to be heteroscedastic, or to have heteroscedasticity, and this behaviour will be reflected in the residuals 
 
 
 
  estimated from a fitted model. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are used to allow the fitting of a model that does contain heteroscedastic residuals. The first such approach was proposed by Huber (1967), and further improved procedures have been produced since for cross-sectional data, time-series data and  GARCH estimation.
Definition
Assume that we are studying the linear regression model



where X is the vector of explanatory variables and β is a k × 1 column vector of parameters to be estimated.
The ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator is



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the matrix of stacked 
 
 
 
  values observed in the data.
If the sample errors have equal variance σ2 and are uncorrelated, then the least-squares estimate of β is BLUE (best linear unbiased estimator), and its variance is easily estimated with



where 
 
 
 
  are regression residuals.
When the assumptions of 
 
 
 
  are violated, the OLS estimator loses its desirable properties. Indeed,



where 
 
 
 
 .
While the OLS point estimator remains unbiased, it is not "best" in the sense of having minimum mean square error, and the OLS variance estimator 
 
 
 
  does not provide a consistent estimate of the variance of the OLS estimates.
For any non-linear model (for instance Logit and Probit models), however, heteroscedasticity has more severe consequences: the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters will be biased (in an unknown direction), as well as inconsistent (unless the likelihood function is modified to correctly take into account the precise form of heteroskedasticity).2 As pointed out by Greene, “simply computing a robust covariance matrix for an otherwise inconsistent estimator does not give it redemption.”3
White's heteroscedasticity-consistent estimator
If the regression errors 
 
 
 
  are independent, but have distinct variances σi2, then 
 
 
 
  which can be estimated with 
 
 
 
 . This provides White's (1980) estimator, often referred to as HCE (heteroscedasticity-consistent estimator):



where as above 
 
 
 
  denotes the matrix of stacked 
 
 
 
  values from the data. The estimator can be derived in terms of the generalized method of moments (GMM).
Note that also often discussed in the literature (including in White's paper itself) is the covariance matrix 
 
 
 
  of the 
 
 
 
 -consistent limiting distribution:


 
  where,


 
  and


 
 
  Thus,


 
  and


 
 . Precisely which covariance matrix is of concern should be a matter of context.
Alternative estimators have been proposed in MacKinnon & White (1985) that correct for unequal variances of regression residuals due to different leverage. Unlike the asymptotic White's estimator, their estimators are unbiased when the data are homoscedastic.
See also

Generalized least squares
Generalized estimating equations
White test — a test for whether heteroscedasticity is present.

Software

Stata: robust option applicable in many pseudo-likelihood based procedures. See online help for _robust option and regress command.
RATS: robusterrors option is available in many of the regression and optimization commands (linreg, nlls, etc.).
EViews: EViews version 8 offers three different methods for robust least squares: M-estimation (Huber, 1973), S-estimation (Rousseeuw and Yohai, 1984), and MM-estimation (Yohai 1987). 1

References




















"
Category:Regression analysis Category:Econometrics Category:Simultaneous equation methods (econometrics) Category:Mathematical and quantitative methods (economics)



Kleiber, C., Zeileis, A (2006) Applied Econometrics with R, UseR-2006 conference↩
↩
↩




