


Character variety




Character variety

In the mathematics of moduli theory, given an algebraic, reductive, Lie group

 
  and a finitely generated group 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -character variety of

 
 
  is a space of equivalence classes of group homomorphisms



More precisely, 
 
 
 
  acts on 
 
 
 
  by conjugation and two homomorphisms are defined to be equivalent if and only if their orbit closures intersect. This is the weakest equivalence relation on the set of conjugation orbits that yields a Hausdorff space.
Formulation
Formally, and when the algebraic group is defined over the complex numbers

 
 , the 
 
 
 
 
 -character variety is the spectrum of prime ideals of the ring of invariants



Here more generally one can consider algebraically closed fields of prime characteristic. In this generality, character varieties are only algebraic sets and are not actual varieties. To avoid technical issues, one often considers the associated reduced space by dividing by the radical of 0 (eliminating nilpotents). However, this does not necessarily yield an irreducible space either. Moreover, if we replace the complex group by a real group we may not even get an algebraic set. In particular, a maximal compact subgroup generally gives a semi-algebraic set. On the other hand, whenever 
 
 
 
  is free we always get an honest variety; it is singular however.
Examples
For example, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is free of rank two, then the character variety is 
 
 
 
 
  since by the Fricke-Klein-Vogt theorem its coordinate ring is isomorphic to the complex polynomial ring in 3 variables 
 
 
 
 . Restricting to 
 
 
 
  gives a closed real three-dimensional ball (semi-algebraic, but not algebraic).
Another example, also studied by Vogt and Fricke-Klein is the case with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is free of rank three. Then the character variety is isomorphic to the hypersurface in 
 
 
 
 
  given by the equation 
 
 

Variants
This is not necessarily the same construction as the Culler-Shalen character variety (generated by evaluations of traces), although when the 
 
 
 
  they do agree since Procesi has shown that in this case the ring of invariants is in fact generated by only traces. Since trace functions are invariant by all inner automorphisms, the Culler-Shalen construction essentially assumes that we are acting by



on



even if



For instance, for a free group of rank 2 and 
 
 
 
  the conjugation action is trivial and the 
 
 
 
 -character variety is the torus



But the trace algebra is a strictly small subalgebra (there are less invariants). This provides an involutive action on the torus that needs to be accounted for to yield the Culler-Shalen character variety. The involution on this torus yields a 2-sphere. The point is that up to 
 
 
 
 -conjugation all points are distinct, but the trace identifies elements with differing anti-diagonal elements (the involution).
Connection to geometry
There is an interplay between these moduli and the moduli of principal bundles, vector bundles, Higgs bundles, and geometric structures on topological spaces, given generally by the observation that, at least locally, equivalent objects in these categories are parameterized by conjugacy classes of holonomy homomorphisms. In other words, with respect to a base space 
 
 
 
 
  for the bundles or a fixed topological space for the geometric structures the holonomy homomorphism is a group homomorphism between 
 
 
 
  and the structure group 
 
 
 
  of the base space.
Connection to skein modules
The coordinate ring of the character variety has been related to skein modules in knot theory.12 The skein module is roughly a deformation (or quantization) of the character variety. It is closely related to topological quantum field theory in dimension 2+1.
See also

Geometric invariant theory
Character sheaf



"
Category:Moduli theory Category:Group actions



D. Bullock, Rings of SL_2(C)-Characters and the Kauffman Bracket Skein Module.
J.H. Przytycki, A.S. Sikora, On Skein Algebras And Sl_2(C)-Character Varieties




