


Denavit–Hartenberg parameters




Denavit–Hartenberg parameters

(Figure)
Sample Denavit-Hartenberg Diagram.png

The Denavit–Hartenberg parameters (also called DH parameters) are the four parameters associated with a particular convention for attaching reference frames to the links of a spatial kinematic chain, or robot manipulator.
Jacques Denavit and Richard Hartenberg introduced this convention in 1955 in order to standardize the coordinate frames for spatial linkages.12
Richard Paul demonstrated its value for the kinematic analysis of robotic systems in 1981.3 While many conventions for attaching references frames have been developed, the Denavit-Hartenberg convention remains the standard approach.
Denavit-Hartenberg convention
A commonly used convention for selecting frames of reference in robotics applications is the Denavit and Hartenberg (D–H) convention which was introduced by Jacques Denavit and Richard S. Hartenberg. In this convention, coordinate frames are attached to the joints between two links such that one transformation is associated with the joint, [Z], and the second is associated with the link [X]. The coordinate transformations along a serial robot consisting of n links form the kinematics equations of the robot,


 
  where [T] is the transformation locating the end-link.
In order to determine the coordinate transformations [Z] and [X], the joints connecting the links are modeled as either hinged or sliding joints, each of which have a unique line S in space that forms the joint axis and define the relative movement of the two links. A typical serial robot is characterized by a sequence of six lines Si, i=1,...,6, one for each joint in the robot. For each sequence of lines Si and Si+1, there is a common normal line Ai,i+1. The system of six joint axes Si and five common normal lines Ai,i+1 form the kinematic skeleton of the typical six degree of freedom serial robot. Denavit and Hartenberg introduced the convention that Z coordinate axes are assigned to the joint axes Si and X coordinate axes are assigned to the common normals Ai,i+1.
This convention allows the definition of the movement of links around a common joint axis Si by the screw displacement,


 
  where θi is the rotation around and di is the slide along the Z axis---either of the parameters can be constants depending on the structure of the robot. Under this convention the dimensions of each link in the serial chain are defined by the screw displacement around the common normal Ai,i+1 from the joint Si to Si+1, which is given by


 
  where αi,i+1 and ri,i+1 define the physical dimensions of the link in terms of the angle measured around and distance measured along the X axis.
In summary, the reference frames are laid out as follows:

the 
 
 
 
 -axis is in the direction of the joint axis
the 
 
 
 
 -axis is parallel to the common normal


 If there is no unique common normal (parallel 
 
 
 
  axes), then 
 
 
 
  (below) is a free parameter. The direction of 
 
 
 
  is from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , as shown in the video below.
the 
 
 
 
 -axis follows from the 
 
 
 
 - and 
 
 
 
 -axis by choosing it to be a right-handed coordinate system.

Four parameters
(Figure)
centre|thumb|568x568px|The four parameters of classic DH convention are shown in red text, which are
 
 
 
 . With those four parameters, we can translate the coordinates from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .

The transformation the following four parameters known as D–H parameters:.4



 
 : offset along previous 
 
 
 
  to the common normal


 
 : angle about previous 
 
 
 
 , from old 
 
 
 
  to new 
 
 



 
 : length of the common normal (aka 
 
 
 
 , but if using this notation, do not confuse with 
 
 
 
 ). Assuming a revolute joint, this is the radius about previous 
 
 
 
 .


 
 : angle about common normal, from old 
 
 
 
  axis to new 
 
 
 
  axis

A visualization of D–H parameterization is available: YouTube
There is some choice in frame layout as to whether the previous 
 
 
 
  axis or the next 
 
 
 
  points along the common normal. The latter system allows branching chains more efficiently, as multiple frames can all point away from their common ancestor, but in the alternative layout the ancestor can only point toward one successor. Thus the commonly used notation places each down-chain 
 
 
 
  axis collinear with the common normal, yielding the transformation calculations shown below.
We can note constraints on the relationships between the axes:

the 
 
 
 
 -axis is perpendicular to both the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  axes
the 
 
 
 
 -axis intersects both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  axes
the origin of joint 
 
 
 
  is at the intersection of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 



 
  completes a right-handed reference frame based on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 


Denavit-Hartenberg matrix
It is common to separate a screw displacement into the product of a pure translation along a line and a pure rotation about the line,56 so that


 
  and



Using this notation, each link can be described by a coordinate transformation from the previous coordinate system to the next coordinate system.



Note that this is the product of two screw displacements, The matrices associated with these operations are:












This gives:



where R is the 3×3 submatrix describing rotation and T is the 3×1 submatrix describing translation.
Use of Denavit and Hartenberg matrices
The Denavit and Hartenberg notation gives a standard methodology to write the kinematic equations of a manipulator. This is specially useful for serial manipulators where a matrix is used to represent the pose (position and orientation) of one body with respect to another.
The position of body 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  may be represented by a position matrix indicated with the symbol 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 




This matrix is also used to transform a point from frame 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 



 
  Where the upper left 
 
 
 
  submatrix of 
 
 
 
  represents the relative orientation of the two bodies, and the upper right 
 
 
 
  represents their relative position.
The position of body 
 
 
 
  with respect to body 
 
 
 
  can be obtained as the product of the matrices representing the pose of 
 
 
 
  with respect of 
 
 
 
  and that of 
 
 
 
  with respect of 
 
 




An important property of Denavit and Hartenberg matrices is that the inverse is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is both the transpose and the inverse of the orthogonal matrix

 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
Kinematics
Further matrices can be defined to represent velocity and acceleration of bodies.78 The velocity of body 
 
 
 
  with respect to body 
 
 
 
  can be represented in frame 
 
 
 
  by the matrix


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the angular velocity of body 
 
 
 
  with respect to body 
 
 
 
  and all the components are expressed in frame 
 
 
 
 ; 
 
 
 
  is the velocity of one point of body 
 
 
 
  with respect to body 
 
 
 
  (the pole). The pole is the point of 
 
 
 
  passing through the origin of frame 
 
 
 
 .
The acceleration matrix can be defined as the sum of the time derivative of the velocity plus the velocity squared



The velocity and the acceleration in frame 
 
 
 
  of a point of body 
 
 
 
  can be evaluated as






It is also possible to prove that






Velocity and acceleration matrices add up according to the following rules





 
  in other words the absolute velocity is the sum of the drag plus the relative velocity; for the acceleration the Coriolis' term is also present.
The components of velocity and acceleration matrices are expressed in an arbitrary frame 
 
 
 
  and transform from one frame to another by the following rule






Dynamics
For the dynamics 3 further matrices are necessary to describe the inertia 
 
 
 
 , the linear and angular momentum 
 
 
 
 , and the forces and torques 
 
 
 
  applied to a body.
Inertia 
 
 
 
 :



where 
 
 
 
  is the mass, 
 
 
 
  represent the position of the center of mass, and the terms 
 
 
 
  represent inertia and are defined as












Action matrix 
 
 
 
 , containing force 
 
 
 
  and torque 
 
 
 
 :



Momentum matrix 
 
 
 
 , containing linear 
 
 
 
  and angular 
 
 
 
  momentum



All the matrices are represented with the vector components in a certain frame 
 
 
 
 . Transformation of the components from frame 
 
 
 
 
  to frame 
 
 
 
  follows to rule









The matrices described allow the writing of the dynamic equations in a concise way.
Newton's law:


 
  Momentum:



The first of these equations express the Newton's law and is the equivalent of the vector equation 
 
 
 
  (force equal mass times acceleration) plus 
 
 
 
  (angular acceleration in function of inertia and angular velocity); the second equation permits the evaluation of the linear and angular momentum when velocity and inertia are known.
Modified DH parameters
Some books such as 9 use modified DH parameters. The difference between the classic DH parameters and the modified DH parameters are the locations of the coordinates system attachment to the links and the order of the performed transformations.  Compared with the classic DH parameters, the coordinates of frame 
 
 
 
  is put on axis i-1, not the axis i in classic DH convention. The coordinates of 
 
 
 
 
  is put on the axis i, not the axis i+1 in classic DH convention.
Another difference is that according to the modified convention, the transform matrix is given by the following order of operations:



Thus, the matrix of the modified DH parameters becomes



It should be noteworthy to remark that some books (e.g.:10) use 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to indicate the length and twist of link n-1 rather than link n. As a consequence, 
 
 
 
  is formed only with parameters using the same subscript.
Surveys of DH conventions and its differences have been published.1112
See also

Forward kinematics
Inverse kinematics
Kinematic chain
Kinematics
Robotics conventions
Mechanical systems

References
"
Category:Robot control



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


John J. Craig, Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and Control (3rd Edition)↩
↩
↩
↩




