


Cone-shape distribution function




Cone-shape distribution function
The cone-shape distribution function, also known as the Zhao-Atlas-Marks time-frequency distribution,1 (acronymized as the ZAM 234 distribution5 or ZAMD6), is one of the members of Cohen's class distribution function.78 It was first proposed by Yunxin Zhao, Les E. Atlas, and Robert J. Marks II in 1990.9 The distribution's name stems from the twin cone shape of the distribution's kernel function on the 
 
 
 
  plane.10 The advantage of the cone kernel function is that it can completely remove the cross-term between two components having the same center frequency. Cross-term results from components with the same time center, however, cannot be completely removed by the cone-shaped kernel.1112
Mathematical definition
The definition of the cone-shape distribution function is:



where



and the kernel function is



The kernel function in 
 
 
 
  domain is defined as:



Following are the magnitude distribution of the kernel function in 
 
 
 
  domain.
(Figure)
cone shape 1.jpg

Following are the magnitude distribution of the kernel function in 
 
 
 
  domain with different 
 
 
 
  values.
(Figure)
cone shape 2.jpg

As is seen in the figure above, a properly chosen kernel of cone-shape distribution function can filter out the interference on the 
 
 
 
  axis in the 
 
 
 
  domain, or the ambiguity domain. Therefore, unlike the Choi-Williams distribution function, the cone-shape distribution function can effectively reduce the cross-term results form two component with same center frequency. However, the cross-terms on the 
 
 
 
  axis are still preserved.
The cone-shape distribution function is in the MATLAB Time-Frequency Toolbox13 and National Instruments' LabVIEW Tools for Time-Frequency, Time-Series, and Wavelet Analysis 14
See also

Cohen's class distribution function
Choi-Williams distribution function
Wigner distribution function
Ambiguity function
Short-time Fourier transform

References
"
Category:Time–frequency analysis Category:Transforms



Leon Cohen, Time Frequency Analysis: Theory and Applications, Prentice Hall, (1994)











1 Time-Frequency Toolbox For Use with MATLAB
2 National Instruments. LabVIEW Tools for Time-Frequency, Time-Series, and Wavelet Analysis. 3 TFA Cone-Shaped Distribution VI




