


Isochron




Isochron

In the mathematical theory of dynamical systems, an isochron is a set of initial conditions for the system that all lead to the same long-term behaviour.12
Mathematical isochron
An introductory example
Consider the ordinary differential equation for a solution 
 
 
 
  evolving in time:



This ordinary differential equation (ODE) needs two initial conditions at, say, time 
 
 
 
 
 . Denote the initial conditions by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are some parameters. The following argument shows that the isochrons for this system are here the straight lines 
 
 
 
 
 .
The general solution of the above ODE is



Now, as time increases, 
 
 
 
 , the exponential terms decays very quickly to zero (exponential decay). Thus all solutions of the ODE quickly approach 
 
 
 
 . That is, all solutions with the same 
 
 
 
  have the same long term evolution. The exponential decay of the 
 
 
 
 
  term brings together a host of solutions to share the same long term evolution. Find the isochrons by answering which initial conditions have the same 
 
 
 
 .
At the initial time 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Algebraically eliminate the immaterial constant 
 
 
 
 
  from these two equations to deduce that all initial conditions 
 
 
 
  have the same 
 
 
 
 , hence the same long term evolution, and hence form an isochron.
Accurate forecasting requires isochrons
Let's turn to a more interesting application of the notion of isochrons. Isochrons arise when trying to forecast predictions from models of dynamical systems. Consider the toy system of two coupled ordinary differential equations



A marvellous mathematical trick is the normal form (mathematics) transformation.3 Here the coordinate transformation near the origin



to new variables 
 
 
 
 
  transforms the dynamics to the separated form



Hence, near the origin, 
 
 
 
  decays to zero exponentially quickly as its equation is 
 
 
 
 . So the long term evolution is determined solely by 
 
 
 
 : the 
 
 
 
 
  equation is the model.
Let us use the 
 
 
 
  equation to predict the future. Given some initial values 
 
 
 
  of the original variables: what initial value should we use for 
 
 
 
 ? Answer: the 
 
 
 
  that has the same long term evolution. In the normal form above, 
 
 
 
 
  evolves independently of 
 
 
 
 . So all initial conditions with the same 
 
 
 
 , but different 
 
 
 
 , have the same long term evolution. Fix 
 
 
 
  and vary 
 
 
 
 
  gives the curving isochrons in the 
 
 
 
  plane. For example, very near the origin the isochrons of the above system are approximately the lines 
 
 
 
 . Find which isochron the initial values 
 
 
 
  lie on: that isochron is characterised by some 
 
 
 
 ; the initial condition that gives the correct forecast from the model for all time is then 
 
 
 
 
 .
You may find such normal form transformations for relatively simple systems of ordinary differential equations, both deterministic and stochastic, via an interactive web site.1
References


"
Category:Dynamical systems



J. Guckenheimer, Isochrons and phaseless sets, J. Math. Biol., 1:259–273 (1975)
S.M. Cox and A.J. Roberts, Initial conditions for models of dynamical systems, Physica D, 85:126–141 (1995)
A.J. Roberts, Normal form transforms separate slow and fast modes in stochastic dynamical systems, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 387:12–38 (2008)




