


Taylor–Green vortex




Taylor–Green vortex

In fluid dynamics, the Taylor–Green vortex is an unsteady flow of a decaying vortex, which has an exact closed form solution of the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations in Cartesian coordinates. It is named after the British physicist and mathematician Geoffrey Ingram Taylor and his collaborator A. E. Green.1
(Figure)
Vector plot of the Taylor-Green Vortex

Original work
In the original work of Taylor and Green,2 a particular flow is analyzed in three spatial dimensions, with the three velocity components 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  specified by









The continuity equation 
 
 
 
  determines that 
 
 
 
 . The small time behavior of the flow is then found through simplification of the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations using the initial flow to give a step-by-step solution as time progresses.
An exact solution in two spatial dimensions is known, and is presented below.
Incompressible Navier–Stokes equations
The incompressible Navier–Stokes equations in the absence of body force, and in two spatial dimensions, are given by








 
  The first of the above equation represents the continuity equation and the other two represent the momentum equations.
Taylor–Green vortex solution
In the domain 
 
 
 
 
 , the solution is given by



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  being the kinematic viscosity of the fluid. Following the analysis of Taylor and Green3 for the two-dimensional situation, and for 
 
 
 
 , gives agreement with this exact solution, if the exponential is expanded as a Taylor series, i.e. 
 
 
 
 
 .
The pressure field 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by substituting the velocity solution in the momentum equations and is given by



The stream function of the Taylor–Green vortex solution, i.e. which satisfies 
 
 
 
  for flow velocity 
 
 
 
 , is



Similarly, the vorticity, which satisfies 
 
 
 
 , is given by



The Taylor–Green vortex solution may be used for testing and validation of temporal accuracy of Navier–Stokes algorithms.45
References
"
Category:Fluid dynamics Category:Computational fluid dynamics



Taylor, G. I. and Green, A. E., Mechanism of the Production of Small Eddies from Large Ones, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 158, 499–521 (1937).↩


Chorin, A. J., Numerical solution of the Navier–Stokes equations, Math. Comp., 22, 745–762 (1968).↩
Kim, J. and Moin, P., Application of a fractional-step method to incompressible Navier–Stokes equations, J. Comput. Phys., 59, 308–323 (1985).↩




