


Uniformly most powerful test




Uniformly most powerful test

In statistical hypothesis testing, a uniformly most powerful (UMP) test is a hypothesis test which has the greatest power 1 − β among all possible tests of a given size α. For example, according to the Neyman–Pearson lemma, the likelihood-ratio test is UMP for testing simple (point) hypotheses.
Setting
Let 
 
 
 
  denote a random vector (corresponding to the measurements), taken from a parametrized family of probability density functions or probability mass functions

 
 , which depends on the unknown deterministic parameter 
 
 
 
 . The parameter space 
 
 
 
  is partitioned into two disjoint sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the hypothesis that 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  denote the hypothesis that 
 
 
 
 . The binary test of hypotheses is performed using a test function 
 
 
 
 .


 
  meaning that 
 
 
 
  is in force if the measurement 
 
 
 
  and that 
 
 
 
 
  is in force if the measurement 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  is a disjoint covering of the measurement space.
Formal definition
A test function 
 
 
 
  is UMP of size 
 
 
 
  if for any other test function 
 
 
 
 
  satisfying


 
  we have



The Karlin-Rubin theorem
The Karlin-Rubin theorem1 can be regarded as an extension of the Neyman-Pearson lemma for composite hypotheses. Consider a scalar measurement having a probability density function parameterized by a scalar parameter θ, and define the likelihood ratio 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is monotone non-decreasing, in 
 
 
 
 
 , for any pair 
 
 
 
  (meaning that the greater 
 
 
 
  is, the more likely 
 
 
 
  is), then the threshold test:




where 
 
 
 
  is chosen such that 
 
 


is the UMP test of size α for testing 
 
 

Note that exactly the same test is also UMP for testing 
 
 

Important case: The exponential family
Although the Karlin-Rubin theorem may seem weak because of its restriction to scalar parameter and scalar measurement, it turns out that there exist a host of problems for which the theorem holds. In particular, the one-dimensional exponential family of probability density functions or probability mass functions with


 
  has a monotone non-decreasing likelihood ratio in the sufficient statistic T(x), provided that 
 
 
 
  is non-decreasing.
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  denote i.i.d. normally distributed 
 
 
 
 -dimensional random vectors with mean 
 
 
 
  and covariance matrix 
 
 
 
 . We then have






 
  which is exactly in the form of the exponential family shown in the previous section, with the sufficient statistic being



Thus, we conclude that the test






is the UMP test of size 
 
 
 
  for testing 
 
 
 
  vs. 
 
 

Further discussion
Finally, we note that in general, UMP tests do not exist for vector parameters or for two-sided tests (a test in which one hypothesis lies on both sides of the alternative). Why is it so?
The reason is that in these situations, the most powerful test of a given size for one possible value of the parameter (e.g. for 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 ) is different from the most powerful test of the same size for a different value of the parameter (e.g. for 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 ). As a result, no test is uniformly most powerful.
References
Further reading

L. L. Scharf, Statistical Signal Processing, Addison-Wesley, 1991, section 4.7.

"
Category:Hypothesis testing Category:Statistical terminology



Casella, G.; Berger, R.L. (2008), Statistical Inference, Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-495-39187-5 (Theorem 8.3.17)




