


Accessible category




Accessible category
The theory of '''accessible categories'''  originates from the work of [[Alexander Grothendieck|Gr
 othendieck]] completed by 1969 (Grothendieck (1972)) and Gabriel-Ulmer (1971). It has been further developed in 1989 by Michael Makkai and Robert Paré, with motivation coming from model theory, a branch of mathematical logic.1 Accessible categories have also applications in homotopy theory.23 Grothendieck also continued the development of the theory for homotopy-theoretic purposes in his (still partly unpublished) 1991 manuscript Les dérivateurs (Grothendieck (1991)). Some properties of accessible categories depend on the set universe in use, particularly on the cardinal properties.4
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be an infinite regular cardinal and let 
 
 
 
  be a category. An object 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is called 

 
 -presentable if the Hom functor

 
  preserves 
 
 
 
 -directed colimits. The category 
 
 
 
  is called 

 
 -accessible provided that :



 
  has 
 
 
 
 -directed colimits


 
  has a set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 -presentable objects such that every object of 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -directed colimit of objects of 
 
 


A category 
 
 
 
  is called accessible if 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -accessible for some infinite regular cardinal 
 
 
 
 .
A 
 
 
 
 -presentable object is usually called finitely presentable, and an 
 
 
 
 -accessible category is often called finitely accessible.
Examples

The category 

 
 -Mod of (left) 
 
 
 
 -modules is finitely accessible for any ring 
 
 
 
 . The objects that are finitely presentable in the above sense are precisely the finitely presented modules (which are not necessarily the same as the finitely generated modules unless 
 
 
 
  is noetherian).
The category of simplicial sets is finitely-accessible.
The category Mod(T) of models of some first-order theory T with countable signature is 
 
 
 
  -accessible. 
 
 
 
  -presentable objects are models with a countable number of elements.

 Further notions
When the category 
 
 
 
  is cocomplete, 
 
 
 
  is called a locally presentable category. Locally presentable categories are also complete.
References
Further reading











(Les Dérivateurs: Texte d'Alexandre Grothendieck. Édité par M. Künzer, J. Malgoire, G. Maltsiniotis)




"
Category:Category theory



J. Rosicky "On combinatorial model categories", Arxiv, 16 August 2007. Retrieved on 19 January 2008.

J. Rosicky, Injectivity and accessible categories
J. Adamek and J. Rosicky, Locally Presentable and Accessible Categories, Cambridge University Press 1994




