


Choi–Williams distribution function




Choi–Williams distribution function

Choi–Williams distribution function is one of the members of Cohen's class distribution function. It was first proposed by Hyung-Ill Choi and William J. Williams in 1989. This distribution function adopts exponential kernel to suppress the cross-term. However, the kernel gain does not decrease along the 
 
 
 
  axes in the ambiguity domain. Consequently, the kernel function of Choi–Williams distribution function can only filter out the cross-terms that result from the components that differ in both time and frequency center.
Mathematical definition
The definition of the cone-shape distribution function is shown as follows:



where



and the kernel function is:



Following are the magnitude distribution of the kernel function in 
 
 
 
  domain with different 
 
 
 
  values.
As we can see from the figure above, the kernel function indeed suppress the interference which is away from the origin, but for the cross-term locates on the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  axes, this kernel function can do nothing about it.
See also

Cone-shape distribution function
Wigner distribution function
Ambiguity function
Short-time Fourier transform

References

Time frequency analysis and wavelet transform class notes, Jian-Jiun Ding, the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan, 2007.
S. Qian and D. Chen, Joint Time-Frequency Analysis: Methods and Applications, Chap. 5, Prentice Hall, N.J., 1996.
H. Choi and W. J. Williams, “Improved time-frequency representation of multicomponent signals using exponential kernels,” IEEE. Trans. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Processing, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 862–871, June 1989.
Y. Zhao, L. E. Atlas, and R. J. Marks, “The use of cone-shape kernels for generalized time-frequency representations of nonstationary signals,” IEEE Trans. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Processing, vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 1084–1091, July 1990.

"
Category:Time–frequency analysis Category:Transforms


