


A-equivalence




A-equivalence

In mathematics, 

 
 -equivalence, sometimes called right-left equivalence, is an equivalence relation between map germs.
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two manifolds, and let 
 
 
 
  be two smooth map germs. We say that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 -equivalent if there exist diffeomorphism germs 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

In other words, two map germs are 
 
 
 
 -equivalent if one can be taken onto the other by a diffeomorphic change of co-ordinates in the source (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) and the target (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ).
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the space of smooth map germs

 
  Let 
 
 
 
  be the group of diffeomorphism germs 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the group of diffeomorphism germs 
 
 
 
  The group 
 
 
 
  acts on 
 
 
 
  in the natural way
 
 
 
  Under this action we see that the map germs

 
  are 
 
 
 
 -equivalent if, and only if, 
 
 
 
  lies in the orbit of 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
  (or vice versa).
A map germ is called stable if its orbit under the action of 
 
 
 
  is open relative to the Whitney topology. Since 
 
 
 
  is an infinite dimensional space metric topology is no longer trivial. Whitney topology compares the differences in successive derivatives and gives a notion of proximity within the infinite dimensional space. A base for the open sets of the topology in question is given by taking 
 
 
 
 -jets for every 
 
 
 
  and taking open neighbourhoods in the ordinary Euclidean sense. Open sets in the topology are then unions of these base sets.
Consider the orbit of some map germ

 
  The map germ

 
  is called simple if there are only finitely many other orbits in a neighbourhood of each of its points. Vladimir Arnold has shown that the only simple singular map germs

 
  for 
 
 
 
  are the infinite sequence 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ), the infinite sequence 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ), 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 

See also

K-equivalence (contact equivalence)

References

M. Golubitsky and V. Guillemin, Stable Mappings and Their Singularities. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer.

"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Singularity theory


