   Diketene      Diketene   Diketene is an organic compound with the formula (CH 2 CO) 2 . It is formed by dimerization of ketene (IUPAC name: ethenone). Diketene is a member of the oxetane family. It is used as a reagent in organic chemistry . 1 It is a colorless liquid.  Production  Ketene is generated by dehydrating acetic acid at 700–750 °C in the presence of triethyl phosphate as a catalyst or (in Switzerland and the CIS) by the thermolysis of acetone at 600–700 °C in the presence of carbon disulfide as a catalyst. 2   CH 3 CO 2 H → H 2 C=C=O + H 2 O (Δ H = +147 kJ/mol)  CH 3 COCH 3 → H 2 C=C=O + CH 4    Reactions  Heating or irradiation with UV light 3 regenerates the ketene monomer:   (CH 2 CO) 2     ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   2 CH 2 CO   Alkylated ketenes also dimerize with ease and form substituted diketenes.  Diketene readily hydrolyses in water forming acetoacetic acid , its half-life in pure water is approximately 45 minutes a 25 °C at 2  Certain diketenes with two aliphatic chains , such as alkyl ketene dimer (AKD), are used industrially to improve hydrophobicity in paper .  At one time acetic anhydride was prepared by the reaction of ketene with acetic acid: 4   H 2 C=C=O + CH 3 COOH → (CH 3 CO) 2 O (Δ H = −63 kJ/mol)   Acetoacetylation  Diketene also reacts with alcohols and amines to the corresponding acetoacetic acid derivatives. The process is sometimes called acetoacetylation. An example is the reaction with 2-aminoindane : 5      Diketene is an important industrial intermediate used for the production of acetoacetate esters and amides as well as substituted 1-phenyl-3-methylpyrazolones. The latter are used in the manufacture of dyestuffs and pigments. 6 A typical reaction is:   ArNH 2 + (CH 2 CO) 2 → ArNHC(O)CH 2 C(O)CH 3    These acetoacetamides are precursors to arylide yellow and diarylide pigments . 7  Safety  Despite its high reactivity as an alkylating agent , and unlike analogue β-lactones propiolactone and β-butyrolactone, diketene is inactive as a carcinogen, possibly due to the instability of its DNA adducts . 8  References  "  Category:Alkenes  Category:Oxetanes  Category:Lactones     Beilstein E III/IV 17: 4297. ↩   ↩  . ↩  ↩  Ashford's Dictionary of Industrial Chemicals, Third Edition, 2011, pages 3241-2. ↩  K. Hunger. W. Herbst "Pigments, Organic" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry , Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2012. ↩  ↩     