


Shift space




Shift space

In symbolic dynamics and related branches of mathematics, a shift space or subshift is a set of infinite words that represent the evolution of a discrete system. In fact, shift spaces and symbolic dynamical systems are often considered synonyms.
Notation
Let A be a finite set of states. An infinite (respectively bi-infinite) word over A is a sequence 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  (resp. 
 
 
 
 ) and 
 
 
 
 
  is in A for any 
 
 
 
 . The shift operator

 
  acts on an infinite or bi-infinite word by shifting all symbols to the left, i.e.,


 
  for all n. In the following we choose 
 
 
 
  and thus speak of infinite words, but all definitions are naturally generalizable to the bi-infinite case.
Definition
A set of infinite words over A is a shift space if it is closed with respect to the natural product topology of 
 
 
 
 
  and invariant under the shift operator. Thus a set 
 
 
 
  is a subshift if and only if

for any (pointwise) convergent sequence

 
  of elements of S, the limit

 
  also belongs to S; and


 
 .

A shift space S is sometimes denoted as 
 
 
 
 
  to emphasize the role of the shift operator.
Some authors1 use the term subshift for a set of infinite words that is just invariant under the shift, and reserve the term shift space for those that are also closed.
Characterization and sofic subshifts
A subset S of 
 
 
 
  is a shift space if and only if there exists a set X of finite words such that S coincides with the set of all infinite words over A having no factor in X.
In particular, if X is finite then S is called a subshift of finite type and more generally when X is a regular language, the corresponding subshift is called sofic. The name "sofic" was coined by , based on the Hebrew word סופי meaning "finite", to refer to the fact that this is a generalization of a finiteness property.2
Examples
The first trivial example of shift space (of finite type) is the full shift

 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
 . The set of all infinite words over A containing at most one b is a sofic subshift, not of finite type. The set of all infinite words over A whose b form blocks of prime length is not sofic (this can be shown by using the pumping lemma).
Further reading






References


"
Category:Symbolic dynamics Category:Dynamical systems Category:Combinatorics on words




. Weiss does not describe the origin of the word other than calling it a neologism; however, its Hebrew origin is stated by MathSciNet reviewer R. L. Adler.




