


Cone of curves




Cone of curves

In mathematics, the cone of curves (sometimes the Kleiman-Mori cone) of an algebraic variety

 
  is a combinatorial invariant of much importance to the birational geometry of 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a proper variety. By definition, a (real) 1-cycle on 
 
 
 
  is a formal linear combination

 
  of irreducible, reduced and proper curves 
 
 
 
 , with coefficients 
 
 
 
 . Numerical equivalence of 1-cycles is defined by intersections: two 1-cycles 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are numerically equivalent if 
 
 
 
  for every Cartier divisor

 
  on 
 
 
 
 . Denote the real vector space of 1-cycles modulo numerical equivalence by 
 
 
 
 .
We define the cone of curves of 
 
 
 
  to be



where the 
 
 
 
  are irreducible, reduced, proper curves on 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  their classes in 
 
 
 
 . It is not difficult to see that 
 
 
 
  is indeed a convex cone in the sense of convex geometry.
Applications
One useful application of the notion of the cone of curves is the Kleiman condition, which says that a (Cartier) divisor 
 
 
 
  on a complete variety 
 
 
 
  is ample if and only if 
 
 
 
  for any nonzero element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the closure of the cone of curves in the usual real topology. (In general, 
 
 
 
  need not be closed, so taking the closure here is important.)
A more involved example is the role played by the cone of curves in the theory of minimal models of algebraic varieties. Briefly, the goal of that theory is as follows: given a (mildly singular) projective variety 
 
 
 
 , find a (mildly singular) variety 
 
 
 
  which is birational to 
 
 
 
 , and whose canonical divisor

 
  is nef. The great breakthrough of the early 1980s (due to Mori and others) was to construct (at least morally) the necessary birational map from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  as a sequence of steps, each of which can be thought of as contraction of a 
 
 
 
 -negative extremal ray of 
 
 
 
 . This process encounters difficulties, however, whose resolution necessitates the introduction of the flip.
A structure theorem
The above process of contractions could not proceed without the fundamental result on the structure of the cone of curves known as the Cone Theorem. The first version of this theorem, for smooth varieties, is due to Mori; it was later generalised to a larger class of varieties by Kollár, Reid, Shokurov, and others. Mori's version of the theorem is as follows:
Cone Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth projective variety. Then
1. There are countably many rational curves

 
  on 
 
 
 
 , satisfying 
 
 
 
 , and



2. For any positive real number 
 
 
 
  and any ample divisor

 
 ,



where the sum in the last term is finite.
The first assertion says that, in the closed half-space of 
 
 
 
  where intersection with 
 
 
 
  is nonnegative, we know nothing, but in the complementary half-space, the cone is spanned by some countable collection of curves which are quite special: they are rational, and their 'degree' is bounded very tightly by the dimension of 
 
 
 
 . The second assertion then tells us more: it says that, away from the hyperplane 
 
 
 
 , extremal rays of the cone cannot accumulate.
If in addition the variety 
 
 
 
  is defined over a field of characteristic 0, we have the following assertion, sometimes referred to as the Contraction Theorem:
3. Let 
 
 
 
  be an extremal face of the cone of curves on which 
 
 
 
  is negative. Then there is a unique morphism

 
  to a projective variety Z, such that 
 
 
 
  and an irreducible curve 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is mapped to a point by 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
References

Lazarsfeld, R., Positivity in Algebraic Geometry I, Springer-Verlag, 2004. ISBN 3-540-22533-1
Kollár, J. and Mori, S., Birational Geometry of Algebraic Varieties, Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-521-63277-3

"
Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Birational geometry


