   Yttria-stabilized zirconia      Yttria-stabilized zirconia   Yttria-stabilized zirconia ( YSZ ) is a ceramic in which the crystal structure of zirconium dioxide is made stable at room temperature by an addition of yttrium oxide . These oxides are commonly called "zirconia" ( Zr O 2 ) and "yttria" ( Y 2 O 3 ), hence the name.  Stabilization  Pure zirconium dioxide undergoes a phase transformation from monoclinic (stable at the room temperature) to tetragonal (at about 1000 °C) and then to cubic (at about 2370 °C), according to the scheme:  monoclinic (1173 °C)   ↔   normal-↔   \leftrightarrow   tetragonal (2370 °C)   ↔   normal-↔   \leftrightarrow   cubic (2690 °C)   ↔   normal-↔   \leftrightarrow   melt  Obtaining stable sintered zirconia ceramic products is difficult because of the large volume change accompanying the transition from tetragonal to monoclinic (about 9%). Stabilization of the cubic polymorph of zirconia over wider range of temperatures is accomplished by substitution of some of the Zr 4+ ions (ionic radius of 0.82 Å, too small for ideal lattice of fluorite characteristic for the tetragonal zirconia) in the crystal lattice with slightly larger ions, e.g., those of Y 3+ (ionic radius of 0.96 Å). The resulting doped zirconia materials are termed stabilized zirconias . 1  Materials related to YSZ include calcia -, magnesia -, ceria - or alumina -stabilized zirconias, or partially stabilized zirconias (PSZ). Hafnia stabilized Zirconia is also known.  Some of the abbreviations used in conjunction with stabilized zirconias are as follow:   Partly stabilized zirconia ZrO 2 :  PSZ - Partially Stabilized Zirconia  TZP - Tetragonal Zirconia Polycrystal  4YSZ: with 4 mol-% Y 2 O 3 partially Stabilized ZrO 2 , Yttria Stabilized Zirconia   Fully stabilized zirconias ZrO 2 :  FSZ - Fully Stabilized Zirconia  CSZ - Cubic Stabilized Zirconia  8YSZ - with 8 mol-% Y 2 O 3 Fully Stabilized ZrO 2    Thermal expansion coefficient  The thermal expansion coefficients depends on the modification of zirconia as follows:   Monoclinic: 7 · 10 −6 /K 2  Tetragonal: 12 · 10 −6 /K 3  Y 2 O 3 stabilized: 10.5 · 10 −6 /K 4   Effect of stabilization of ionic conductivity  The addition of yttria to pure zirconia replaces some of the Zr 4+ ions in the zirconia lattice with Y 3+ ions. This produces oxygen vacancies, as three O 2− ions replace four O 2− ions. It also permits yttrium stabilized zirconia to conduct O 2− ions (and thus conduct an electric current), provided there is sufficient vacancy site mobility, a property that increases with temperature. This ability to conduct O 2− ions makes yttria-stabilized zirconia well suited to use in solid oxide fuel cells, although it requires that they operate at high enough temperatures.  The ionic conductivity of the stabilized zirconias increases with increasing dopant concentration (linearly for low dopant concentrations), then saturates, and then starts to decrease. The maximum ionic conductivity is obtained at Y 2 O 3 concentration of about 8% (1000 °C). 5  Applications  YSZ has a number of applications:   For its hardness and chemical inertness (e.g., tooth crowns ).  As a refractory (e.g., in jet engines).  As a thermal barrier coating in gas turbines  As an electroceramic due to its ion-conducting properties (e.g., to determine oxygen content in exhaust gases, to measure pH in high-temperature water, in fuel cells).  Used in the production of a solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC). YSZ is used as the solid electrolyte , which enables oxygen ion conduction while blocking electronic conduction. In order to achieve sufficient ion conduction, an SOFC with a YSZ electrolyte must be operated at high temperatures (800 °C-1000 °C). While it is advantageous that YSZ retains mechanical robustness at those temperatures, the high temperature necessary is often a disadvantage of SOFCs. The high density of YSZ is also necessary in order to physically separate the gaseous fuel from oxygen, or else the electrochemical system would produce no electrical power. 6 7  For its hardness and optical properties in monocrystal form (see " cubic zirconia "), it is used as jewelry.  As a material for non-metallic knife blades, produced by Boker and Kyocera companies.  In water-based pastes for do-it-yourself ceramics and cements. These contain microscopic YSZ milled fibers or sub-micrometer particles, often with potassium silicate and zirconium acetate binders (at mildly acidic pH). The cementation occurs on removal of water. The resulting ceramic material is suitable for very high temperature applications.  YSZ doped with rare-earth materials can act as a thermographic phosphor and a luminescent material. 8  Historically used for glowing rods in Nernst lamps .  As a high precision alignment sleeve for optical fiber connector ferrules. 9   See also   Cubic zirconia  Sintering   References  Further reading     de:Zirconium(IV)-oxid#Stabilisierung "  Category:Zirconium compounds  Category:Refractory materials  Category:Electrochemistry     H. Yanagida, K. Koumoto, M. Miyayama, "The Chemistry of Ceramics", John Wiley & Sons, 1996. ISBN 0 471 95627 9. ↩  Matweb: CeramTec 848 Zirconia (ZrO 2 ) & Zirconium Oxide, Zirconia, ZrO 2 ↩     ↩  ↩  ↩  http://www.diamond-fo.com/en/products_catalogue_details.asp?section=2&group; ;=e2000&source;=Assemblies&family;=10101 ↩     