


Numerical range




Numerical range

In the mathematical field of linear algebra and convex analysis, the numerical range or field of values of a complex n × n matrix A is the set



where x* denotes the conjugate transpose of the vector x.
In engineering, numerical ranges are used as a rough estimate of eigenvalues of A. Recently, generalizations of numerical range are used to study quantum computing.
A related concept is the numerical radius, which is the largest absolute value of the numbers in the numerical range, i.e.



r(A) is a norm. r(A)=||A||, where ||A|| is the operator norm of A.
Properties

The numerical range is the range of the Rayleigh quotient.
(Hausdorff–Toeplitz theorem) The numerical range is convex and compact.


 
  for all square matrix A and complex numbers α and β. Here I is the identity matrix.


 
  is a subset of the closed right half-plane if and only if 
 
 
 
  is positive semidefinite.
The numerical range 
 
 
 
  is the only function on the set of square matrices that satisfies (2), (3) and (4).
(Sub-additive) 
 
 
 
 .


 
  contains all the eigenvalues of A.
The numerical range of a 2×2 matrix is an elliptical disk.


 
  is a real line segment [α, β] if and only if A is a Hermitian matrix with its smallest and the largest eigenvalues being α and β
If A is a normal matrix then 
 
 
 
  is the convex hull of its eigenvalues.
If α is a sharp point on the boundary of 
 
 
 
 , then α is a normal eigenvalue of A.


 
  is a norm on the space of n×n matrices.




Generalisations

C - numerical range
Higher rank numerical range
Joint numerical range
Product numerical range
Polynomial numerical hull

See also

Spectral theory
Rayleigh quotient

References

Bibliography



.

.

.

.

.

.

.
Roger A. Horn and Charles R. Johnson, Topics in Matrix Analysis, Chapter 1, Cambridge University Press, 1991. ISBN 0-521-30587-X (hardback), ISBN 0-521-46713-6 (paperback).
"Functional Characterizations of the Field of Values and the Convex Hull of the Spectrum", Charles R. Johnson, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 61(2):201-204, Dec 1976.

"
Category:Matrix theory Category:Spectral theory Category:Operator theory Category:Linear algebra


