


Short division




Short division

In arithmetic, short division is a division algorithm which breaks down a division problem into a series of easy steps. It is an abbreviated form of long division. Short division relies on mental arithmetic, which necessarily limits the size of the divisor. For most people, small integer divisors up to 12 are handled using memorised multiplication tables, though some people can use the procedure for larger divisors.
As in all division problems, a number called the dividend is divided by another, called the divisor. The answer to the problem is called the quotient.
Using short division, one can solve a division problem with a very large dividend by following a series of easy steps.1
Tableau
Short division does not use the slash (/) or obelus (÷) symbols. Instead, it displays the dividend, divisor, and quotient (when it is found) in a tableau. An example is shown below, representing the division of 500 by 4. The quotient is 125.



Alternatively the bar may be placed below the number which means the sum proceeds down the page. This is in distinction to long division where the space under the dividend is required for workings:



Example
The procedure involves several steps. As an example, consider 950 divided by 4:
Using the alternative layout the final workings would be:



Prime factoring
 A common requirement is to reduce a number to its prime factors. This is used particularly in working with vulgar fractions. The dividend is successively divided by prime numbers, repeating where possible:



So 950 = 2 x 5² x 19
Modulo division
When one is interested only in the remainder of the division, this procedure (a variation of short division) ignores the quotient and tallies only the remainders. It can be used for manual modulo calculation or as a test for even divisibility. The quotient digits are not written down.
For example, what is the remainder of 16762109 divided by 7?



The remainder is zero, so 16762109 is exactly divisible by 7.
See also

Arbitrary-precision arithmetic
Chunking (division)
Division algorithm
Elementary arithmetic
Fourier division
Long division
Polynomial long division
Synthetic division

References
External links

Alternative Division Algorithms: Double Division, Partial Quotients & Column Division, Partial Quotients Movie


Lesson in Short Division: TheMathPage.com

"
Category:Division (mathematics)



↩




