


Thermodynamic integration




Thermodynamic integration
'''Thermodynamic integration''' is a method used to compare the di
 fference in free energy between two given states (e.g., A and B) whose potential energies 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have different dependences on the spatial coordinates. Because the free energy of a system is not simply a function of the phase space coordinates of the system, but is instead a function of the Boltzmann-weighted integral over phase space (i.e. partition function), the free energy difference between two states cannot be calculated directly. In thermodynamic integration, the free energy difference is calculated by defining a thermodynamic path between the states and integrating over ensemble-averaged enthalpy changes along the path. Such paths can either be real chemical processes or alchemical processes. An example alchemical process is the Kirkwood's coupling parameter method.1
Derivation
Consider two systems, A and B, with potential energies 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The potential energy in either system can be calculated as an ensemble average over configurations sampled from a molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulation with proper Boltzmann weighting. Now consider a new potential energy function defined as:



Here, 
 
 
 
  is defined as a coupling parameter with a value between 0 and 1, and thus the potential energy as a function of 
 
 
 
  varies from the energy of system A for 
 
 
 
  and system B for 
 
 
 
 . In the canonical ensemble, the partition function of the system can be written as:



In this notation, 
 
 
 
  is the potential energy of state 
 
 
 
  in the ensemble with potential energy function 
 
 
 
  as defined above. The free energy of this system is defined as:


 
 ,
If we take the derivative of F with respect to λ, we will get that it equals the ensemble average of the derivative of potential energy with respect to λ.



The change in free energy between states A and B can thus be computed from the integral of the ensemble averaged derivatives of potential energy over the coupling parameter 
 
 
 
 .2 In practice, this is performed by defining a potential energy function 
 
 
 
 , sampling the ensemble of equilibrium configurations at a series of 
 
 
 
  values, calculating the ensemble-averaged derivative of 
 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  at each 
 
 
 
  value, and finally computing the integral over the ensemble-averaged derivatives.
Umbrella sampling is a related free energy method. It adds a bias to the potential energy. In the limit of an infinite strong bias it is equivalent to thermodynamic integration.3
See also

Free energy perturbation
Bennett acceptance ratio

References


"
Category:Computational chemistry



J. G. Kirkwood. Statistical mechanics of fluid mixtures, J. Chem. Phys., 3:300-313,1935
Frenkel, Daan and Smit, Berend. Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to Applications. Academic Press, 2007





