


Omega equation




Omega equation

The omega equation is of great importance in meteorology and atmospheric physics. It is a partial differential equation for the vertical velocity, 
 
 
 
 , which is defined as a Lagrangian rate of change of pressure with time, that is, 
 
 
 
 .
 The equation reads:




where 
 
 
 
  is the Coriolis parameter, 
 
 
 
  is the static stability, 
 
 
 
  is the geostrophic velocity vector, 
 
 
 
  is the geostrophic relative vorticity, 
 
 
 
  is the geopotential, 
 
 
 
  is the horizontal Laplacian operator and 
 
 
 
  is the horizontal del operator.1
Derivation
The derivation of the 
 
 
 
  equation is based on the vorticity equation and the thermodynamic equation. The vorticity equation for a frictionless atmosphere may be written as:




Here 
 
 
 
  is the relative vorticity, 
 
 
 
  the horizontal wind velocity vector, whose components in the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  directions are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively, 
 
 
 
  the absolute vorticity, 
 
 
 
  the Coriolis parameter, 
 
 
 
  the individual rate of change of pressure 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is the unit vertical vector, 
 
 
 
  is the isobaric Del (grad) operator, 
 
 
 
  is the vertical advection of vorticity and 
 
 
 
  represents the transformation of horizontal vorticity into vertical vorticity.2
The thermodynamic equation may be written as:





 where 
 
 
 
 , in which 
 
 
 
  is the supply of heat per unit-time and mass, 
 
 
 
 the specific heat of dry air, 
 
 
 
  the gas constant for dry air, 
 
 
 
  is the potential temperature and 
 
 
 
  is geopotential 
 
 
 
 .
The 
 
 
 
  equation () is then obtained from equation () and () by substituting values:


 
  and



into (), which gives:




Differentiating () with respect to 
 
 
 
  gives:




Taking the Laplacian (
 
 
 
 ) of () gives:




Adding () and (), simplifying and substituting 
 
 
 
 , gives:




Equation () is now a linear differential equation in 
 
 
 
 , such that it can be split into two part, namely 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , such that:




and




where 
 
 
 
  is the vertical velocity due to the mean baroclinicity in the atmosphere and 
 
 
 
  is the vertical velocity due to the non-adiabatic heating, which includes the latent heat of condensation, sensible heat radiation, etc. (Singh & Rathor, 1974).
Interpretation
Physically, the omega equation combines the effects of vertical differential of geostrophic absolute vorticity advection (first term on the right-hand side) and three-dimensional Laplacian of thickness thermal advection (second term on the right-hand side) and determines the resulting vertical motion (as expressed by the dependent variable 
 
 
 
 .)
The above equation is used by meteorologists and operational weather forecasters to assess development from synoptic charts. In rather simple terms, positive vorticity advection (or PVA for short) and no thermal advection results in a negative 
 
 
 
 , that is, ascending motion. Similarly, warm advection (or WA for short) also results in a negative 
 
 
 
  corresponding to ascending motion. Negative vorticity advection (NVA) or cold advection (CA) both result in a positive 
 
 
 
  corresponding to descending motion.
References


External links

American Meteorological Society definition

"
Category:Atmospheric dynamics Category:Partial differential equations



Holton, J.R., 1992, An Introduction to Dynamic Meteorology Academic Press, 166-175↩
Singh & Rathor, 1974, Reduction of the Complete Omega Equation to the Simplest Form, Pure and Applied Geophysics, 112, 219-223↩




