


Casey's theorem




Casey's theorem

In mathematics, Casey's theorem, also known as the generalized Ptolemy's theorem, is a theorem in Euclidean geometry named after the Irish mathematician John Casey.
Formulation of the theorem
(Figure)




Let 
 
 
 
  be a circle of radius 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 
  be (in that order) four non-intersecting circles that lie inside 
 
 
 
  and tangent to it. Denote by 
 
 
 
  the length of the exterior common bitangent of the circles 
 
 
 
 . Then:1



Note that in the degenerate case, where all four circles reduce to points, this is exactly Ptolemy's theorem.
Proof
The following proof is due2 to Zacharias.3 Denote the radius of circle 
 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  and its tangency point with the circle 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . We will use the notation 
 
 
 
  for the centers of the circles. Note that from Pythagorean theorem,



We will try to express this length in terms of the points 
 
 
 
 . By the law of cosines in triangle 
 
 
 
 ,



Since the circles 
 
 
 
  tangent to each other:



Let 
 
 
 
  be a point on the circle 
 
 
 
 . According to the law of sines in triangle 
 
 
 
 :



Therefore,



and substituting these in the formula above:









And finally, the length we seek is



We can now evaluate the left hand side, with the help of the original Ptolemy's theorem applied to the inscribed quadrilateral

 
 
 :






Q.E.D.
Further generalizations
It can be seen that the four circles need not lie inside the big circle. In fact, they may be tangent to it from the outside as well. In that case, the following change should be made:4




If 
 
 
 
  are both tangent from the same side of 
 
 
 
  (both in or both out), 
 
 
 
 
  is the length of the exterior common tangent.




If 
 
 
 
  are tangent from different sides of 
 
 
 
  (one in and one out), 
 
 
 
  is the length of the interior common tangent.




The converse of Casey's theorem is also true.5 That is, if equality holds, the circles are tangent.
Applications
Casey's theorem and its converse can be used to prove a variety of statements in Euclidean geometry. For example, the shortest known proof6 of Feuerbach's theorem uses the converse theorem.
References

7 8 9  


External links


Shailesh Shirali: On a generalized Ptolemy Theorem

"
Category:Circles Category:Euclidean geometry Category:Theorems in geometry Category:Articles containing proofs









↩
↩
↩




