


Hat matrix




Hat matrix

In statistics, the hat matrix, H, sometimes also called influence matrix1 and projection matrix, maps the vector of response values to the vector of fitted values (or predicted values). It describes the influence each response value has on each fitted value.23 The diagonal elements of the hat matrix are the leverages, which describe the influence each response value has on the fitted value for that same observation.
If the vector of response values is denoted by y and the vector of fitted values by ŷ,


 
  As ŷ is usually pronounced "y-hat", the hat matrix is so named as it "puts a hat on y". The formula for the vector of residuals r can also be expressed compactly using the hat matrix:


 
  Moreover, the element in the ith row and jth column of H is equal to the covariance between the jth response value and the ith fitted value, divided by the variance of the former:


 
 
  The covariance matrix of the residuals is therefore, by error propagation, equal to 
 
 
 
 , where Σ is the covariance matrix of the error vector (and by extension, the response vector as well). For the case of linear models with independent and identically distributed errors in which Σ = σ2I, this reduces to (I − H)σ2.4
Many types of models and techniques are subject to this formulation. A few examples are:

Linear model / linear least squares
Smoothing splines
Regression splines
Local regression
Kernel regression
Linear filtering

Linear model
Suppose that we wish to estimate a linear model using linear least squares. The model can be written as


 
  where X is a matrix of explanatory variables (the design matrix), β is a vector of unknown parameters to be estimated, and ε is the error vector.
Solution with unit weights and uncorrelated errors
When the weights for each observation are identical and the errors are uncorrelated, the estimated parameters are



so the fitted values are



Therefore the hat matrix is given by



In the language of linear algebra, the hat matrix is the orthogonal projection onto the column space of the design matrix X.5(Note that 
 
 
 
  is the pseudoinverse of X.)
Some facts of the hat matrix in this setting are summarized as follows:6



 
  and 
 
 

H is symmetric, and so is I - H.
H is idempotent
 
 
 
 , and so is I - H.
X is invariant under H

 
  hence 
 
 
 
 .




The hat matrix corresponding to a linear model is symmetric and idempotent, that is, 
 
 
 
 . However, this is not always the case; in locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOESS), for example, the hat matrix is in general neither symmetric nor idempotent.
For linear models, the trace of the hat matrix is equal to the rank of X, which is the number of independent parameters of the linear model. For other models such as LOESS that are still linear in the observations y, the hat matrix can be used to define the effective degrees of freedom of the model.
The hat matrix has a number of useful algebraic properties.78 Practical applications of the hat matrix in regression analysis include leverage and Cook's distance, which are concerned with identifying observations which have a large effect on the results of a regression.
More generally
Non-identical weights and/or correlated errors
The above may be generalized to the cases where the weights are not identical and/or the errors are correlated. Suppose that the covariance matrix of the errors is Σ. Then since



the hat matrix is thus



and again it may be seen that H2 = H, though now it is no longer symmetric.
Blockwise formula
Suppose the design matrix 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed by columns as 
 
 
 
 . Define the Hat operator as 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, define the residual operator as 
 
 
 
 . Then the Hat matrix of 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed as follows:


9
There are a number of applications of such a partitioning. The classical application has 
 
 
 
  a column of all ones, which allows one to analyze the effects of adding an intercept term to a regression. Another use is in the fixed effects model, where 
 
 
 
  is a large sparse matrix of the dummy variables for the fixed effect terms. One can use this partition to compute the hat matrix of 
 
 
 
  without explicitly forming the matrix 
 
 
 
 , which might be too large to fit into computer memory.
See also

Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse
Studentized residuals
Effective degrees of freedom
Idempotent matrix
Mean and predicted response

References
"
Category:Statistical terminology Category:Regression analysis Category:Matrices



Data Assimilation: Observation inﬂuence diagnostic of a data assimilation system↩
↩
↩



Gans, P. (1992) Data Fitting in the Chemical Sciences,, Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-93412-7↩
Draper, N.R., Smith, H. (1998) Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-17082-8↩
↩




