   TRNA nucleotidyltransferase      TRNA nucleotidyltransferase   In enzymology , a tRNA nucleotidyltransferase () is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction   tRNA n+1 + phosphate   ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons   tRNA n + a nucleoside diphosphate   where tRNA-N is a product of transcription, and tRNA Nucleotidyltransferase catalyzes this cytidine-cytidine-adenosine (CCA) addition to form the tRNA-NCCA product.  Function  Protein synthesis takes place in cytosolic ribosomes , mitochondria (mitoribosomes), and in plants, the plastids (chloroplast ribosomes). Each of these compartments requires a complete set of functional tRNAs to carry out protein synthesis. The production of mature tRNAs requires processing and modification steps 1 such as the addition of a 3’-terminal cytidine-cytidine-adenosine (CCA). Since no plant tRNA genes encode this particular sequence, a tRNA nucleotidyltransferase must add this sequence post-transcriptionally and therefore is present in all three compartments.  In eukaryotes , multiple forms of tRNA nucleotidyltransferases are synthesized from a single gene and are distributed to different subcellular compartments in the cell. There are multiple in-frame start codons which allow for the production of variant forms of the enzyme containing different targeting information predominantly found in the N-terminal sequence of the protein (reference). In vivo experiments show that the N-terminal sequences are used as transit peptides for import into the mitochondria and plastids. Comparison studies using available tRNA nucleotidyltransferase sequences have identified a single gene coding for this enzyme in plants. Complementation studies in yeast using cDNA derived from Arabidopsis thaliana 2 or Lupinus albus genes 3 demonstrate the biological activity of these enzymes. The enzyme has also been shown to repair damaged or incomplete CCA sequences in yeast. 4  This enzyme belongs to the family of transferases , specifically those transferring phosphorus-containing nucleotide groups ( nucleotidyltransferases ).  References  Further reading      "  Category:EC 2.7.7  Category:Enzymes of known structure     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     