


Bühlmann model




Bühlmann model

In credibility theory, a branch of study in actuarial science, the Bühlmann model is a random effects model (or "variance components model" or hierarchical linear model) used in to determine the appropriate premium for a group of insurance contracts. The model is named after Hans Bühlmann who first published a description in 1967.1
Model description
Consider i risks which generate random losses for which historical data of m recent claims are available (indexed by j). A premium for the ith risk is to be determined based on the expected value of claims. A linear estimator which minimizes the mean square error is sought. Write

Xij for the j-th claim on the i-th risk (we assume that all claims for i-th risk are independent and identically distributed)


 
  for the average value.


 
  - the parameter for the distribution of the i-th risk





 
  - premium for the i-th risk













Note
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are functions of random parameter 
 
 

The Bühlmann model is the solution for the problem:



where 
 
 
 
  is the estimator of premium 
 
 
 
  and arg min represents the parameter values which minimize the expression.
Model solution
The solution for the problem is:



where:



We can give this result the interpretation, that Z part of the premium is based on the information that we have about the specific risk, and (1-Z) part is based on the information that we have about the whole population.
Proof
The following proof is slightly different from the one in the original paper. It is also more general, because it considers all linear estimators, while original proof considers only estimators based on average claim. Proof can be found on this site.2
Lemma: The problem can be stated alternatively as:



Proof:





The last equation follows from the fact that 
 
 



We are using here the law of total expectation and the fact, that 
 
 

In our previous equation, we decompose minimized function in the sum of two expressions. The second expression does not depend on parameters used in minimization. Therefore, minimizing the function is the same as minimizing the first part of the sum.
Let us find critical points of the function





For 
 
 
 
  we have:




We can simplify derivative, noting that:



and



and



Taking above equations and inserting into derivative, we have:





Right side doesn't depend on k. Therefore all 
 
 
 
  are constant



From the solution for 
 
 
 
  we have



Finally, the best estimator is



References





"
Category:Actuarial science Category:Analysis of variance




url = http://www.math.ku.dk/~schmidli/rt.pdf




