


Coherent topology




Coherent topology

In topology, a coherent topology is a topology that is uniquely determined by a family of subspaces. Loosely speaking, a topological space is coherent with a family of subspaces if it is a topological union of those subspaces. It is also sometimes called the weak topology generated by the family of subspaces, a notion which is quite different from the notion of a weak topology generated by a set of maps.1
Definition
Let X be a topological space and let C = {Cα : α ∈ A} be a family of subspaces of X (typically C will be a cover of X). Then X is said to be coherent with C (or determined by C)2 if X has the final topology coinduced by the inclusion maps


 
  By definition, this is the finest topology on (the underlying set of) X for which the inclusion maps are continuous.
Equivalently, X is coherent with C if either of the following two equivalent conditions holds:

A subset U is open in X if and only if U ∩ Cα is open in Cα for each α ∈ A.
A subset U is closed in X if and only if U ∩ Cα is closed in Cα for each α ∈ A.

Given a topological space X and any family of subspaces C there is unique topology on (the underlying set of) X which is coherent with C. This topology will, in general, be finer than the given topology on X.
Examples

A topological space X is coherent with every open cover of X.
A topological space X is coherent with every locally finite closed cover of X.
A discrete space is coherent with every family of subspaces (including the empty family).
A topological space X is coherent with a partition of X if and only X is homeomorphic to the disjoint union of the elements of the partition.
Finitely generated spaces are those determined by the family of all finite subspaces.
Compactly generated spaces are those determined by the family of all compact subspaces.
A CW complex X is coherent with its family of n-skeletons Xn.

Topological union
Let 
 
 
 
  be a family of (not necessarily disjoint) topological spaces such that the induced topologies agree on each intersection Xα ∩ Xβ. Assume further that Xα ∩ Xβ is closed in Xα for each α,β. Then the topological union X is the set-theoretic union


 
  endowed with the final topology coinduced by the inclusion maps 
 
 
 
 
 . The inclusion maps will then be topological embeddings and X will be coherent with the subspaces {Xα}.
Conversely, if X is coherent with a family of subspaces {Cα} that cover X, then X is homeomorphic to the topological union of the family {Cα}.
One can form the topological union of an arbitrary family of topological spaces as above, but if the topologies do not agree on the intersections then the inclusions will not necessarily be embeddings.
One can also describe the topological union by means of the disjoint union. Specifically, if X is a topological union of the family {Xα}, then X is homeomorphic to the quotient of the disjoint union of the family {Xα} by the equivalence relation


 
  for all α, β in A. That is,



If the spaces {Xα} are all disjoint then the topological union is just the disjoint union.
Assume now that the set A is directed, in a way compatible with inclusion
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
 . Then there is a unique map from 
 
 
 
 
  to X, which is in fact a homeomorphism. Here 
 
 
 
  is the direct (inductive) limit (colimit) of {Xα} in the category Top.
Properties
Let X be coherent with a family of subspaces {Cα}. A map f : X → Y is continuous if and only if the restrictions


 
  are continuous for each α ∈ A. This universal property characterizes coherent topologies in the sense that a space X is coherent with C if and only if this property holds for all spaces Y and all functions f : X → Y.
Let X be determined by a cover C = {Cα}. Then

If C is a refinement of a cover D, then X is determined by D.
If D is a refinement of C and each Cα is determined by the family of all Dβ contained in Cα then X is determined by D.

Let X be determined by {Cα} and let Y be an open or closed subspace of X. Then Y is determined by {Y ∩ Cα}.
Let X be determined by {Cα} and let f : X → Y be a quotient map. Then Y is determined by {f(Cα)}.
Let f : X → Y be a surjective map and suppose Y is determined by {Dα : α ∈ A}. For each α ∈ A let


 
  be the restriction of f to f−1(Dα). Then

If f is continuous and each fα is a quotient map, then f is a quotient map.
f is a closed map (resp. open map) if and only if each fα is closed (resp. open).

Notes


References




"
Category:General topology



Willard, p. 69↩
X is also said to have the weak topology generated by C. This is a potentially confusing name since the adjectives weak and strong are used with opposite meanings by different authors. In modern usage the term weak topology is synonymous with initial topology and strong topology is synonymous with final topology. It is the final topology that is being discussed here.↩




