


Venkatesan Guruswami




Venkatesan Guruswami

Venkatesan Guruswami (born 1976) is a computer scientist at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, USA. He did his schooling at Padma Seshadri Bala Bhavan in Chennai, India. He completed his undergraduate in Computer Science from IIT Madras and his doctorate from Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the supervision of Madhu Sudan in 2001 1. After receiving his PhD, he spent a year at UC Berkeley as a Miller Fellow, and then was a member of the faculty at the University of Washington from 2002 to 2009. His primary area of research is computer science, and in particular on error-correcting codes. Following 2007, he was on leave from University of Washington. During 2007-2008, he visited IAS at Princeton University as a Member of School of Mathematics. He also visited SCS at Carnegie Mellon University during 2008-09 as a Visiting Faculty. In July 2009, he joined the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University as Associate Professor in the Computer Science Department.
Guruswami was awarded the 2002 ACM Doctoral Dissertation Award for his dissertation List Decoding of Error-Correcting Codes. 2, which introduced an algorithm that allowed for the correction of errors beyond half the minimum distance of the code. It applies to Reed–Solomon codes and more generally to algebraic geometric codes. This algorithm produces a list of codewords (it is a list-decoding algorithm) and is based on interpolation and factorization of polynomials over 
 
 
 
  and its extensions.
He was an invited speaker in International Congress of Mathematicians 2010, Hyderabad on the topic of "Mathematical Aspects of Computer Science."1
Guraswami was one of two winners of the 2012 Presburger Award, given by the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science for outstanding contributions by a young theoretical computer scientist.2
Selected publications




See also

Guruswami–Sudan list decoding algorithm

References
External links

Venkatesan Guruswami's Homepage


"
Category:1976 births Category:Living people Category:Indian mathematicians Category:Indian computer scientists Category:Theoretical computer scientists Category:Indian Institute of Technology Madras alumni Category:Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni Category:Carnegie Mellon University faculty Category:ICM 2010 Plenary and Invited Speakers Category:Padma Seshadri Bala Bhavan schools alumni



↩
Presburger Award 2012, EATCS, retrieved 2012-04-23.↩




