


Coherence condition




Coherence condition

In mathematics, and particularly category theory a coherence condition is a collection of conditions requiring that various compositions of elementary morphisms are equal. Typically the elementary morphisms are part of the data of the category.
An illustrative example: a monoidal category
Part of the data of a monoidal category is a chosen morphism 
 
 
 
 , called the associator:



for each triple of objects 
 
 
 
  in the category. Using compositions of these 
 
 
 
 , one can construct a morphism



Actually, there are many ways to construct such a morphism as a composition of various 
 
 
 
 . One coherence condition that is typically imposed is that these compositions are all equal.
Typically one proves a coherence condition using a coherence theorem, which states that one only needs to check a few equalities of compositions in order to show that the rest also hold. In the above example, one only needs to check that, for all quadruples of objects 
 
 
 
 , the following diagram commutes 
Further examples
Two simple examples that illustrate the definition are as follows. Both are directly from the definition of a category.
Identity
Let  be a morphism of a category containing two objects A and B. Associated with these objects are the identity morphisms  and . By composing these with f, we construct two morphisms:

, and
 
.
 

Both are morphisms between the same objects as f. We have, accordingly, the following coherence statement:

.
 

Associativity of composition
Let ,  and  be morphisms of a category containing objects A, B, C and D. By repeated composition, we can construct a morphism from A to D in two ways:

, and
 
.
 

We have now the following coherence statement:

.
 

In these two particular examples, the coherence statements are theorems for the case of an abstract category, since they follow directly from the axioms; in fact, they are axioms. For the case of a concrete mathematical structure, they can be viewed as conditions, namely as requirements for the mathematical structure under consideration to be a concrete category, requirements that such a structure may meet or fail to meet.
References

Mac Lane, Saunders (1971). "Categories for the working mathematician". Graduate texts in mathematics Springer-Verlag. Especially Chapter VII Part 2.

"
Category:Category theory


