


Segmentation-based object categorization




Segmentation-based object categorization

The image segmentation problem is concerned with partitioning an image into multiple regions according to some homogeneity criterion. This article is primarily concerned with graph theoretic approaches to image segmentation. Segmentation-based object categorization can be viewed as a specific case of spectral clustering applied to image segmentation.
Applications of image segmentation

Image compression

Segment the image into homogeneous components, and use the most suitable compression algorithm for each component to improve compression.

Medical diagnosis

Automatic segmentation of MRI images for identification of cancerous regions.

Mapping and measurement

Automatic analysis of remote sensing data from satellites to identify and measure regions of interest.


Segmentation using normalized cuts
Graph theoretic formulation
The set of points in an arbitrary feature space can be represented as a weighted undirected complete graph G = (V, E), where the nodes of the graph are the points in the feature space. The weight 
 
 
 
  of an edge 
 
 
 
  is a function of the similarity between the nodes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In this context, we can formulate the image segmentation problem as a graph partitioning problem that asks for a partition 
 
 
 
  of the vertex set 
 
 
 
 , where, according to some measure, the vertices in any set 
 
 
 
  have high similarity, and the vertices in two different sets 
 
 
 
  have low similarity.
Normalized cuts
Let G = (V, E, w) be a weighted graph. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two subsets of vertices.
Let:









In the normalized cuts approach,1 for any cut 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  measures the similarity between different parts, and 
 
 
 
  measures the total similarity of vertices in the same part.
Since 
 
 
 
 , a cut 
 
 
 
  that minimizes 
 
 
 
  also maximizes 
 
 
 
 .
Computing a cut 
 
 
 
  that minimizes 
 
 
 
  is an NP-hard problem. However, we can find in polynomial time a cut 
 
 
 
  of small normalized weight 
 
 
 
  using spectral techniques.
The ncut algorithm
Let:



Also, let D be an 
 
 
 
  diagonal matrix with 
 
 
 
  on the diagonal, and let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
  symmetric matrix with 
 
 
 
 .
After some algebraic manipulations, we get:



subject to the constraints:



 
 , for some constant 
 
 





Minimizing 
 
 
 
  subject to the constraints above is NP-hard. To make the problem tractable, we relax the constraints on 
 
 
 
 , and allow it to take real values. The relaxed problem can be solved by solving the generalized eigenvalue problem 
 
 
 
  for the second smallest generalized eigenvalue.
The partitioning algorithm:

Given a set of features, set up a weighted graph 
 
 
 
 , compute the weight of each edge, and summarize the information in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Solve 
 
 
 
  for eigenvectors with the smallest eigenvalues.
Use the eigenvector with the second smallest eigenvalue to bipartition the graph (e.g. grouping according to sign).
Decide if the current partition should be subdivided.
Recursively partition the segmented parts, if necessary.

Computational Complexity
Solving a standard eigenvalue problem for all eigenvectors (using the QR algorithm, for instance) takes 
 
 
 
  time. This is impractical for image segmentation applications where 
 
 
 
  is the number of pixels in the image.
Since only one eigenvector, corresponding to the second smallest generalized eigenvalue, is used by the ncut algorithm, efficiency can be dramatically improved if the solve of the corresponding eigenvalue problem is performed in a matrix-free fashion, i.e., without explicitly manipulating with or even computing the matrix W, as, e.g., in the Lanczos algorithm. Matrix-free methods require only a function that performs a matrix-vector product for a given vector, on every iteration. For image segmentaion, the matrix W is typically sparse, with a number of nonzero entries 
 
 
 
 , so such a matrix-vector product takes 
 
 
 
  time.
For high-resolution images, the second eigenvalue is often ill-conditioned, leading to slow convergence of iterative eigenvalue solvers, such as the Lanczos algorithm.Preconditioning is a key technology accelerating the convergence, e.g., in the matrix-free LOBPCG method. Computing the eigenvector using an optimally preconditioned matrix-free method takes 
 
 
 
  time, which is the optimal complexity, since the eigenvector has 
 
 
 
  components.
OBJ CUT
OBJ CUT2 is an efficient method that automatically segments an object. The OBJ CUT method is a generic method, and therefore it is applicable to any object category model. Given an image D containing an instance of a known object category, e.g. cows, the OBJ CUT algorithm computes a segmentation of the object, that is, it infers a set of labels m.
Let m be a set of binary labels, and let 
 
 
 
  be a shape parameter(
 
 
 
  is a shape prior on the labels from a layered pictorial structure (LPS) model). An energy function 
 
 
 
  is defined as follows.


 
  (1)
The term 
 
 
 
  is called a unary term, and the term 
 
 
 
  is called a pairwise term. A unary term consists of the likelihood 
 
 
 
  based on color, and the unary potential 
 
 
 
  based on the distance from 
 
 
 
 . A pairwise term consists of a prior 
 
 
 
  and a contrast term 
 
 
 
 .
The best labeling 
 
 
 
  minimizes 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the weight of the parameter 
 
 
 
 .


 
  (2)
Algorithm

Given an image D, an object category is chosen, e.g. cows or horses.
The corresponding LPS model is matched to D to obtain the samples 
 
 

The objective function given by equation (2) is determined by computing 
 
 
 
  and using 
 
 

The objective function is minimized using a single MINCUT operation to obtain the segmentation m.

Other approaches

Jigsaw approach3
Image parsing 4
Interleaved segmentation 5
LOCUS 6
LayoutCRF 7
Minimum spanning tree-based segmentation

References
"
Category:Object recognition and categorization



Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik (1997): "Normalized Cuts and Image Segmentation", IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 731–737
M. P. Kumar, P. H. S. Torr, and A. Zisserman. Obj cut. In Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, San Diego, pages 18–25, 2005.
E. Borenstein, S. Ullman: Class-specic, top-down segmentation. In Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on Computer Vision, Copenhagen, Denmark, pages 109–124, 2002.
Z. Tu, X. Chen, A. L. Yuille, S. C. Zhu: Image Parsing: Unifying Segmentation, Detection, and Recognition. Toward Category-Level Object Recognition 2006: 545–576
B. Leibe, A. Leonardis, B. Schiele: An Implicit Shape Model for Combined Object Categorization and Segmentation. Toward Category-Level Object Recognition 2006: 508–524
J. Winn, N. Joijic. Locus: Learning object classes with unsupervised segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, Beijing, 2005.
J. M. Winn, J. Shotton: The Layout Consistent Random Field for Recognizing and Segmenting Partially Occluded Objects. CVPR (1) 2006: 37–44




