


Carleman matrix




Carleman matrix

In mathematics, a Carleman matrix is a matrix used to convert function composition into matrix multiplication. It is often used in iteration theory to find the continuous iteration of functions which cannot be iterated by pattern recognition alone. Other uses of Carleman matrices occur in the theory of probability generating functions, and Markov chains.
Definition
The Carleman matrix of a function 
 
 
 
  is defined as:


 
  so as to satisfy the (Taylor series) equation:




For instance, the computation of 
 
 
 
  by


 
  simply amounts to the dot-product of row 1 of 
 
 
 
  with a column vector 
 
 
 
 .
The entries of 
 
 
 
  in the next row give the 2nd power of 
 
 
 
 :


 
  and also, in order to have the zero'th power of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , we aadopt the row 0 containing zeros everywhere except the first position, such that



Thus, the dot product of 
 
 
 
  with the column vector 
 
 
 
  yields the column vector 
 
 




Bell matrix
The Bell matrix of a function 
 
 
 
  is defined as


 
  so as to satisfy the equation


 
  so it is the transpose of the above Carleman matrix.
Jabotinsky matrix
Eri Jabotinsky developed that concept of matrices 1947 for the purpose of representation of convolutions of polynomials. In an article "Analytic Iteration" (1963) he introduces the term "representation matrix", and generalized that concept to two-way-infinite matrices. In that article only functions of the type 
 
 
 
  are discussed, but considered for positive *and* negative powers of the function. Several authors refer to the Bell matrices as "Jabotinsky matrix" since (D. Knuth 1992, W.D. Lang 2000), and possibly this shall grow to a more canonical name.
Analytic Iteration Author(s): Eri Jabotinsky Source: Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, Vol. 108, No. 3 (Sep., 1963), pp.457-477 Published by: American Mathematical Society Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1993593 Accessed: 19/03/2009 15:57
Generalization
A generalization of the Carleman matrix of a function can be defined around any point, such as:


 
  or 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 . This allows the matrix power to be related as:



Matrix properties
These matrices satisfy the fundamental relationships:








which makes the Carleman matrix M a (direct) representation of 
 
 
 
 , and the Bell matrix B an anti-representation of 
 
 
 
 . Here the term 
 
 
 
  denotes the composition of functions 
 
 
 
 .
Other properties include:



 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an iterated function and


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the inverse function (if the Carleman matrix is invertible).

Examples
The Carleman matrix of a constant is:



The Carleman matrix of the identity function is:



The Carleman matrix of a constant addition is:



The Carleman matrix of a constant multiple is:



The Carleman matrix of a linear function is:



The Carleman matrix of a function 
 
 
 
  is:



The Carleman matrix of a function 
 
 
 
  is:



See also

Bell polynomials
Function composition
Schröder's equation

References

R Aldrovandi, Special Matrices of Mathematical Physics: Stochastic, Circulant and Bell Matrices, World Scientific, 2001. ([http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr;;=&id;=wb9aLGfVsOwC preview])
R. Aldrovandi, L. P. Freitas, Continuous Iteration of Dynamical Maps, online preprint, 1997.
P. Gralewicz, K. Kowalski, Continuous time evolution from iterated maps and Carleman linearization, online preprint, 2000.
K Kowalski and W-H Steeb, Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Carleman Linearization, World Scientific, 1991. (preview)
D. Knuth, Convolution Polynomials arXiv online print, 1992
Jabotinsky, Eri: Representation of Functions by Matrices. Application to Faber Polynomials in: Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, Vol. 4, No. 4 (Aug., 1953), pp. 546- 553 Stable jstor-URL

"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Matrix theory


