


Laughlin wavefunction




Laughlin wavefunction
In [[condensed matter physics]], the '''Laughlin wavefunction'''Original article: [http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.50.1395 Anomalous Quantum Hall Effect: An Incompressible Quantum Fluid with Fractionally Charged Excitations]{{cite book | author=Z. F. Ezewa    | title=Quantum Hall Effects, Second Edition| publisher= World Scientific| year=2008 | isbn=981-270-032-3}}
 pp. 210-213 is an ansatz, proposed by Robert Laughlin for the ground state of a two-dimensional electron gas placed in a uniform background magnetic field in the presence of a uniform jellium background when the filling factor (Quantum Hall effect) of the lowest Landau level is 

 where 

 is an odd positive integer. It was constructed to explain the observation of the 

  fractional quantum Hall effect, and predicted the existence of additional 

 states as well as quasiparticle excitations with fractional electric charge 

, both of which were later experimentally observed. Laughlin received one third of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1998 for this discovery. Being a trial wavefunction, it is not exact, but qualitatively, it reproduces many features of the exact solution and quantitatively, it has very high overlaps with the exact ground state for small systems.
If we ignore the jellium and mutual Coulomb repulsion between the electrons as a zeroth order approximation, we have an infinitely degenerate lowest Landau level (LLL) and with a filling factor of 1/n, we'd expect that all of the electrons would lie in the LLL. Turning on the interactions, we can make the approximation that all of the electrons lie in the LLL. If 
 
 
 
  is the single particle wavefunction of the LLL state with the lowest orbital angular momentum, then the Laughlin ansatz for the multiparticle wavefunction is


 
  where position is denoted by



and normalization



in (Gaussian units)



and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coordinates in the xy plane. Here 
 
 
 
  is Planck's constant, 
 
 
 
  is the electron charge, 
 
 
 
  is the total number of particles, and 
 
 
 
  is the magnetic field, which is perpendicular to the xy plane. The subscripts on z identify the particle. In order for the wavefunction to describe fermions, n must be an odd integer. This forces the wavefunction to be antisymmetric under particle interchange. The angular momentum for this state is 
 
 
 
 .
Energy of interaction for two particles
 The Laughlin wavefunction is the multiparticle wavefunction for quasiparticles. The expectation value of the interaction energy for a pair of quasiparticles is



where the screened potential is (see Coulomb potential between two current loops embedded in a magnetic field)



where 
 
 
 
  is a confluent hypergeometric function and 
 
 
 
  is a Bessel function of the first kind. Here, 
 
 
 
  is the distance between the centers of two current loops, 
 
 
 
  is the magnitude of the electron charge, 
 
 
 
  is the quantum version of the Larmor radius, and 
 
 
 
  is the thickness of the electron gas in the direction of the magnetic field. The angular momenta of the two individual current loops are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 . The inverse screening length is given by (Gaussian units)



where 
 
 
 
  is the cyclotron frequency, and 
 
 
 
  is the area of the electron gas in the xy plane.
The interaction energy evaluates to:
::{|cellpadding="2" style="border:2px solid #ccccff" |


 
  |} 
To obtain this result we have made the change of integration variables



and



and noted (see Common integrals in quantum field theory)









The interaction energy has minima for (Figure 1)



and



For these values of the ratio of angular momenta, the energy is plotted in Figure 2 as a function of 
 
 
 
 .
References


See also

Landau level
Fractional quantum Hall effect
Coulomb potential between two current loops embedded in a magnetic field

"
Category:Hall effect Category:Condensed matter physics Category:Quantum phases


