


Ruin theory




Ruin theory

In actuarial science and applied probability ruin theory (sometimes risk theory1 collective risk theory) uses mathematical models to describe an insurer's vulnerability to insolvency/ruin. In such models key quantities of interest are the probability of ruin, distribution of surplus immediately prior to ruin and deficit at time of ruin.
Classical model
(Figure)
A sample path of compound Poisson risk process

The theoretical foundation of ruin theory, known as the Cramér–Lundberg model (or classical compound-Poisson risk model, classical risk process2 or Poisson risk process) was introduced in 1903 by the Swedish actuary Filip Lundberg.3 Lundberg's work was republished in the 1930s by Harald Cramér.4
The model describes an insurance company who experiences two opposing cash flows: incoming cash premiums and outgoing claims. Premiums arrive a constant rate c > 0 from customers and claims arrive according to a Poisson process with intensity λ and are independent and identically distributed non-negative random variables with distribution F and mean μ (they form a compound Poisson process). So for an insurer who starts with initial surplus x,5


 
  The central object of the model is to investigate the probability that the insurer's surplus level eventually falls below zero (making the firm bankrupt). This quantity, called the probability of ultimate ruin, is defined as


 
  where the time of ruin is 
 
 
 
  with the convention that 
 
 
 
 . This can be computed exactly using the Pollaczek–Khinchine formula as6 (the ruin function here is equivalent to the tail function of the stationary distribution of waiting time in an M/G/1 queue7)


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the transform of the tail distribution of F,


 
  In the case where the claim sizes are exponentially distributed, this simplifies to8



Sparre Andersen model
E. Sparre Andersen extended the classical model in 19579 by allowing claim inter-arrival times to have arbitrary distribution functions.10








where the claim number process 
 
 
 
  is a renewal process and 
 
 
 
  are independent and identically distributed random variables. The model furthermore assumes that 
 
 
 
  almost surely and that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are independent . The model is also known as the renewal risk model.
Expected discounted penalty function
Michael R. Powers11 and Gerber and Shiu12 analyzed the behavior of the insurer's surplus through the expected discounted penalty function, which is commonly referred to as Gerber-Shiu function in the ruin literature. It is arguable whether the function should have been called Powers-Gerber-Shiu function due to the contribution of Powers.13
In Powers’ notation, this is defined as


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the discounting force of interest, 
 
 
 
  is a general penalty function reflecting the economic costs to the insurer at the time of ruin, and the expectation 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the probability measure 
 
 
 
 . The function is called expected discounted cost of insolvency in Powers.14
In Gerber and Shiu’s notation, it is given as


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the discounting force of interest and 
 
 
 
  is a penalty function capturing the economic costs to the insurer at the time of ruin (assumed to depend on the surplus prior to ruin 
 
 
 
  and the deficit at ruin 
 
 
 
 ), and the expectation 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the probability measure 
 
 
 
 . Here the indicator function 
 
 
 
  emphasizes that the penalty is exercised only when ruin occurs.
It is quite intuitive to interpret the expected discounted penalty function. Since the function measures the actuarial present value of the penalty that occurs at 
 
 
 
 , the penalty function is multiplied by the discounting factor 
 
 
 
 , and then averaged over the probability distribution of the waiting time to 
 
 
 
 . While Gerber and Shiu15 applied this function to the classical compound-Poisson model, Powers16 argued that an insurer’s surplus is better modeled by a family of diffusion processes.
There are a great variety of ruin-related quantities that fall into the category of the expected discounted penalty function.




Special case

Mathematical representation

Choice of penalty function





Probability of ultimate ruin











Joint (defective) distribution of surplus and deficit







Defective distribution of claim causing ruin







Trivariate Laplace transform of time, surplus and deficit











Joint moments of surplus and deficit











Other finance-related quantities belonging to the class of the expected discounted penalty function include the perpetual American put option,17 the contingent claim at optimal exercise time, and more.
Recent developments

Compound-Poisson risk model with constant interest
Compound-Poisson risk model with stochastic interest
Brownian-motion risk model
General diffusion-process model
Markov-modulated risk model
Accident probability factor (APF) calculator – risk analysis model (@SBH)

See also

Poisson process
Continuous-time Markov chain
Stochastic processes
Queueing theory

References
Bibliography




"
Category:Actuarial science Category:Probability theory Category:Stochastic processes Category:Mathematical finance Category:Risk



↩
↩
Lundberg, F. (1903) Approximerad Framställning av Sannolikehetsfunktionen, Återförsäkering av Kollektivrisker, Almqvist & Wiksell, Uppsala.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

Andersen, E. Sparre. "On the collective theory of risk in case of contagion between claims." Transactions of the XVth International Congress of Actuaries. Vol. 2. No. 6. 1957.↩
Thorin, Olof. "Some comments on the Sparre Andersen model in the risk theory" The ASTIN bulletin: international journal for actuarial studies in non-life insurance and risk theory (1974): 104.↩
↩
↩




↩




