


Analytic torsion




Analytic torsion

In mathematics, Reidemeister torsion (or R-torsion, or Reidemeister–Franz torsion) is a topological invariant of manifolds introduced by Kurt Reidemeister () for 3-manifolds and generalized to higher dimensions by  and . Analytic torsion (or Ray–Singer torsion) is an invariant of Riemannian manifolds defined by  as an analytic analogue of Reidemeister torsion.  and  proved Ray and Singer's conjecture that Reidemeister torsion and analytic torsion are the same for compact Riemannian manifolds.
Reidemeister torsion was the first invariant in algebraic topology that could distinguish between spaces which are homotopy equivalent but not homeomorphic, and can thus be seen as the birth of geometric topology as a distinct field. It can be used to classify lens spaces.
Reidemeister torsion is closely related to Whitehead torsion; see . For later work on torsion see the books , . And it had given one of important motivation to arithmetic topology. 
Definition of analytic torsion
If M is a Riemannian manifold and E a vector bundle over M, then there is a Laplacian operator acting on the i-forms with values in E. If the eigenvalues on i-forms are λj then the zeta function ζi is defined to be



for s large, and this is extended to all complex s by analytic continuation. The zeta regularized determinant of the Laplacian acting on i-forms is



which is formally the product of the positive eigenvalues of the laplacian acting on i-forms. The analytic torsion T(M,E) is defined to be



Definition of Reidemeister torsion
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a finite connected CW-complex with fundamental group

 
  and universal cover

 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be an orthogonal finite-dimensional 
 
 
 
 -representation. Suppose that



for all n. If we fix a cellular basis for 
 
 
 
  and an orthogonal 
 
 
 
 -basis for 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a contractible finite based free 
 
 
 
 
 -chain complex. Let 
 
 
 
  be any chain contraction of D*, i.e. 
 
 
 
  for all n. We obtain an isomorphism 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 . We define the Reidemeister torsion



where A is the matrix of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the given bases. The Reidemeister torsion 
 
 
 
  is independent of the choice of the cellular basis for 
 
 
 
 , the orthogonal basis for 
 
 
 
 
  and the chain contraction 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a compact smooth manifold, and let 
 
 
 
  be a unimodular representation. 
 
 
 
  has a smooth triangulation. For any choice of a volume 
 
 
 
 
 , we get an invariant 
 
 
 
 . Then we call the positive real number 
 
 
 
  the Reidemiester torsion of the manifold 
 
 
 
  respect to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 .
A short history of Reidemeister torsion
Reidemeister torsion was first used to combinatorially classify 3-dimensional lens spaces in  by Reidemeister, and in higher-dimensional spaces by Franz. The classification includes examples of homotopy equivalent 3-dimensional manifolds which are not homeomorphic – at the time (1935) the classification was only up to PL homeomorphism, but later  showed that this was in fact a classification up to homeomorphism.
J. H. C. Whitehead defined the "torsion" of a homotopy equivalence between finite complexes. This is a direct generalization of the Reidemeister, Franz, and de Rham concept; but is a more delicate invariant. Whitehead torsion provides a key tool for the study of combinatorial or differentiable manifolds with nontrivial fundamental group and is closely related to the concept of "simple homotopy type." see 
In 1960 Milnor discovered the duality relation of torsion invariants of manifolds and show that the (twisted) Alexander polynomial of knots is the Reidemister torsion of its knot complement in S3.  For each q the Poincaré duality

 
  induces


 
  and then we obtain


 
  The representation of the fundamental group of knot complement plays a central role in them. It gives the relation between knot theory and torsion invariants.
Cheeger–Müller theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be an orientable compact Riemann manifold of dimension n and 
 
 
 
 
  a representation of the fundamental group of 
 
 
 
  on a real vector space of dimension N. Then we can define the De Rham complex


 
  and the formal adjoint 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  due to the flatness of 
 
 
 
 
 . And we also obtain the Laplacian on p-form as usual



We assume 
 
 
 
 , then the Laplacian is a symmetric positive simipositive elliptic operator with pure point spectrum


 
  As same as the above definition we can define the zeta function associated with the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 
  by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the projection of 
 
 
 
  onto the kernel space 
 
 
 
  of the Laplacian 
 
 
 
 
 .
In 1967 Seeley proved that 
 
 
 
  extends to a meromorphic function of 
 
 
 
  which is holomorphic at 
 
 
 
 . 
As in the case of an orthogonal representation, we define the analytic torsion 
 
 
 
  by



In 1971 D.B. Ray and I.M. Singer conjectured that 
 
 
 
  for any unitary representation 
 
 
 
 . Independently, J. Cheeger  and W. Muller  proved the Ray–Singer conjecture. Their idea is considering the logarithm of torsions and their traces. Firstly for odd-dimensional manifolds they had proved the equality of two torsions and then for even-dimensional, which have some technical difficulties.
In later years, along with Atiyah–Patodi–Singer theorem, the Cheeger–Müller theorem, i.e. the equivalence of two torsions, forms the basis of Chern–Simons perturbation theory.
References










Online book










"
Category:Differential geometry Category:3-manifolds Category:Surgery theory


