


Grzegorczyk hierarchy




Grzegorczyk hierarchy

The Grzegorczyk hierarchy (pronounced: ), named after the Polish logician Andrzej Grzegorczyk, is a hierarchy of functions used in computability theory (Wagner and Wechsung 1986:43). Every function in the Grzegorczyk hierarchy is a primitive recursive function, and every primitive recursive function appears in the hierarchy at some level. The hierarchy deals with the rate at which the values of the functions grow; intuitively, functions in lower level of the hierarchy grow slower than functions in the higher levels.
Definition
First we introduce an infinite set of functions, denoted Ei for some natural number i. We define 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . I.e., E0 is the addition function, and E1 is a unary function which squares its argument and adds two. Then, for each n greater than 1, we define 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the x-th iterate of 
 
 
 
 
  evaluated at 2.
From these functions we define the Grzegorczyk hierarchy. 
 
 
 
 , the n-th set in the hierarchy, contains the following functions:

Ek for k < n
the zero function (Z(x) = 0);
the successor function (S(x) = x + 1);
the projection functions (
 
 
 
 );
the (generalized) compositions of functions in the set (if h, g1, g2, ... and gm are in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is as well)1; and
the results of limited (primitive) recursion applied to functions in the set, (if g, h and j are in 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all t and 
 
 
 
 , and further 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then f is in 
 
 
 
 
  as well)2

In other words, 
 
 
 
  is the closure of set 
 
 
 
  with respect to function composition and limited recursion (as defined above).
Properties
These sets clearly form the hierarchy


 
  because they are closures over the 
 
 
 
 's and 
 
 
 
 
 .
They are strict subsets (Rose 1984; Gakwaya 1997). In other words


 
  because the hyper operation

 
  is in 
 
 
 
  but not in 
 
 
 
 .



 
 
  includes functions such as x+1, x+2, ...


 
  provides all addition functions, such as x+y, 4x, ...


 
  provides all multiplication functions, such as xy, x4


 
  provides all exponentiation functions, such as xy, 222x, and is exactly the elementary recursive functions.


 
  provides all tetration functions, and so on.

Notably, both the function 
 
 
 
 
  and the characteristic function of the predicate 
 
 
 
  from the Kleene normal form theorem are definable in a way such that they lie at level 
 
 
 
  of the Grzegorczyk hierarchy. This implies in particular that every recursively enumerable set is enumerable by some 
 
 
 
 -function.
Relation to primitive recursive functions
The definition of 
 
 
 
  is the same as that of the primitive recursive functions, RP, except that recursion is limited (
 
 
 
 
  for some j in 
 
 
 
 ) and the functions 
 
 
 
 . Thus the Grzegorczyk hierarchy can be seen as a way to limit the power of primitive recursion to different levels.
It is clear from this fact that all functions in any level of the Grzegorczyk hierarchy are primitive recursive functions (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) and thus:



It can also be shown that all primitive recursive functions are in some level of the hierarchy (Rose 1984; Gakwaya 1997), thus


 
 
  and the sets 
 
 
partition the set of primitive recursive functions, PR.
Extensions
The Grzegorczyk hierarchy can be extended to transfinite ordinals. Such extensions define a fast-growing hierarchy. To do this, the generating functions 
 
 
 
  must be recursively defined for limit ordinals (note they have already been recursively defined for successor ordinals by the relation 
 
 
 
 ). If there is a standard way of defining a fundamental sequence

 
 , whose limit ordinal is 
 
 
 
 
 , then the generating functions can be defined $E_\lambda(n) = E_{\lambda_n}(n)$. However, this definition depends upon a standard way of defining the fundamental sequence. Rose (1984) suggests a standard way for all ordinals α 0]].
The original extension was due to Martin Löb and Stan S. Wainer (1970) and is sometimes called the Löb–Wainer hierarchy.
Notes
References

Brainerd, W.S., Landweber, L.H. (1974), Theory of Computation, Wiley, ISBN 0-471-09585-0

Gakwaya, J.–S. (1997), A survey on the Grzegorczyk Hierarchy and its Extension through the BSS Model of Computability
Grzegorczyk, A. (1953), Some classes of recursive functions, Rozprawy matematyczne, Vol 4, pp. 1–45.
Löb, M.H. and Wainer, S.S., "Hierarchies of Number Theoretic Functions I, II: A Correction," Arch. Math. Logik Grundlagenforschung 14, 1970 pp. 198–199.
Rose, H.E., "Subrecursion: Functions and hierarchies", Oxford University Press, New York, USA, 1984. ISBN 0-19-853189-3
Wagner, K. and Wechsung, G. (1986), Computational Complexity, Mathematics and its Applications v. 21. ISBN 978-90-277-2146-4

"
Category:Computability theory Category:Hierarchy of functions









