


Fisher's inequality




Fisher's inequality

(Figure)
Ronald Fisher

Fisher's inequality, is a necessary condition for the existence of a balanced incomplete block design which satisfies certain prescribed conditions in combinatorial mathematics. Outlined by Ronald Fisher, a population geneticist and statistician, was concerned with the design of experiments studying the differences among several different varieties of plants, under each of a number of different growing conditions, called "blocks".
Let:

v be the number of varieties of plants;
b be the number of blocks.

It was required that:

k different varieties are in each block, k < v; no variety occurs twice in any one block;
any two varieties occur together in exactly λ blocks;
each variety occurs in exactly r blocks.

Fisher's inequality states simply that








Proof
Let the incidence matrix M be a v×b matrix defined so that Mi,j is 1 if element i is in block j and 0 otherwise. Then B=MMT is a v×v matrix such that Bi,i = r and Bi,j = λ for i ≠ j. Since r ≠ λ, det(B) ≠ 0, so rank(B) = v; on the other hand, rank(B) = rank(M) ≤ b, so v ≤ b.
Generalization
Fisher's inequality is valid for more general classes of designs. A "pairwise balanced design" (or PBD) is a set X together with a family of subsets of X (which need not have the same size and may contain repeats) such that every pair of distinct elements of X is contained in exactly λ (a positive integer) subsets. The set X is allowed to be one of the subsets, and if all the subsets are copies of X, the PBD is called "trivial". The size of X is v and the number of subsets in the family (counted with multiplicity) is b.
Theorem: For any non-trivial PBD, v ≤ b.1
This result also generalizes the Erdős-De Bruijn theorem:
For a PBD with λ = 1 having no blocks of size 1 or size v, v ≤ b, with equality if the PBD is a projective plane or a near-pencil (meaning that exactly n - 1 of the points are collinear).2
Notes
References

R. C. Bose, "A Note on Fisher's Inequality for Balanced Incomplete Block Designs", Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1949, pages 619–620.


R. A. Fisher, "An examination of the different possible solutions of a problem in incomplete blocks", Annals of Eugenics, volume 10, 1940, pages 52–75.







"
Category:Design theory Category:Design of experiments Category:Set families Category:Statistical inequalities









