   Computers and Intractability      Computers and Intractability   In computer science , more specifically computational complexity theory , Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness is an influential textbook by Michael Garey and David S. Johnson . 1 It was the first book on the theory of NP-completeness and computational intractability . 2 The book features an appendix providing a thorough compendium of NP-complete problems (which was updated in later printings of the book). The book is now outdated in some respects as it does not cover more recent development such as the PCP theorem . It is nevertheless still in print and is regarded as a classic: in a 2006 study, the CiteSeer search engine listed the book as the most cited reference in computer science literature. 3  Open problems  Another appendix of the book featured problems for which it was not known whether they were NP-complete or in P (or neither). The problems (with their original names) are:   Graph isomorphism  Subgraph homeomorphism (for a fixed graph   H   H   H   )  Graph genus  Chordal graph completion  Chromatic index  Spanning tree parity problem  Partial order dimension  Precedence constrained 3-processor scheduling  Linear programming  Total unimodularity  Composite number  Minimum length triangulation   As of 2015, only problems 1 and 11 are yet to be classified.  Reception  Soon after it appeared, the book received positive reviews by reputed researchers in the area of theoretical computer science.  In his review, Ronald V. Book recommends the book to "anyone who wishes to learn about the subject of NP-completeness", and he explicitly mentions the "extremely useful" appendix with over 300 NP-hard computational problems. He concludes: "Computer science needs more books like this one." 4  Harry R. Lewis praises the mathematical prose of the authors: "Garey and Johnson's book is a thorough, clear, and practical exposition of NP-completeness. In many respects it is hard to imagine a better treatment of the subject." Also, he considers the appendix as "unique" and "as a starting point in attempts to show new problems to be NP-complete". 5  Twenty-three years after the book appeared, Lance Fortnow , editor-in-chief of the scientific journal  Transactions on Computational Theory , states: "I consider Garey and Johnson the single most important book on my office bookshelf. Every computer scientist should have this book on their shelves as well. [...] Garey and Johnson has the best introduction to computational complexity I have ever seen." 6  References  See also   List of NP-complete problems  List of important publications in theoretical computer science   "  Category:Computer science books  Category:1979 books     ↩  ↩  ↩  Ronald V. Book. Review: Computers and intractability: A guide to the theory of NP-completeness Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.), 3 (2), pp. 898–904, 1980 ↩  Harry R. Lewis, Review: Computers and intractability: A guide to the theory of NP-completeness , The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 48 (2), pp. 498–500, 1983 ↩  Lance Fortnow , Great Books: Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness by Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. Computational complexity blog, August 30, 2002. ↩     