


Dimension theory (algebra)




Dimension theory (algebra)

In mathematics, dimension theory is a branch of commutative algebra studying the notion of the dimension of a commutative ring, and by extension that of a scheme.
The theory is much simpler for an affine ring; i.e., an integral domain that is a finitely generated algebra over a field. By Noether's normalization lemma, the Krull dimension of such a ring is the transcendence degree over the base field and the theory runs in parallel with the counterpart in algebraic geometry; cf. Dimension of an algebraic variety. The general theory tends to be less geometrical; in particular, very little works/is known for non-noetherian rings. (Kaplansky's commutative rings gives a good account of the non-noetherian case.) Today, a standard approach is essentially that of Bourbaki and EGA, which makes essential use of graded modules and, among other things, emphasizes the role of multiplicities, the generalization of the degree of a projective variety. In this approach, Krull's principal ideal theorem appears as a corollary.
Throughout the article, 
 
 
 
  denotes Krull dimension of a ring and 
 
 
 
  the height of a prime ideal (i.e., the Krull dimension of the localization at that prime ideal.) Rings are assumed to be commutative except in the last section on dimensions of non-commutative rings.
Basic results
Let R be a noetherian ring or valuation ring. Then


 
  If R is noetherian, this follows from the fundamental theorem below (in particular, Krull's principal ideal theorem.) But it is also a consequence of the more precise result. For any prime ideal 
 
 
 
  in R,


 
 .


 
  for any prime ideal 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  that contracts to 
 
 
 
 . This can be shown within basic ring theory (cf. Kaplansky, commutative rings). By the way, it says in particular that in each fiber of 
 
 
 
 , one cannot have a chain of primes ideals of length 
 
 
 
 .
Since an artinian ring (e.g., a field) has dimension zero, by induction, one gets the formula: for an artinian ring R,



Local rings
Fundamental theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be a noetherian local ring and I a 
 
 
 
 -primary ideal (i.e., it sits between some power of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ). Let 
 
 
 
  be the Poincaré series of the associated graded ring

 
 . That is,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  refers to the length of a module (over an artinian ring 
 
 
 
 ). If 
 
 
 
  generate I, then their image in 
 
 
 
  have degree 1 and generate 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 -algebra. By the Hilbert–Serre theorem, F is a rational function with exactly one pole at 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
 . Since


 
 , we find that the coefficient of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is of the form


 
  That is to say, 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial 
 
 
 
  in n of degree 
 
 
 
 . P is called the Hilbert polynomial of 
 
 
 
 .
We set 
 
 
 
 . We also set 
 
 
 
  to be the minimum number of elements of R that can generate a 
 
 
 
 -primary ideal of R. Our ambition is to prove the fundamental theorem:


 
 . Since we can take s to be 
 
 
 
 , we already have 
 
 
 
  from the above. Next we prove 
 
 
 
  by induction on 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a chain of prime ideals in R. Let 
 
 
 
  and x a nonzero nonunit element in D. Since x is not a zero-divisor, we have the exact sequence


 
 . The degree bound of the Hilbert-Samuel polynomial now implies that 
 
 
 
 . (This essentially follows from the Artin-Rees lemma; see Hilbert-Samuel function for the statement and the proof.) In 
 
 
 
 , the chain 
 
 
 
  becomes a chain of length 
 
 
 
  and so, by inductive hypothesis and again by the degree estimate,


 
 . The claim follows. It now remains to show 
 
 
 
  More precisely, we shall show:

Lemma: R contains elements 
 
 
 
  such that, for any i, any prime ideal containing 
 
 
 
  has height 
 
 
 
 .
 

(Notice
 
 
 
  is then 
 
 
 
 -primary.) The proof is omitted. It appears, for example, in Atiyah–MacDonald. But it can also be supplied privately; the idea is to use prime avoidance.
Consequences of the fundamental theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be a noetherian local ring and put 
 
 
 
 . Then



 
 , since a basis of 
 
 
 
  lifts to a generating set of 
 
 
 
  by Nakayama. If the equality holds, then R is called a regular local ring.


 
 , since 
 
 
 
 .
(Krull's principal ideal theorem) The height of the ideal generated by elements 
 
 
 
  in a noetherian ring is at most s. Conversely, a prime ideal of height s can be generated by s elements. (Proof: Let 
 
 
 
  be a prime ideal minimal over such an ideal. Then 
 
 
 
 . The converse was shown in the course of the proof of the fundamental theorem.)

Proof: Let 
 
 
 
  generate a 
 
 
 
 -primary ideal and 
 
 
 
  be such that their images generate a 
 
 
 
 -primary ideal. Then 
 
 
 
  for some s. Raising both sides to higher powers, we see some power of 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., the latter ideal is 
 
 
 
 -primary; thus, 
 
 
 
 . The equality is a straightforward application of the going-down property. 
 
 

Proof: If 
 
 
 
  are a chain of prime ideals in R, then 
 
 
 
  are a chain of prime ideals in 
 
 
 
  while 
 
 
 
  is not a maximal ideal. Thus, 
 
 
 
 . For the reverse inequality, let 
 
 
 
  be a maximal ideal of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Clearly, 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is then a localization of a principal ideal domain and has dimension at most one, we get 
 
 
 
  by the previous inequality. Since 
 
 
 
  is arbitrary, it follows 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 

Nagata's altitude formula
{R'/\mathfrak{p}'} \le \dim R_{\mathfrak{p}} + \operatorname{tr.deg}_{R} {R'} where the equality holds if either (a) R is universally catenary and R{{'}} is finitely generated R-algebra or (b) R{{'}} is a polynomial ring over R.}}
Proof:1 First suppose 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial ring. By induction on the number of variables, it is enough to consider the case 
 
 
 
 . Since R{{'}} is flat over R,


 
 . By Noether's normalization lemma, the second term on the right side is:


 
  Next, suppose 
 
 
 
  is generated by a single element; thus, 
 
 
 
 . If I = 0, then we are already done. Suppose not. Then 
 
 
 
  is algebraic over R and so 
 
 
 
 . Since R is a subring of R{{'}}, 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  is algebraic over 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the pre-image in 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Then, as 
 
 
 
 , by the polynomial case,


 
  Here, note that the inequality is the equality if R{{'}} is catenary. Finally, working with a chain of prime ideals, it is straightforward to reduce the general case to the above case. 
 
 

Homological methods
Regular rings
Let R be a noetherian ring. The projective dimension of a finite R-module M is the shortest length of any projective resolution of R (possibly infinite) and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . We set 
 
 
 
 ; it is called the global dimension of R.
Assume R is local with residue field k.
Proof: We claim: for any finite R-module M,


 
 . By dimension shifting (cf. the proof of Theorem of Serre below), it is enough to prove this for 
 
 
 
 . But then, by the local criterion for flatness, 
 
 
 
  Now,


 
  completing the proof. 
 
 

Remark: The proof also shows that 
 
 
 
  if M is not free and 
 
 
 
  is the kernel of some surjection from a free module to M.
Proof: If 
 
 
 
 , then M is R-free and thus 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -free. Next suppose 
 
 
 
 . Then we have
 
 
 
  as in the remark above. Thus, by induction, it is enough to consider the case 
 
 
 
 . Then there is a projective resolution
 
 
 
 , which gives:


 
 . But 
 
 
 
  Hence, 
 
 
 
  is at most 1. 
 
 

Proof:2 If R is regular, we can write 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  a regular system of parameters. An exact sequence 
 
 
 
 , some f in the maximal ideal, of finite modules, 
 
 
 
 , gives us:


 
  But f here is zero since it kills k. Thus, 
 
 
 
  and consequently 
 
 
 
 . Using this, we get:


 
  The proof of the converse is by induction on 
 
 
 
 . We begin with the inductive step. Set 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  among a system of parameters. To show R is regular, it is enough to show 
 
 
 
  is regular. But, since 
 
 
 
 , by inductive hypothesis and the preceding lemma with 
 
 
 
 ,



The basic step remains. Suppose 
 
 
 
 . We claim 
 
 
 
  if it is finite. (This would imply that R is a semisimple local ring; i.e., a field.) If that is not the case, then there is some finite module 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and thus in fact we can find M with 
 
 
 
 . By Nakayama's lemma, there is a surjection 
 
 
 
  from a free module F to M whose kernel K is contained in 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 , the maximal ideal 
 
 
 
  is an associated prime of R; i.e., 
 
 
 
  for some nonzero s in R. Since 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . Since K is not zero and is free, this implies 
 
 
 
 , which is absurd. 
 
 

Proof: Let R be a regular local ring. Then 
 
 
 
 , which is an integrally closed domain. It is a standard algebra exercise to show this implies that R is an integrally closed domain. Now, we need to show every divisorial ideal is principal; i.e., the divisor class group of R vanishes. But, according to Bourbaki, Algèbre commutative, chapitre 7, §. 4. Corollary 2 to Proposition 16, a divisorial ideal is principal if it admits a finite free resolution, which is indeed the case by the theorem. 
 
 

Depths
Let R be a ring and M a module over it. A sequence of elements 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is called an M-regular sequence if 
 
 
 
  is not a zero-divisor on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is not a zero divisor on 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 . A priori, it is not obvious whether any permutation of a regular sequence is still regular (see the section below for some positive answer.)
Let R be a local Noetherian ring with maximal ideal 
 
 
 
  and put 
 
 
 
 . Then, by definition, the depth of a finite R-module M is the supremum of the lengths of all M-regular sequences in 
 
 
 
 . For example, we have 
 
 
 
  consists of zerodivisors on M

 
  is associated with M. By induction, we find


 
  for any associated primes 
 
 
 
  of M. In particular, 
 
 
 
 . If the equality holds for M = R, R is called a Cohen–Macaulay ring.
Example: A regular Noetherian local ring is Cohen–Macaulay (since a regular system of parameters is an R-regular sequence.)
In general, a Noetherian ring is called a Cohen–Macaulay ring if the localizations at all maximal ideals are Cohen–Macaulay. We note that a Cohen–Macaulay ring is universally catenary. This implies for example that a polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  is universally catenary since it is regular and thus Cohen–Macaulay.
Proof: We first prove by induction on n the following statement: for every R-module M and every M-regular sequence 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 ,

(*) 
 
 


The basic step n = 0 is trivial. Next, by inductive hypothesis, 
 
 
 
 . But the latter is zero since the annihilator of N contains some power of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, from the exact sequence 
 
 
 
  and the fact that 
 
 
 
  kills N, using the inductive hypothesis again, we get


 
 , proving (*). Now, if 
 
 
 
 , then we can find an M-regular sequence of length more than n and so by (*) we see 
 
 
 
 . It remains to show 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . By (*) we can assume n = 0. Then 
 
 
 
  is associated with M; thus is in the support of M. On the other hand, 
 
 
 
  It follows by linear algebra that there is a nonzero homomorphism from N to M modulo 
 
 
 
 ; hence, one from N to M by Nakayama's lemma. 
 
 

The Auslander–Buchsbaum formula relates depth and projective dimension.
Proof: We argue by induction on 
 
 
 
 , the basic case (i.e., M free) being trivial. By Nakayama's lemma, we have the exact sequence 
 
 
 
  where F is free and the image of f is contained in 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  what we need to show is 
 
 
 
 . Since f kills k, the exact sequence yields: for any i,


 
  Note the left-most term is zero if 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , then since 
 
 
 
  by inductive hypothesis, we see 
 
 
 
  If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  and it must be 
 
 


As a matter of notation, for any R-module M, we let


 
  One sees without difficulty that 
 
 
 
  is a left-exact functor and then let 
 
 
 
  be its j-th right derived functor, called the local cohomology of R. Since 
 
 
 
 , via abstract nonsense,


 
 . This observation proves the first part of the theorem below. (M) = 0, i .



 
  and 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 

If R is complete and d its Krull dimension and if E is the injective hull of k, then
 
 





is representable (the representing object is sometimes called the canonical module especially if R is Cohen–Macaulay.)
 



}} Proof: 1. is already noted (except to show the nonvanishing at the degree equal to the depth of M; use induction to see this) and 3. is a general fact by abstract nonsense. 2. is a consequence of an explicit computation of a local cohomology by means of Koszul complexes (see below). 
 
 

Koszul complex
Let R be a ring and x an element in it. We form the chain complex K(x) given by 
 
 
 
  for i = 0, 1 and 
 
 
 
  for any other i with the differential


 
  For any R-module M, we then get the complex 
 
 
 
  with the differential 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be its homology. Note:


 
 ,


 
 .
More generally, given a finite sequence 
 
 
 
  of elements in a ring R, we form the tensor product of complexes:


 
  and let 
 
 
 
  its homology. As before,


 
 ,


 
 .
We now have the homological characterization of a regular sequence. 
 
A Koszul complex is a powerful computational tool. For instance, it follows from the theorem and the corollary


 
  (Here, one uses the self-duality of a Koszul complex; see Proposition 17.15. of Eisenbud, Commutative Algebra with a View Toward Algebraic Geometry.)
Another instance would be 
Remark: The theorem can be used to give a second quick proof of Serre's theorem, that R is regular if and only if it has finite global dimension. Indeed, by the above theorem, 
 
 
 
  and thus 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, as 
 
 
 
 , the Auslander–Buchsbaum formula gives 
 
 
 
 . Hence, 
 
 
 
 .
We next use a Koszul homology to define and study complete intersection rings. Let R be a Noetherian local ring. By definition, the first deviation of R is the vector space dimension


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a system of parameters. By definition, R is a complete intersection ring if 
 
 
 
  is the dimension of the tangent space. (See Hartshorne for a geometric meaning.)
Injective dimension and Tor dimensions
Let R be a ring. The injective dimension of an R-module M denoted by 
 
 
 
  is defined just like a projective dimension: it is the minimal length of an injective resolution of M. Let 
 
 
 
  be the category of R-modules.
Proof: Suppose 
 
 
 
 . Let M be an R-module and consider a resolution


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are injective modules. For any ideal I,


 
  which is zero since 
 
 
 
  is computed via a projective resolution of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, by Baer's criterion, N is injective. We conclude that 
 
 
 
 . Essentially by reversing the arrows, one can also prove the implication in the other way. 
 
 

The theorem suggests that we consider a sort of a dual of a global dimension:


 
 . It was originally called the weak global dimension of R but today it is more commonly called the Tor dimension of R.
Remark: for any ring R, 
 
 
 
 .
Multiplicity theory
Dimensions of non-commutative rings
Let A be a graded algebra over a field k. If V is a finite-dimensional generating subspace of A, then we let 
 
 
 
  and then put


 
 . It is called the Gelfand–Kirillov dimension of A. It is easy to show 
 
 
 
  is independent of a choice of V.
Example: If A is finite-dimensional, then gk(A) = 0. If A is an affine ring, then gk(A) = Krull dimension of A.
See also: Goldie dimension, Krull–Gabriel dimension.
See also

Bass number
Perfect complex
amplitude

Notes
References


Part II of .
Chapter 10 of .
Kaplansky, Irving, Commutative rings, Allyn and Bacon, 1970.
H. Matsumura Commutative ring theory. Translated from the Japanese by M. Reid. Second edition. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 8.



"
Category:Dimension Category:Commutative algebra









