


Blade (geometry)




Blade (geometry)

In geometric algebra, a blade is a generalization of the concept of scalars and vectors to include simple bivectors, trivectors, etc. Specifically, a 
 
 
 
 -blade is any object that can be expressed as the exterior product (informally wedge product) of 
 
 
 
  vectors, and is of grade

 
 .
In detail:1

A 0-blade is a scalar.
A 1-blade is a vector. Every vector is simple.
A 2-blade is a simple bivector. Linear combinations of 2-blades also are bivectors, but need not be simple, and are hence not necessarily 2-blades. A 2-blade may be expressed as the wedge product of two vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :
 
 


A 3-blade is a simple trivector, that is, it may expressed as the wedge product of three vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 :
 
 


In a space of dimension 
 
 
 
 , a blade of grade 
 
 
 
  is called a pseudovector.2
The highest grade element in a space is called a pseudoscalar, and in a space of dimension 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -blade.3
In a space of dimension 
 
 
 
 , there are 
 
 
 
  dimensions of freedom in choosing a 
 
 
 
 -blade, of which one dimension is an overall scaling multiplier.4

For an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space, there are blades of all grades from 0 to 
 
 
 
  inclusive. A vector subspace of finite dimension 
 
 
 
  may be represented by the 
 
 
 
 -blade formed as a wedge product of all the elements of a basis for that subspace.5
Examples
For example, in 2-dimensional space scalars are described as 0-blades, vectors are 1-blades, and area elements are 2-blades known as pseudoscalars, in that they are one-dimensional objects distinct from regular scalars.
In three-dimensional space, 0-blades are again scalars and 1-blades are three-dimensional vectors, but in three-dimensions, areas have an orientation, so while 2-blades are area elements, they are oriented. 3-blades (trivectors) represent volume elements and in three-dimensional space, these are scalar-like—i.e., 3-blades in three-dimensions form a one-dimensional vector space.
See also

Multivector
Exterior algebra
Geometric algebra
Clifford algebra

Notes


General references



A Lasenby, J Lasenby & R Wareham (2004) A covariant approach to geometry using geometric algebra Technical Report. University of Cambridge Department of Engineering, Cambridge, UK.


External links

A Geometric Algebra Primer, especially for computer scientists.

"
Category:Geometric algebra Category:Vector calculus



↩
↩
↩
For Grassmannians (including the result about dimension) a good book is: . The proof of the dimensionality is actually straightforward. Take 
 
 
 
  vectors and wedge them together 
 
 
 
  and perform elementary column operations on these (factoring the pivots out) until the top 
 
 
 
  block are elementary basis vectors of 
 
 
 
 . The wedge product is then parametrized by the product of the pivots and the lower 
 
 
 
  block.↩
↩




