


Surgery structure set




Surgery structure set

In mathematics, the surgery structure set

 
  is the basic object in the study of manifolds which are homotopy equivalent to a closed manifold X. It is a concept which helps to answer the question whether two homotopy equivalent manifolds are diffeomorphic (or PL-homeomorphic or homeomorphic). There are different versions of the structure set depending on the category (DIFF, PL or TOP) and whether Whitehead torsion is taken into account or not.
Definition
Let X be a closed smooth (or PL- or topological) manifold of dimension n. We call two homotopy equivalences 
 
 
 
  from closed manifolds 
 
 
 
  of dimension 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) equivalent if there exists a cobordism

 
  together with a map 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are homotopy equivalences. The structure set

 
  is the set of equivalence classes of homotopy equivalences 
 
 
 
  from closed manifolds of dimension n to X. This set has a preferred base point
 
 
 
 .
There is also a version which takes Whitehead torsion into account. If we require in the definition above the homotopy equivalences F, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to be simple homotopy equivalences then we obtain the simple structure set

 
 .
Remarks
Notice that 
 
 
 
  in the definition of 
 
 
 
  resp. 
 
 
 
  is an h-cobordism resp. an s-cobordism. Using the s-cobordism theorem we obtain another description for the simple structure set 
 
 
 
 , provided that n>4: The simple structure set 
 
 
 
  is the set of equivalence classes of homotopy equivalences 
 
 
 
  from closed manifolds 
 
 
 
  of dimension n to X with respect to the following equivalence relation. Two homotopy equivalences 
 
 
 
  (i=0,1) are equivalent if there exists a diffeomorphism (or PL-homeomorphism or homeomorphism) 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is homotopic to 
 
 
 
 .
As long as we are dealing with differential manifolds, there is in general no canonical group structure on 
 
 
 
 . If we deal with topological manifolds, it is possible to endow 
 
 
 
  with a preferred structure of an abelian group (see chapter 18 in the book of Ranicki).
Notice that a manifold M is diffeomorphic (or PL-homeomorphic or homeomorphic) to a closed manifold X if and only if there exists a simple homotopy equivalence 
 
 
 
  whose equivalence class is the base point in 
 
 
 
 . Some care is necessary because it may be possible that a given simple homotopy equivalence 
 
 
 
  is not homotopic to a diffeomorphism (or PL-homeomorphism or homeomorphism) although M and X are diffeomorphic (or PL-homeomorphic or homeomorphic). Therefore, it is also necessary to study the operation of the group of homotopy classes of simple self-equivalences of X on 
 
 
 
 .
The basic tool to compute the simple structure set is the surgery exact sequence.
Examples
Topological Spheres: The generalized Poincaré conjecture in the topological category says that 
 
 
 
  only consists of the base point. This conjecture was proved by Smale (n > 4), Freedman (n = 4) and Perelman (n = 3).
Exotic Spheres: The classification of exotic spheres by Kervaire and Milnor gives 
 
 
 
  for n > 4 (smooth category).
References






External links

Andrew Ranicki's homepage
Shmuel Weinberger's homepage

"
Category:Geometric topology Category:Algebraic topology Category:Quadratic forms Category:Surgery theory


