


Pseudorandom generators for polynomials




Pseudorandom generators for polynomials

In theoretical computer science, a pseudorandom generator for low-degree polynomials is an efficient procedure that maps a short truly random seed to a longer pseudorandom string in such a way that low-degree polynomials cannot distinguish the output distribution of the generator from the truly random distribution. That is, evaluating any low-degree polynomial at a point determined by the pseudorandom string is statistically close to evaluating the same polynomial at a point that is chosen uniformly at random.
Pseudorandom generators for low-degree polynomials are a particular instance of pseudorandom generators for statistical tests, where the statistical tests considered are evaluations of low-degree polynomials.
Definition
A pseudorandom generator 
 
 
 
  for polynomials of degree 
 
 
 
  over a finite field

 
  is an efficient procedure that maps a sequence of 
 
 
 
 
  field elements to a sequence of 
 
 
 
  field elements such that any 
 
 
 
 -variate polynomial over 
 
 
 
  of degree 
 
 
 
  is fooled by the output distribution of 
 
 
 
 
 . In other words, for every such polynomial 
 
 
 
 , the statistical distance between the distributions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is at most a small 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is the uniform distribution over 
 
 
 
 .
Construction
The case 
 
 
 
  corresponds to pseudorandom generators for linear functions and is solved by small-bias generators. For example, the construction of  achieves a seed length of 
 
 
 
 , which is optimal up to constant factors.
conjectured that the sum of small-bias generators fools low-degree polynomials and were able to prove this under the Gowers inverse conjecture.  proved unconditionally that the sum of 
 
 
 
  small-bias spaces fools polynomials of degree 
 
 
 
 
 .  proves that, in fact, taking the sum of only 
 
 
 
  small-bias generators is sufficient to fool polynomials of degree 
 
 
 
 . The analysis of  gives a seed length of 
 
 
 
 .
References






"
Category:Pseudorandomness


