


Smoothing spline




Smoothing spline

The smoothing spline is a method of smoothing (fitting a smooth curve to a set of noisy observations) using a spline function.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
 . The smoothing spline estimate 
 
 
 
  of the function 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the minimizer (over the class of twice differentiable functions) of1



Remarks:



 
  is a smoothing parameter, controlling the trade-off between fidelity to the data and roughness of the function estimate.
The integral is evaluated over the range of the 
 
 
 
 .
As 
 
 
 
  (no smoothing), the smoothing spline converges to the interpolating spline.
As 
 
 
 
  (infinite smoothing), the roughness penalty becomes paramount and the estimate converges to a linear least squares estimate.
The roughness penalty based on the second derivative is the most common in modern statistics literature, although the method can easily be adapted to penalties based on other derivatives.
In early literature, with equally-spaced 
 
 
 
 , second or third-order differences were used in the penalty, rather than derivatives.
When the sum-of-squares term is replaced by a log-likelihood, the resulting estimate is termed penalized likelihood. The smoothing spline is the special case of penalized likelihood resulting from a Gaussian likelihood.

Derivation of the smoothing spline
It is useful to think of fitting a smoothing spline in two steps:

First, derive the values 
 
 
 
 .
From these values, derive 
 
 
 
  for all x.

Now, treat the second step first.
Given the vector 
 
 
 
  of fitted values, the sum-of-squares part of the spline criterion is fixed. It remains only to minimize 
 
 
 
 , and the minimizer is a natural cubic spline that interpolates the points 
 
 
 
 . This interpolating spline is a linear operator, and can be written in the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are a set of spline basis functions. As a result, the roughness penalty has the form


 
  where the elements of A are 
 
 
 
 . The basis functions, and hence the matrix A, depend on the configuration of the predictor variables 
 
 
 
 , but not on the responses 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
Now back to the first step. The penalized sum-of-squares can be written as


 
  where 
 
 
 
 . Minimizing over 
 
 
 
  gives



De Boor's approach
De Boor's approach exploits the same idea, of finding a balance between having a smooth curve and being close to the given data.2


where 
 
 
 
  is a parameter called smooth factor and belongs to the interval 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are the quantities controlling the extent of smoothing (they represent the weight 
 
 
 
  of each point 
 
 
 
 ). In practice, since cubic splines are mostly used, 
 
 
 
  is usually 
 
 
 
 . The solution for 
 
 
 
  was proposed by Reinsch in 1967.3 For 
 
 
 
 , when 
 
 
 
  approaches 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  converges to the "natural" spline interpolant to the given data.4 As 
 
 
 
  approaches 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  converges to a straight line (the smoothest curve). Since finding a suitable value of 
 
 
 
  is a task of trial and error, a redundant constant 
 
 
 
  was introduced for convenience.5

 
  is used to numerically determine the value of 
 
 
 
  so that the function 
 
 
 
  meets the following condition:



The algorithm described by de Boor starts with 
 
 
 
  and increases 
 
 
 
  until the condition is met.6 If 
 
 
 
  is an estimation of the standard deviation for 
 
 
 
 , the constant 
 
 
 
  is recommended to be chosen in the interval 
 
 
 
 . Having 
 
 
 
  means the solution is the "natural" spline interpolant.7 Increasing 
 
 
 
  means we obtain a smoother curve by getting farther from the given data.
Creating a multidimensional spline
Given the constraint from the definition formula 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  so that they would become 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the cumulating distance 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .89
A more detailed analysis on parametrization is done by E.T.Y Lee.10
Related methods
Smoothing splines are related to, but distinct from:

Regression splines. In this method, the data is fitted to a set of spline basis functions with a reduced set of knots, typically by least squares. No roughness penalty is used.
Penalized Splines. This combines the reduced knots of regression splines, with the roughness penalty of smoothing splines.11
Elastic maps method for manifold learning. This method combines the least squares penalty for approximation error with the bending and stretching penalty of the approximating manifold and uses the coarse discretization of the optimization problem.

Source code
Source code for spline smoothing can be found in the examples from Carl de Boor's book A Practical Guide to Splines. The examples are in Fortran programming language. The updated sources are available also on Carl de Boor's official site 1.
Further reading

Wahba, G. (1990). Spline Models for Observational Data. SIAM, Philadelphia.
Green, P. J. and Silverman, B. W. (1994). Nonparametric Regression and Generalized Linear Models. CRC Press.
De Boor, C. (2001). A Practical Guide to Splines (Revised Edition). Springer.

References
"
Category:Regression analysis Category:Splines Category:Statistical methods


















