


Boneh–Franklin scheme




Boneh–Franklin scheme

The Boneh/Franklin scheme is an Identity based encryption system proposed by Dan Boneh and Matthew K. Franklin in 2001.1 This article refers to the protocol version called BasicIdent. It is an application of pairings (Weil pairing) over elliptic curves and finite fields.
Groups and parameters
As the scheme bases upon pairings, all computations are performed in two groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :
For 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be prime, 
 
 
 
  and consider the elliptic curve

 
  over 
 
 
 
 . Note that this curve is not singular as 
 
 
 
  only equals 
 
 
 
  for the case 
 
 
 
  which is excluded by the additional constraint.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a prime factor of 
 
 
 
  (which is the order of 
 
 
 
 ) and find a point 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is the set of points generated by 
 
 


 
  is the subgroup of order 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . We do not need to construct this group explicitly (this is done by the pairing) and thus don't have to find a generator.
Protocol description
Setup
The Private Key Generator (PKG) chooses:

the public groups 
 
 
 
  (with generator 
 
 
 
 ) and 
 
 
 
  as stated above, with the size of 
 
 
 
  depending on security parameter 
 
 
 
 ,
the corresponding pairing 
 
 
 
 ,
a random private master-key 
 
 
 
 ,
a public key 
 
 
 
 ,
a public hash function 
 
 
 
 ,
a public hash function 
 
 
 
  for some fixed 
 
 
 
  and
the message space and the cipher space



Extract
To create the public key for 
 
 
 
 , the PKG computes



 
  and
the private key 
 
 
 
  which is given to the user.

Encrypt
Given 
 
 
 
 , the ciphertext 
 
 
 
  is obtained as follows:



 
 ,
choose random 
 
 
 
 ,
compute 
 
 
 
  and
set 
 
 
 
 .

Note that 
 
 
 
  is the PKG's public key and thus independent of the recipient's ID.
Decrypt
Given 
 
 
 
 , the plaintext can be retrieved using the private key:



Correctness
The primary step in both en- and decryption is to employ the pairing and 
 
 
 
  to generate a mask (like a symmetric key) that is xor'ed with the plaintext. So in order to verify correctness of the protocol, one has to verify that an honest sender and recipient end up with the same values here.
The encrypting entity uses 
 
 
 
 , while for decryption, 
 
 
 
  is applied. Due to the properties of pairings, it follows that:



Security
The security of the scheme depends on the hardness of the Bilinear Diffie-Hellman Problem (BDH) for the groups used. It has been proved that in a random-oracle model, the protocol is semantically secure under the BDH assumption.
Improvements
BasicIdent is not chosen ciphertext secure. However, there is a universal transformation method due to Fujisaki and Okamoto that allows for conversion to a scheme having this property called FullIdent.
References


External links

Seminar 'Cryptography and Security in Banking'/'Alternative Cryptology', Ruhr University Bochum
P(airing) B(ased) C(ryptography) library, designed by Ben Lynn et al.

"
Category:Public-key encryption schemes Category:Pairing-based cryptography Category:Identity-based cryptography Category:Elliptic curve cryptography



Dan Boneh, Matthew K. Franklin, Identity-Based Encryption from the Weil Pairing Advances in Cryptology - Proceedings of CRYPTO 2001 (2001)↩




