


Gauge gravitation theory




Gauge gravitation theory

In quantum field theory, gauge gravitation theory is the effort to extend Yang–Mills theory, which provides a universal description of the fundamental interactions, to describe gravity. It should not be confused with the related but distinct gauge theory gravity.
The first gauge model of gravity was suggested by R. Utiyama in 19561 just two years after birth of the gauge theory itself.2 However, the initial attempts to construct the gauge theory of gravity by analogy with the gauge models of internal symmetries encountered a problem of treating general covariant transformations and establishing the gauge status of a pseudo-Riemannian metric (a tetrad field).
In order to overcome this drawback, representing tetrad fields as gauge fields of the translation group was attempted.3 Infinitesimal generators of general covariant transformations were considered as those of the translation gauge group, and a tetrad (coframe) field was identified with the translation part of an affine connection on a world manifold

 
 . Any such connection is a sum 
 
 
 
  of a linear world connection

 
  and a soldering form 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a non-holonomic frame. For instance, if 
 
 
 
  is the Cartan connection, then 
 
 
 
  is the canonical soldering form on 
 
 
 
 . There are different physical interpretations of the translation part 
 
 
 
 
  of affine connections. In gauge theory of dislocations, a field 
 
 
 
  describes a distortion.4 At the same time, given a linear frame 
 
 
 
 , the decomposition 
 
 
 
  motivates many authors to treat a coframe 
 
 
 
  as a translation gauge field.5
Difficulties of constructing gauge gravitation theory by analogy with the Yang-Mills one result from the gauge transformations in these theories belonging to different classes. In the case of internal symmetries, the gauge transformations are just vertical automorphisms of a principal bundle

 
 
  leaving its base 
 
 
 
  fixed. On the other hand, gravitation theory is built on the principal bundle 
 
 
 
  of the tangent frames to 
 
 
 
 . It belongs to the category of natural bundles

 
  for which diffeomorphisms of the base 
 
 
 
 
  canonically give rise to automorphisms of 
 
 
 
 .6 These automorphisms are called general covariant transformations. General covariant transformations are sufficient in order to restate Einstein's General Relativity and metric-affine gravitation theory as the gauge ones.
In terms of gauge theory on natural bundles, gauge fields are linear connections on a world manifold 
 
 
 
 , defined as principal connections on the linear frame bundle

 
 , and a metric (tetrad) gravitational field plays the role of a Higgs field responsible for spontaneous symmetry breaking of general covariant transformations.7
Spontaneous symmetry breaking is a quantum effect when the vacuum is not invariant under the transformation group. In classical gauge theory, spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs if the structure group

 
  of a principal bundle

 
 
  is reducible to a closed subgroup 
 
 
 
 , i.e., there exists a principal subbundle of 
 
 
 
  with the structure group

 
 .8 By virtue of the well-known theorem, there exists one-to-one correspondence between the reduced principal subbundles of 
 
 
 
  with the structure group 
 
 
 
 
  and the global sections of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
 . These sections are treated as classical Higgs fields.
The idea of the pseudo-Riemannian metric as a Higgs field appeared while constructing non-linear (induced) representations of the general linear group 
 
 
 
 , of which the Lorentz group is a Cartan subgroup.9 The geometric equivalence principle postulating the existence of a reference frame in which Lorentz invariants are defined on the whole world manifold is the theoretical justification of that the structure group

 
  of the linear frame bundle 
 
 
 
  is reduced to the Lorentz group. Then the very definition of a pseudo-Riemannian metric on a manifold 
 
 
 
 
  as a global section of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
  leads to its physical interpretation as a Higgs field. The physical reason for world symmetry breaking is the existence of Dirac fermion matter, whose symmetry group is the universal two-sheeted covering 
 
 
 
  of the restricted Lorentz group, 
 
 
 
 .10
See also
Notes
References

I. Kirsch, A Higgs mechanism for gravity, Phys. Rev. D72 (2005) 024001; arXiv: hep-th/0503024.
G. Sardanashvily, Classical gauge gravitation theory, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys. 8 (2011) 1869-1895; arXiv: 1110.1176.
Yu. Obukhov, Poincaré gauge gravity: selected topics, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys. 3 (2006) 95-138; arXiv: gr-qc/0601090.

"
Category:Gauge theories Category:Theories of gravitation



R Utiyama, Invariant theoretical interpretation of interaction, Physical Review 101 (1956) 1597. ↩
↩
F.Hehl, J. McCrea, E. Mielke, Y. Ne'eman, Metric-affine gauge theory of gravity: field equations, Noether identities, world spinors, and breaking of dilaton invariance, Physics Reports 258 (1995) 1. ↩
C.Malyshev, The dislocation stress functions from the double curl 
 
 
 
 -gauge equations: Linearity and look beyond, Annals of Physics 286 (2000) 249. ↩
M. Blagojević, Gravitation and Gauge Symmetries (IOP Publishing, Bristol, 2002).↩
I. Kolář, P. W. Michor, J. Slovák, Natural Operations in Differential Geometry (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1993).↩
D.Ivanenko, G.Sardanashvily, The gauge treatment of gravity, Physics Reports 94 (1983) 1. ↩
L. Nikolova, V. Rizov, Geometrical approach to the reduction of gauge theories with spontaneous broken symmetries, Reports on Mathematical Physics 20 (1984) 287. ↩
M. Leclerk, The Higgs sector of gravitational gauge theories, Annals of Physics 321 (2006) 708. ↩
G. Sardanashvily, O.Zakharov, Gauge Gravitation Theory (World Scientific, Singapore, 1992).↩




