


Carathéodory's existence theorem




Carathéodory's existence theorem

In mathematics, Carathéodory's existence theorem says that an ordinary differential equation has a solution under relatively mild conditions. It is a generalization of Peano's existence theorem. Peano's theorem requires that the right-hand side of the differential equation is continuous, while Carathéodory's theorem shows existence of solutions (in a more general sense) for some discontinuous equations. The theorem is named after Constantin Carathéodory.
Introduction
Consider the differential equation


 
  with initial condition


 
  where the function ƒ is defined on a rectangular domain of the form


 
  Peano's existence theorem states that if ƒ is continuous, then the differential equation has at least one solution in a neighbourhood of the initial condition.1
However, it is also possible to consider differential equations with a discontinuous right-hand side, like the equation


 
  where H denotes the Heaviside function defined by


 
  It makes sense to consider the ramp function


 
  as a solution of the differential equation. Strictly speaking though, it does not satisfy the differential equation at 
 
 
 
 , because the function is not differentiable there. This suggests that the idea of a solution be extended to allow for solutions that are not everywhere differentiable, thus motivating the following definition.
A function y is called a solution in the extended sense of the differential equation 
 
 
 
  with initial condition 
 
 
 
  if y is absolutely continuous, y satisfies the differential equation almost everywhere and y satisfies the initial condition.2 The absolute continuity of y implies that its derivative exists almost everywhere.3
Statement of the theorem
Consider the differential equation


 
  with 
 
 
 
  defined on the rectangular domain 
 
 
 
 . If the function 
 
 
 
  satisfies the following three conditions:



 
  is continuous in 
 
 
 
  for each fixed 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  is measurable in 
 
 
 
  for each fixed 
 
 
 
 ,
there is a Lebesgue-integrable function 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 ,

then the differential equation has a solution in the extended sense in a neighborhood of the initial condition.4
Notes


References


.

.

"
Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Theorems in analysis



, Theorem 1.2 of Chapter 1
, page 42
, Theorem 7.18
, Theorem 1.1 of Chapter 2




