


Interval finite element




Interval finite element

 The interval finite element method (interval FEM) is a finite element method that uses interval parameters. Interval FEM can be applied in situations where it is not possible to get reliable probabilistic characteristics of the structure. This is important in concrete structures, wood structures, geomechanics, composite structures, biomechanics and in many other areas 1. The goal of the Interval Finite Element is to find upper and lower bounds of different characteristics of the model (e.g. stress, displacements, yield surface etc.) and use these results in the design process. This is so called worst case design, which is closely related to the limit state design.
Worst case design require less information than probabilistic design however the results are more conservative [Köylüoglu and Elishakoff 1998]. 
Applications of the interval parameters to the modeling of uncertainty
Solution of the following equation



where a and b are real numbers is equal to 
 
 
 
 .
Very often exact values of the parameters a and b are unknown.
 Let's assume that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . In that case it is necessary to solve the following equation



There are several definition of the solution set of the equation with the interval parameters.
United solution set
In this approach the solution is the following set



This is the most popular solution set of the interval equation and this solution set will be applied in this article.
In the multidimensional case the united solutions set is much more complicated. Solution set of the following system of linear interval equations



is shown on the following picture
600px|550px



Exact solution set is very complicated, because of that in applications it is necessary to find the smallest interval which contain the exact solution set
600px|550px



or simply



where




See also 2
Parametric solution set of interval linear system
Interval Finite Element Method require the solution of parameter dependent system of equations (usually with symmetric positive definite matrix). Example of the solution set of general parameter dependent system of equations



is shown on the picture below (E. Popova, Parametric Solution Set of Interval Linear System 3).
(Figure)
Solution set of the parameter dependent system of equations

Algebraic solution
In this approach x is such interval number for which the equation



is satisfied. In other words left side of the equation is equal to the right side of the equation. In this particular case the solution is equal to 
 
 
 
  because



If the uncertainty is bigger i.e. 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  because



If the uncertainty is even bigger i.e. 
 
 
 
 , then the solution doesn't exist. It is really hard to find physical interpretation of the algebraic interval solution set. Because of that in applications usually the united solution set is applied.
The method
Consider PDE with the interval parameters



where 
 
 
 
  is a vector of parameters which belong to given intervals






For example the heat transfer equation






where 
 
 
 
  are the interval parameters (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ).
Solution of the equation (1) can be defined in the following way



For example in the case of the heat transfer equation



Solution 
 
 
 
  is very complicated because of that in practice it is more interesting to find the smallest possible interval which contain the exact solution set 
 
 
 
 .



For example in the case of the heat transfer equation



Finite element method lead to the following parameter dependent system of algebraic equations



where 
 
 
 
  is a stiffness matrix and 
 
 
 
  is a right hand side.
Interval solution can be defined as a multivalued function



In the simplest case above system can be treat as a system of linear interval equations.
It is also possible to define the interval solution as a solution of the following optimization problem






In multidimensional case the intrval solution can be written as



History
Ben-Haim Y., Elishakoff I., 1990, Convex Models of Uncertainty in Applied Mechanics. Elsevier Science Publishers, New York
Valliappan S., Pham T.D., 1993, Fuzzy Finite Element Analysis of A Foundation on Elastic Soil Medium. International Journal for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics, Vol.17, pp. 771–789
Elishakoff I., Li Y.W., Starnes J.H., 1994, A deterministic method to predict the effect of unknown-but-bounded elastic moduli on the buckling of composite structures. Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering, Vol.111, pp. 155–167
Valliappan S. Pham T.D., 1995, Elasto-Plastic Finite Element Analysis with Fuzzy Parameters. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 38, pp. 531–548
Rao S.S., Sawyer J.P., 1995, Fuzzy Finite Element Approach for the Analysis of Imprecisly Defined Systems. AIAA Journal, Vol.33, No.12, pp. 2364–2370
Köylüoglu H.U., Cakmak A., Nielsen S.R.K., 1995, Interval mapping in structural mechanics. In: Spanos, ed. Computational Stochastic Mechanics. 125-133. Balkema, Rotterdam
Muhanna, R. L. and R. L. Mullen (1995). "Development of Interval Based Methods for Fuzziness in Continuum Mechanics" in Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Uncertainty Modeling and Analysis and Annual Conference of the North American Fuzzy Information Processing Society (ISUMA–NAFIPS'95),IEEE, 705–710
More references can be found here 4
Interval solution versus probabilistic solution
It is important to know that the interval parameters generate different results than uniformly distributed random variables.
Interval parameter 
 
 
 
  take into account all possible probability distributions (for 
 
 
 
 ).
In order to define the interval parameter it is necessary to know only upper 
 
 
 
  and lower bound 
 
 
 
 .
Calculations of probabilistic characteristics require the knowledge of a lot of experimental results.
It is possible to show that the sum of n interval numbers is 
 
 
 
  times wider than the sum of appropriate normally distributed random variables.
Sum of n interval number 
 
 
 
  is equal to



Width of that interval is equal to



Let us consider normally distributed random variable X such that



Sum of n normally distributed random variable is a normally distributed random variable with the following characteristics (see Six Sigma)



We can assume that the width of the probabilistic result is equal to 6 sigma (compare Six Sigma).



Now we can compare the width of the interval result and the probabilistic result



Because of that the results of the interval finite element (or in general worst case analysis) may be overestimated in comparison to the stochastic fem analysis (see also propagation of uncertainty). However in the case of nonprobabilistic uncertainty it is not possible to apply pure probabilistic methods. Because probabilistic characteristic in that case are not known exactly [Elishakoff 2000].
It is possible to consider random (and fuzzy random variables) with the interval parameters (e.g. with the interval mean, variance etc.). Some researchers use interval (fuzzy) measurements in statistical calculations (e.g. 5). As a results of such calculations we will get so called imprecise probability.
Imprecise probability is understood in a very wide sense. It is used as a generic term to cover all mathematical models which measure chance or uncertainty without sharp numerical probabilities. It includes both qualitative (comparative probability, partial preference orderings, …) and quantitative modes (interval probabilities, belief functions, upper and lower previsions, …). Imprecise probability models are needed in inference problems where the relevant information is scarce, vague or conflicting, and in decision problems where preferences may also be incomplete 6.
Simple example: modeling tension, compression, strain, and stress)
400px|350px
1-dimension example
In the tension-compression problem, the following equation shows the relationship between displacement

 
  and force

 
 :



where 
 
 
 
  is length, 
 
 
 
  is the area of a cross-section, and 
 
 
 
  is Young's modulus.
If the Young's modulus and force are uncertain, then



To find upper and lower bounds of the displacement 
 
 
 
 , calculate the following partial derivatives:






Calculate extreme values of the displacement as follows:






Calculate strain using following formula:



Calculate derivative of the strain using derivative from the displacements:






Calculate extreme values of the displacement as follows:






It is also possible to calculate extreme values of strain using the displacements



then






The same methodology can be applied to the stress



then






and






If we treat stress as a function of strain then



then






Structure is safe if stress 
 
 
 
  is smaller than a given value 
 
 
 
  i.e.



this condition is true if



After calculation we know that this relation is satisfied if



The example is very simple but it shows the applications of the interval parameters in mechanics. Interval FEM use very similar methodology in multidimensional cases [Pownuk 2004].
However in the multidimensional cases relation between the uncertain parameters and the solution is not always monotone. In that cases more complicated optimization methods have to be applied 7.
Multidimensional example
In the case of tension-compression problem the equilibrium equation has the following form



where 
 
 
 
  is displacement, 
 
 
 
  is Young's modulus, 
 
 
 
  is an area of cross-section, and 
 
 
 
  is a distributed load. In order to get unique solution it is necessary to add appropriate boundary conditions e.g.






If Young's modulus

 
  and 
 
 
 
  are uncertain then the interval solution can be defined in the following way



For each FEM element it is possible to multiply the equation by the test function 
 
 




where 
 
 

 After integration by parts we will get the equation in the week form



where 
 
 

 Let's introduce a set of grid points 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a number of elements, and linear shape functions for each FEM element



where 
 
 


 
  left endpoint of the element, 
 
 
 
  left endpoint of the element number "e". Approximate solution in the "e"-th element is a linear combination of the shape functions



After substitution to the weak form of the equation we will get the following system of equations


 
  or in the matrix form



In order to assemble the global stiffness matrix it is necessary to consider an equilibrium equations in each node. After that the equation has the following matrix form



where



is the global stiffness matrix,



is the solution vector,



is the right hand side.
In the case of tension-compression problem



If we neglect the distributed load 
 
 




After taking into account the boundary conditions the stiffness matrix has the following form



Right-hand side has the following form



Let's assume that Young's modulus 
 
 
 
 , area of cross-section 
 
 
 
  and the load 
 
 
 
  are uncertain and belong to some intervals









The interval solution can be defined calculating the following way



Calculation of the interval vector 
 
 
 
  is in general NP-hard, however in specific cases it is possible to calculate the solution which can be used in many engineering applications.
The results of the calculations are the interval displacements



Let's assume that the displacements in the column have to be smaller than some given value (due to safety).



The uncertain system is safe if the interval solution satisfy all safety conditions.
In this particular case



or simple



In postprocessing it is possible to calculate the interval stress, the interval strain and the interval limit state functions and use these values in the design process.
The interval finite element method can be applied to the solution of problems in which there is not enough information to create reliable probabilistic characteristic of the structures [Elishakoff 2000]. Interval finite element method can be also applied in the theory of imprecise probability.
Endpoints combination method
It is possible to solve the equation 
 
 
 
  for all possible combinations of endpoints of the interval 
 
 
 
 .
 The list of all vertices of the interval 
 
 
 
  can be written as 
 
 
 
 .
 Upper and lower bound of the solution can be calculated in the following way






Endpoints combination method gives solution which is usually exact; unfortunately the method has exponential computational complexity and cannot be applied to the problems with many interval parameters [Neumaier 1990].
Taylor expansion method
The function 
 
 
 
  can be expanded by using Taylor series. In the simplest case the Taylor series use only linear approximation



Upper and lower bound of the solution can be calculated by using the following formula






The method is very efficient however it is not very accurate.
 In order to improve accuracy it is possible to apply higher order Taylor expansion [Pownuk 2004].
 This approach can be also applied in the interval finite difference method and the interval boundary element method.
Gradient method
If the sign of the derivatives 
 
 
 
  is constant then the functions 
 
 
 
  is monotone and the exact solution can be calculated very fast.

if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 



if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 


Extreme values of the solution can be calculated in the following way



In many structural engineering applications the method gives exact solution.
 If the solution is not monotone the solution is usually reasonable. In order to improve accuracy of the method it is possible to apply monotonicity tests and higher order sensitivity analysis. The method can be applied to the solution of linear and nonlinear problems of computational mechanics [Pownuk 2004]. Applications of sensitivity analysis method to the solution of civil engineering problems can be found in the following paper [M.V. Rama Rao, A. Pownuk and I. Skalna 2008].
 This approach can be also applied in the interval finite difference method and the interval boundary element method.
Element by element method
Muhanna and Mullen applied element by element formulation to the solution of finite element equation with the interval parameters [Muhanna, Mullen 2001]. Using that method it is possible to get the solution with guaranteed accuracy in the case of truss and frame structures.
Perturbation methods
The solution 
 
 
stiffness matrix

 
  and the load vector 
 
 
 
  can be expanded by using perturbation theory. Perturbation theory lead to the approximate value of the interval solution [Qiu, Elishakoff 1998]. The method is very efficient and can be applied to large problems of computational mechanics.
Response surface method
It is possible to approximate the solution 
 
 
 
  by using response surface. Then it is possible to use the response surface to the get the interval solution [Akpan 2000]. Using response surface method it is possible to solve very complex problem of computational mechanics [Beer 2008].
Pure interval methods
Several authors tried to apply pure interval methods to the solution of finite element problems with the interval parameters. In some cases it is possible to get very interesting results e.g. [Popova, Iankov, Bonev 2008]. However in general the method generates very overestimated results [Kulpa, Pownuk, Skalna 1998].
Parametric interval systems
[Popova 2001] and [Skalna 2006] introduced the methods for the solution of the system of linear equations in which the coefficients are linear combinations of interval parameters. In this case it is possible to get very accurate solution of the interval equations with guaranteed accuracy.
See also

Interval boundary element method
Interval (mathematics)
Interval arithmetic
Imprecise probability
Multivalued function
Differential inclusion
Observational error
Random compact set
Reliability (statistics)
Confidence interval
Best, worst and average case
Probabilistic design
Propagation of uncertainty
Experimental uncertainty analysis
Sensitivity analysis
Perturbation theory
Continuum mechanics
Solid mechanics
Truss
Space frame
Linear elasticity
Strength of materials

References

U.O. Akpan, T.S. Koko, I.R. Orisamolu, B.K. Gallant, Practical fuzzy finite element analysis of structures, Finite Elements in Analysis and Design, 38, pp. 93–111, 2000.
M. Beer, Evaluation of Inconsistent Engineering data, The Third workshop on Reliable Engineering Computing (REC08) Georgia Institute of Technology, February 20–22, 2008, Savannah, Georgia, USA.
Dempster, A. P. (1967). "Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping". The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 38 (2): 325-339. 8. Retrieved 2009-09-23
Analyzing Uncertainty in Civil Engineering, by W. Fellin, H. Lessmann, M. Oberguggenberger, and R. Vieider (eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2005
I. Elishakoff, Possible limitations of probabilistic methods in engineering. Applied Mechanics Reviews, Vol.53, No.2, pp. 19–25, 2000.
Hlavácek, I., Chleboun, J., Babuška, I.: Uncertain Input Data Problems and the Worst Scenario Method. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2004)
Köylüoglu, U., Isaac Elishakoff; A comparison of stochastic and interval finite elements applied to shear frames with uncertain stiffness properties, Computers & Structures Volume: 67, Issue: 1-3, April 1, 1998, pp. 91–98
Kulpa Z., Pownuk A., Skalna I., Analysis of linear mechanical structures with uncertainties by means of interval methods. Computer Assisted Mechanics and Engineering Sciences, vol. 5, 1998, pp. 443–477
D. Moens and D. Vandepitte, Interval sensitivity theory and its application to frequency response envelope analysis of uncertain structures. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering Vol. 196, No. 21-24,1 April 2007, pp. 2486–2496.
Möller, B., Beer, M., Fuzzy Randomness - Uncertainty in Civil Engineering and Computational Mechanics, Springer, Berlin, 2004.
R.L. Muhanna, R.L. Mullen, Uncertainty in Mechanics Problems - Interval - Based Approach. Journal of Engineering Mechanics, Vol.127, No.6, 2001, 557-556
A. Neumaier, Interval methods for systems of equations, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1990
E. Popova, On the Solution of Parametrised Linear Systems. W. Kraemer, J. Wolff von Gudenberg (Eds.): Scientific Computing,Validated Numerics, Interval Methods. Kluwer Acad. Publishers, 2001, pp. 127–138.
E. Popova, R. Iankov, Z. Bonev: Bounding the Response of Mechanical Structures with Uncertainties in all the Parameters. In R.L.Muhannah, R.L.Mullen (Eds): Proceedings of the NSF Workshop on Reliable Engineering Computing (REC), Svannah, Georgia USA, Feb. 22-24, 2006, 245-265
A. Pownuk, Numerical solutions of fuzzy partial differential equation and its application in computational mechanics, Fuzzy Partial Differential Equations and Relational Equations: Reservoir Characterization and Modeling (M. Nikravesh, L. Zadeh and V. Korotkikh, eds.), Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing, Physica-Verlag, 2004, pp. 308–347
A. Pownuk, Efficient Method of Solution of Large Scale Engineering Problems with Interval Parameters Based on Sensitivity Analysis, Proceeding of NSF workshop on Reliable Engineering Computing, September 15–17, 2004, Savannah, Georgia, USA, pp. 305–316
M.V. Rama Rao, A. Pownuk and I. Skalna, Stress Analysis of a Singly Reinforced Concrete Beam with Uncertain Structural Parameters, NSF workshop on Reliable Engineering Computing, February 20–22, 2008, Savannah, Georgia, USA, pp. 459–478
I. Skalna, A Method for Outer Interval Solution of Systems of Linear Equations Depending Linearly on Interval Parameters, Reliable Computing, Volume 12, Number 2, April, 2006, pp. 107–120
Z. Qiu and I. Elishakoff, Antioptimization of structures with large uncertain but non-random parameters via interval analysis Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, Volume 152, Issues 3-4, 24 January 1998, Pages 361-372
Bernardini, Alberto, Tonon, Fulvio, Bounding Uncertainty in Civil Engineering, Springer 2010

More references can be found here 9
External links

10—Reliable Engineering Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Savannah, USA
11—Interval Computations
12—Reliable Computing (Journal)
13—Interval equations (collections of references)
14—Interval finite element web applications
15—E. Popova, Parametric Solution Set of Interval Linear System
16—The Society for Imprecise Probability: Theories and Applications

"
Category:Finite element method


