


Helly metric




Helly metric

In game theory, the Helly metric is used to assess the distance between two strategies. It is named for Eduard Helly.
Consider a game 
 
 
 
 , between player I and II. Here, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the sets of pure strategies for players I and II respectively; and 
 
 
 
  is the payoff function.
(in other words, if player I plays 
 
 
 
  and player II plays 
 
 
 
 , then player I pays 
 
 
 
  to player II).
The Helly metric

 
  is defined as



The metric so defined is symmetric, reflexive, and satisfies the triangle inequality.
The Helly metric measures distances between strategies, not in terms of the differences between the strategies themselves, but in terms of the consequences of the strategies. Two strategies are distant if their payoffs are different. Note that 
 
 
 
  does not imply 
 
 
 
  but it does imply that the consequences of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are identical; and indeed this induces an equivalence relation.
If one stipulates that 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
  then the topology so induced is called the natural topology.
The metric on the space of player II's strategies is analogous:



Note that 
 
 
 
  thus defines two Helly metrics: one for each player's strategy space.
Conditional compactness
Notation (definition of an 
 
 
 
 -net). A set 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -net in the space 
 
 
 
  with metric 
 
 
 
  if for any 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 .
A metric space 
 
 
 
  is conditionally compact if for any 
 
 
 
  there exists a finite

 
 -net in 
 
 
 
 .
A game that is conditionally compact in the Helly metric has an 
 
 
 
 -optimal strategy for any 
 
 
 
 .
Other results
If the space of strategies for one player is conditionally compact, then the space of strategies for the other player is conditionally compact (in their Helly metric).
References
N. N. Vorob'ev 1977. Game theory lectures for economists and systems scientists. Springer-Verlag (translated by S. Kotz).
"
Category:Game theory


