


Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem




Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem

The Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem is a theorem in the field of statistical mechanics. The theorem states that when statistical mechanics and classical mechanics are applied consistently, the thermal average of the magnetization is always zero.1 This makes magnetism in solids solely a quantum mechanical effect and means that classical physics cannot account for diamagnetism, paramagnetism or ferromagnetism.2
History
What is today known as the Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem was discovered by Niels Bohr in 1911 in his doctoral dissertation3 and was later rediscovered by Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen in her doctoral thesis in 1919.4 In 1932, van Vleck formalized and expanded upon Bohr's initial theorem in a book he wrote on electric and magnetic susceptibilities.5
The significance of this discovery is that classical physics does not allow for such things as paramagnetism, diamagnetism and ferromagnetism and thus quantum physics are needed to explain the magnetic events.6 This result, "perhaps the most deflationary publication of all time,"7 may have contributed to Bohr's development of a quasi-classical theory of the hydrogen atom in 1913.
Proof
An intuitive proof
The Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem applies to an isolated system that cannot rotate (an isolated star could start rotating if exposed to a field).8 If, in addition, there is only one state of thermal equilibrium in a given temperature and field, and the system is allowed time to return to equilibrium after a field is applied, then there will be no magnetization.
The probability that the system will be in a given state of motion is predicted by Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics to be proportional to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the energy of the system, 
 
 
 
  is the Boltzmann constant, and 
 
 
 
  is the absolute temperature. This energy is equal to the kinetic energy

 
  for a particle with mass 
 
 
 
  and speed 
 
 
 
  and the potential energy.9
The magnetic field does not contribute to the potential energy. The Lorentz force on a particle with charge

 
  and velocity

 
  is

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the electric field and 
 
 
 
  is the magnetic flux density. The rate of work done is 
 
 
 
  and does not depend on 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, the energy does not depend on the magnetic field, so the distribution of motions does not depend on the magnetic field.10
In zero field, there will be no net motion of charged particles because the system is not able to rotate. There will therefore be an average magnetic moment of zero. Since the distribution of motions does not depend on the magnetic field, the moment in thermal equilibrium remains zero in any magnetic field.11
A more formal proof
So as to lower the complexity of the proof, a system with 
 
 
 
  electrons will be used.
This is appropriate, since most of the magnetism in a solid is carried by electrons, and the proof is easily generalized to more than one type of charged particle.
Each electron has a negative charge 
 
 
 
  and mass 
 
 
 
 .
If its position is 
 
 
 
  and velocity is 
 
 
 
 , it produces a current

 
  and a magnetic moment12


The above equation shows that the magnetic moment is a linear function of the position coordinates, so the total magnetic moment in a given direction must be a linear function of the form

 
  where the dot represents a time derivative and 
 
 
 
  are vector coefficients depending on the position coordinates 
 
 
 
 .13
Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics gives the probability that the nth particle has momentum 
 
 
 
  and coordinate 
 
 
 
  as

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Hamiltonian, the total energy of the system.14
The thermal average of any function 
 
 
 
  of these generalized coordinates is then


In the presence of a magnetic field,

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the magnetic vector potential and 
 
 
 
  is the electric scalar potential. For each particle the components of the momentum 
 
 
 
  and position 
 
 
 
  are related by the equations of Hamiltonian mechanics:

 
 
  Therefore,

 
  so the moment 
 
 
 
  is a linear function of the momenta 
 
 
 
 .15
The thermally averaged moment,

 
  is the sum of terms proportional to integrals of the form

 
  where 
 
 
 
  represents one of the moment coordinates.
The integrand is an odd function of 
 
 
 
 , so it vanishes.
Therefore, 
 
 
 
 .16
Applications of the Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem
The Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem is useful in several applications including plasma physics, "All these references base their discussion of the Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem on Niels Bohr's physical model, in which perfectly reflecting walls are necessary to provide the currents that cancel the net contribution from the interior of an element of plasma, and result in zero net diamagnetism for the plasma element."17
Diamagnetism of a purely classical nature occurs in plasmas but is a consequence of thermal disequilibrium, such as a gradient in plasma density. Electromechanics and electrical engineering also see practical benefit from the Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem.
See also

List of plasma (physics) articles

Notes
References









External links

The early 20th century: Relativity and quantum mechanics bring understanding at last

"
Category:Classical mechanics Category:Electric and magnetic fields in matter Category:Physics theorems Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Statistical mechanics theorems



John Hasbrouck van Vleck stated the Bohr–van Leeuwen theorem as "At any finite temperature, and in all finite applied electrical or magnetical fields, the net magnetization of a collection of electrons in thermal equilibrium vanishes identically." (van Vleck, 1932)




















