


Schröder–Bernstein theorem for measurable spaces




Schröder–Bernstein theorem for measurable spaces

The Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem of set theory has a counterpart for measurable spaces, sometimes called the Borel Schroeder–Bernstein theorem, since measurable spaces are also called Borel spaces. This theorem, whose proof is quite easy, is instrumental when proving that two measurable spaces are isomorphic. The general theory of standard Borel spaces contains very strong results about isomorphic measurable spaces, see Kuratowski's theorem. However, (a) the latter theorem is very difficult to prove, (b) the former theorem is satisfactory in many important cases (see Examples), and (c) the former theorem is used in the proof of the latter theorem.
The theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be measurable spaces. If there exist injective, bimeasurable maps 
 
 

 
  then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are isomorphic (the Schröder–Bernstein property).
Comments
The phrase "
 
 
 
  is bimeasurable" means that, first, 
 
 
 
  is measurable (that is, the preimage

 
  is measurable for every measurable 
 
 
 
 ), and second, the image

 
  is measurable for every measurable 
 
 
 
 . (Thus, 
 
 
 
  must be a measurable subset of 
 
 
 
  not necessarily the whole 
 
 
 
 )
An isomorphism (between two measurable spaces) is, by definition, a bimeasurable bijection. If it exists, these measurable spaces are called isomorphic.
Proof
First, one constructs a bijection 
 
 
 
  out of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  exactly as in the proof of the Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem. Second, 
 
 
 
  is measurable, since it coincides with 
 
 
 
  on a measurable set and with 
 
 
 
  on its complement. Similarly, 
 
 
 
  is measurable.
Examples
(Figure)
Example maps :(0,1)→[0,1] and :[0,1]→(0,1).

Example 1
The open interval (0, 1) and the closed interval [0, 1] are evidently non-isomorphic as topological spaces (that is, not homeomorphic). However, they are isomorphic as measurable spaces. Indeed, the closed interval is evidently isomorphic to a shorter closed subinterval of the open interval. Also the open interval is evidently isomorphic to a part of the closed interval (just itself, for instance).
Example 2
The real line 
 
 
 
  and the plane 
 
 
 
  are isomorphic as measurable spaces. It is immediate to embed 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  The converse, embedding of 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  (as measurable spaces, of course, not as topological spaces) can be made by a well-known trick with interspersed digits; for example,

g(π,100e) = g(, ) = .  ….
 

The map 
 
 
 
  is clearly injective. It is easy to check that it is bimeasurable. (However, it is not bijective; for example, the number 
 
 
 
  is not of the form 
 
 
 
 ).
References

S.M. Srivastava, A Course on Borel Sets, Springer, 1998.



See Proposition 3.3.6 (on page 96), and the first paragraph of Section 3.3 (on page 94).
 



"
Category:Theorems in measure theory Category:Descriptive set theory Category:Theorems in the foundations of mathematics


