


Alpha–beta transformation




Alpha–beta transformation

In electrical engineering, the alpha-beta (
 
 
 
 ) transformation (also known as the Clarke transformation) is a mathematical transformation employed to simplify the analysis of three-phase circuits. Conceptually it is similar to the dqo transformation. One very useful application of the 
 
 
 
  transformation is the generation of the reference signal used for space vector modulation control of three-phase inverters.
Definition
The 
 
 
 
 
  transform applied to three-phase currents, as used by Edith Clarke, is1


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a generic three-phase current sequence and 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding current sequence given by the transformation 
 
 
 
 . The inverse transform is:



The above Clarke's transformation preserves the amplitude of the electrical variables which it is applied to. Indeed, consider a three-phase symmetric, direct, current sequence


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the RMS of 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the generic time-varying angle that can also be set to 
 
 
 
  without loss of generality. Then, by applying 
 
 
 
 
  to the current sequence, it results


 
 
  where the last equation holds since we have considered balanced currents. As it is shown in the above, the amplitudes of the currents in the 
 
 
 
  reference frame are the same of that in the natural reference frame.
Power invariant transformation
The active and reactive powers computed in the Clark's domain with the transformation shown above are not the same of those computed in the standard reference frame. This happens because 
 
 
 
  is not unitary. In order to preserve the active and reactive powers one has, instead, to consider


 
  which is a unitary matrix and the inverse coincides with its transpose.2 In this case the amplitudes of the transformed currents are not the same of those in the standard reference frame, that is


 
 
  Finally, the inverse trasformation in this case is



Simplified transformation
Since in a balanced system 
 
 
 
  and thus 
 
 
 
  one can also consider the simplified transform3



which is simply the original Clarke's transformation with the 3rd equation thrown away, and



Geometric Interpretation
The 
 
 
 
  transformation can be thought of as the projection of the three phase quantities (voltages or currents) onto two stationary axes, the alpha axis and the beta axis.
(Figure)
Shown above is the 
 
 
 
  transform as applied to three symmetrical currents flowing through three windings separated by 120 physical degrees. The three phase currents lag their corresponding phase voltages by 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
  axis is shown with the 
 
 
 
  axis aligned with phase 'A'. The current vector 
 
 
 
  rotates with angular velocity 
 
 
 
 . There is no 
 
 
 
  component since the currents are balanced.



 
  transform
The 

 
  transform is conceptually similar to the 
 
 
 
  transform. Whereas the dqo transform is the projection of the phase quantities onto a rotating two-axis reference frame, the 
 
 
 
  transform can be thought of as the projection of the phase quantities onto a stationary two-axis reference frame.
References
See also

Symmetrical components
Y-Δ transform
Field-oriented control

"
Category:Electrical engineering



↩
↩
F. Tahri, A.Tahri, Eid A. AlRadadi and A. Draou Senior, "Analysis and Control of Advanced Static VAR compensator Based on the Theory of the Instantaneous Reactive Power," presented at ACEMP, Bodrum, Turkey, 2007.↩




