


Steinitz exchange lemma




Steinitz exchange lemma

The Steinitz exchange lemma is a basic theorem in linear algebra used, for example, to show that any two bases for a finite-dimensional vector space have the same number of elements. The result is named after the German mathematician Ernst Steinitz. The result is often called the Steinitz–Mac Lane exchange lemma, also recognizing the generalization1 by Saunders Mac Lane of Steinitz's lemma to matroids.2
Statement
If {v1, ..., vm} is a set of m linearly independent vectors in a vector space V, and {w1, ..., wn} span V then m ≤ n and, possibly after reordering the wi, the set {v1, ..., vm, wm + 1, ..., wn} spans V.
Proof
We are going to show that for any integer 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 , the following assertion is valid. Choosing 
 
 
 
  gives the result.
(A) The set 
 
 
 
  spans 
 
 
 
  (where the 
 
 
 
  have possibly been reordered, and the reordering depends on 
 
 
 
 ).
We will prove (A) by induction over 
 
 
 
 : Since (A) is clear for 
 
 
 
 , the only thing that needs to be done is the inductive step.
Assume that (A) holds for some 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  spans 
 
 
 
  (by the induction hypothesis), there exist 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  At least one of 
 
 
 
  must be non-zero, otherwise this equality would contradict the linear independence of 
 
 
 
 ; note that this additionally implies that 
 
 
 
 , we may assume that 
 
 
 
  is not zero. Therefore, we have


 
  In other words, 
 
 
 
  is in the span of 
 
 
 
  and so the latter must be the whole of $V$. We have thus shown that (A) holds for $k+1$, completing the inductive step.
Applications
The Steinitz exchange lemma is a basic result in computational mathematics, especially in linear algebra and in combinatorial algorithms.3
References



Julio R. Bastida, Field extensions and Galois Theory, Addison–Wesley Publishing Company (1984).

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Lemmas Category:Matroid theory



.
.
Page v in Stiefel: 




