


Bochner–Riesz mean




Bochner–Riesz mean

The Bochner–Riesz mean is a summability method often used in harmonic analysis when considering convergence of Fourier series and Fourier integrals. It was introduced by Salomon Bochner as a modification of the Riesz mean.
Define



Let 
 
 
 
  be a periodic function, thought of as being on the n-torus, 
 
 
 
 , and having Fourier coefficients 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Then the Bochner–Riesz means of complex order 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  of (where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) are defined as



Analogously, for a function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  with Fourier transform 
 
 
 
 , the Bochner–Riesz means of complex order 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) are defined as



For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  may be written as convolution operators, where the convolution kernel is an approximate identity. As such, in these cases, considering the almost everywhere convergence of Bochner–Riesz means for functions in 
 
 
 
  spaces is much simpler than the problem of "regular" almost everywhere convergence of Fourier series/integrals (corresponding to 
 
 
 
 ). In higher dimensions, the convolution kernels become more "badly behaved" (specifically, for 
 
 
 
 , the kernel is no longer integrable) and establishing almost everywhere convergence becomes correspondingly more difficult.
Another question is that of for which 
 
 
 
  and which 
 
 
 
  the Bochner–Riesz means of an 
 
 
 
  function converge in norm. This is of fundamental importance for 
 
 
 
 , since regular spherical norm convergence (again corresponding to 
 
 
 
 ) fails in 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 . This was shown in a paper of 1971 by Charles Fefferman.1 By a transference result, the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  problems are equivalent to one another, and as such, by an argument using the uniform boundedness principle, for any particular 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  norm convergence follows in both cases for exactly those 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the symbol of an 
 
 
 
  bounded Fourier multiplier operator. For 
 
 
 
 , this question has been completely resolved, but for 
 
 
 
 , it has only been partially answered. The case of 
 
 
 
  is not interesting here as convergence follows for 
 
 
 
  in the most difficult 
 
 
 
  case as a consequence of the 
 
 
 
  boundedness of the Hilbert transform and an argument of Marcel Riesz.
References
Further reading






"
Category:Means Category:Summability methods



↩




