


Pettis integral




Pettis integral

In mathematics, the Pettis integral or Gelfand–Pettis integral, named after I. M. Gelfand and B. J. Pettis, extends the definition of the Lebesgue integral to vector-valued functions on a measure space, by exploiting duality. The integral was introduced by Gelfand for the case when the measure space is an interval with Lebesgue measure. The integral is also called the weak integral in contrast to the Bochner integral, which is the strong integral.
Definition
Suppose that 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a measure space and 
 
 
 
  is a topological vector space. Suppose that 
 
 
 
 
  admits a dual space 
 
 
 
  that separates points. e.g., 
 
 
 
  a Banach space or (more generally) a locally convex, Hausdorff vector space. We write evaluation of a functional as duality pairing
 
 
 
 .
Choose any measurable set 
 
 
 
 . We say that 
 
 
 
 
  is Pettis integrable (over 
 
 
 
 ) if there exists a vector 
 
 
 
  so that


 
  In this case, we call 
 
 
 
  the Pettis integral of 
 
 
 
 
  (over 
 
 
 
 ). Common notations for the Pettis integral 
 
 
 
  include 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 .
A function is Pettis integrable (over 
 
 
 
 ) if the scalar-valued function 
 
 
 
  is integrable for every functional 
 
 
 
 .
Law of Large Numbers for Pettis integrable random variables
Let 
 
 
 
  be a probability space, and let 
 
 
 
 
  be a topological vector space with a dual space that separates points. Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of Pettis integrable random variables, and write 
 
 
 
  for the Pettis integral of 
 
 
 
  (over 
 
 
 
 ). Note that 
 
 
 
 
  is a (non-random) vector in 
 
 
 
 , and is not a scalar value.
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the sample average. By linearity, 
 
 
 
  is Pettis integrable, and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose that the partial sums 
 
 
 
  converge absolutely in the topology of 
 
 
 
 , in the sense that all rearrangements of the sum converge to a single vector 
 
 
 
 . The Weak Law of Large Numbers implies that 
 
 
 
  for every functional 
 
 
 
 
 . Consequently, 
 
 
 
  in the weak topology on 
 
 
 
 .
Without further assumptions, it is possible that 
 
 
 
  does not converge to 
 
 
 
 . To get strong convergence, more assumptions are necessary.
See also

Vector measure
Weakly measurable function

References

J. K. Brooks, Representations of weak and strong integrals in Banach spaces, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 63, 1969, 266–270. Fulltext 
I.M. Gel'fand, Sur un lemme de la théorie des espaces linéaires, Commun. Inst. Sci. Math. et Mecan., Univ. Kharkoff et Soc. Math. Kharkoff, IV. Ser. 13, 1936, 35–40 Zbl 0014.16202
M. Talagrand, Pettis Integral and Measure Theory, Memoirs of the AMS no. 307 (1984) 


"
Category:Functional analysis Category:Integrals


