


Surgery exact sequence




Surgery exact sequence

In the mathematical surgery theory the surgery exact sequence is the main technical tool to calculate the surgery structure set of a compact manifold in dimension 
 
 
 
 . The surgery structure set

 
  of a compact 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifold 
 
 
 
  is a pointed set which classifies 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifolds within the homotopy type of 
 
 
 
 .
The basic idea is that in order to calculate 
 
 
 
  it is enough to understand the other terms in the sequence, which are usually easier to determine. These are on one hand the normal invariants which form generalized cohomology groups, and hence one can use standard tools of algebraic topology to calculate them at least in principle. On the other hand there are the L-groups which are defined algebraically in terms of quadratic forms or in terms of chain complexes with quadratic structure. A great deal is known about these groups. Another part of the sequence are the surgery obstruction maps from normal invariants to the L-groups. For these maps there are certain characteristic classes formulas, which enable to calculate them in some cases. Knowledge of these three components, that means: the normal maps, the L-groups and the surgery obstruction maps is enough to determine the structure set (at least up to extension problems).
In practice one has to proceed case by case, for each manifold 
 
 
 
  it is a unique task to determine the surgery exact sequence, see some examples below. Also note that there are versions of the surgery exact sequence depending on the category of manifolds we work with: smooth (DIFF), PL, or topological manifolds and whether we take Whitehead torsion into account or not (decorations 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ).
The original 1962 work of Browder and Novikov on the existence and uniqueness of manifolds within a simply-connected homotopy type was reformulated by Sullivan in 1966 as a surgery exact sequence. In 1970 Wall developed non-simply-connected surgery theory and the surgery exact sequence for manifolds with arbitrary fundamental group.
Definition
The surgery exact sequence is defined as



where:
the entries 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the abelian groups of normal invariants,
the entries 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the L-groups associated to the group ring

 
 ,
the maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the surgery obstruction maps,
the arrows 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  will be explained below.
Versions
There are various versions of the surgery exact sequence. One can work in either of the three categories of manifolds: differentiable (smooth), PL, topological. Another possibility is to work with the decorations 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
The entries
Normal invariants
A degree one normal map 
 
 
 
  consists of the following data: an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional oriented closed manifold 
 
 
 
 , a map 
 
 
 
  which is of degree one (that means 
 
 
 
 , and a bundle map 
 
 
 
  from the stable tangent bundle of 
 
 
 
  to some bundle 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . Two such maps are equivalent if there exists a normal bordism between them (that means a bordism of the sources covered by suitable bundle data). The equivalence classes of degree one normal maps are called normal invariants.
When defined like this the normal invariants 
 
 
 
  are just a pointed set, with the base point given by 
 
 
 
 . However the Pontrjagin-Thom construction gives 
 
 
 
  a structure of an abelian group. In fact we have a non-natural bijection



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the homotopy fiber of the map 
 
 
 
 , which is an infinite loop space and hence maps into it define a generalized cohomology theory. There are corresponding identifications of the normal invariants with 
 
 
 
  when working with PL-manifolds and with 
 
 
 
  when working with topological manifolds.
L-groups
The 
 
 
 
 -groups are defined algebraically in terms of quadratic forms or in terms of chain complexes with quadratic structure. See the main article for more details. Here only the properties of the L-groups described below will be important.
Surgery obstruction maps
The map 
 
 
 
  is in the first instance a set-theoretic map (that means not necessarily a homomorphism) with the following property (when 
 
 
 
 :
A degree one normal map 
 
 
 
  is normally cobordant to a homotopy equivalence if and only if the image 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
The normal invariants arrow 
 
 

Any homotopy equivalence 
 
 
 
  defines a degree one normal map.
The surgery obstruction arrow 
 
 

This arrow describes in fact an action of the group 
 
 
 
  on the set 
 
 
 
  rather than just a map. The definition is based on the realization theorem for the elements of the 
 
 
 
 -groups which reads as follows:
Let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifold with 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
 . Then there exists a degree one normal map of manifolds with boundary



with the following properties:
1. 
 
 

2. 
 
 
 
  is a diffeomorphism
3. 
 
 
 
  is a homotopy equivalence of closed manifolds
Let 
 
 
 
  represent an element in 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 
 
 .
The exactness
Recall that the surgery structure set is only a pointed set and that the surgery obstruction map 
 
 
 
  might not be a homomorphism. Hence it is necessary to explain what is meant when talking about the "exact sequence". So the surgery exact sequence is an exact sequence in the following sense:
For a normal invariant 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 . For two manifold structures 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  if and only if there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . For an element 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
Versions revisited
In the topological category the surgery obstruction map can be made into a homomorphism. This is achieved by putting an alternative abelian group structure on the normal invariants as described here. Moreover, the surgery exact sequence can be identified with the algebraic surgery exact sequence of Ranicki which is an exact sequence of abelian groups by definition. This gives the structure set 
 
 
 
  the structure of an abelian group. Note, however, that there is to this date no satisfactory geometric description of this abelian group structure.
Classification of manifolds
The answer to the organizing questions of the surgery theory can be formulated in terms of the surgery exact sequence. In both cases the answer is given in the form of a two-stage obstruction theory.
The existence question. Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite Poincaré complex. It is homotopy equivalent to a manifold if and only if the following two conditions are satisfied. Firstly, 
 
 
 
  must have a vector bundle reduction of its Spivak normal fibration. This condition can be also formulated as saying that the set of normal invariants 
 
 
 
  is non-empty. Secondly, there must be a normal invariant 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Equivalently, the surgery obstruction map 
 
 
 
  hits 
 
 
 
 .
The uniqueness question. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent two elements in the surgery structure set

 
 . The question whether they represent the same element can be answered in two stages as follows. First there must be a normal cobordism between the degree one normal maps induced by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , this means 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Denote the normal cobordism 
 
 
 
 . If the surgery obstruction 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  to make this normal cobordism to an h-cobordism (or s-cobordism) relative to the boundary vanishes then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in fact represent the same element in the surgery structure set.
Examples
1. Homotopy spheres
This is an example in the smooth category, 
 
 
 
 .
The idea of the surgery exact sequence is implicitly present already in the original article of Kervaire and Milnor on the groups of homotopy spheres. In the present terminology we have



 
  the cobordism group of almost framed 
 
 
 
  manifolds, 
 
 

 
  where 
 
 
 
  mod 
 
 
 
  (recall the 
 
 
 
 -periodicity of the L-groups)
The surgery exact sequence in this case is an exact sequence of abelian groups. In addition to the above identifications we have



Because the odd-dimensional L-groups are trivial one obtains these exact sequences:









The results of Kervaire and Milnor are obtained by studying the middle map in the first two sequences and by relating the groups 
 
 
 
  to stable homotopy theory.
2. Topological spheres
The generalized Poincaré conjecture in dimension 
 
 
 
  can be phrased as saying that 
 
 
 
 . It has been proved for any 
 
 
 
  by the work of Smale, Freedman and Perelman. From the surgery exact sequence for 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in the topological category we see that



is an isomorphism. (In fact this can be extended to 
 
 
 
  by some ad-hoc methods.)
3. Complex projective spaces in the topological category
The complex projective space 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional topological manifold with 
 
 
 
 . In addition it is known that in the case 
 
 
 
  in the topological category the surgery obstruction map 
 
 
 
  is always surjective. Hence we have



From the work of Sullivan one can calculate


 
  and hence 
 
 

4. Aspherical manifolds in the topological category
An aspherical 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifold 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -manifold such that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Hence the only non-trivial homotopy group is 
 
 

One way to state the Borel conjecture is to say that for such 
 
 
 
  we have that the Whitehead group

 
  is trivial and that



This conjecture was proven in many special cases - for example when 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , when it is the fundamental group of a negatively curved manifold or when it is a word-hyperbolic group or a CAT(0)-group.
The statement is equivalent to showing that the surgery obstruction map to the right of the surgery structure set is injective and the surgery obstruction map to the left of the surgery structure set is surjective. Most of the proofs of the above mentioned results are done by studying these maps or by studying the assembly maps with which they can be identified. See more details in Borel conjecture, Farrell-Jones Conjecture.
References







"
Category:Surgery theory


