


Division polynomials




Division polynomials

In mathematics the division polynomials provide a way to calculate multiples of points on elliptic curves and to study the fields generated by torsion points. They play a central role in the study of counting points on elliptic curves in Schoof's algorithm.
Definition
The set of division polynomials is a sequence of polynomials in 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  free variables that is recursively defined by:
































































The polynomial 
 
 
 
  is called the nth division polynomial.
Properties

In practice, one sets 
 
 
 
 , and then 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The division polynomials form a generic elliptic divisibility sequence over the ring 
 
 
 
 .
If an elliptic curve

 
  is given in the Weierstrass form

 
  over some field 
 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 , one can use these values of 
 
 
 
  and consider the division polynomials in the coordinate ring of 
 
 
 
 . The roots of 
 
 
 
  are the 
 
 
 
 
 -coordinates of the points of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
torsion subgroup of 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, the roots of 
 
 
 
 
  are the 
 
 
 
 -coordinates of the points of 
 
 
 
 .
Given a point 
 
 
 
  on the elliptic curve 
 
 
 
  over some field 
 
 
 
 
 , we can express the coordinates of the nth multiple of 
 
 
 
  in terms of division polynomials:








where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are defined by:
 
 







Using the relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , along with the equation of the curve, the functions 
 
 
 
  , 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are all in 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be prime and let 
 
 
 
  be an elliptic curve over the finite field 
 
 
 
 
 , i.e., 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
 
 -torsion group of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 , and to 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . Hence the degree of 
 
 
 
 
  is equal to either 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , or 0.
René Schoof observed that working modulo the 
 
 
th division polynomial allows one to work with all 
 
 
 
 -torsion points simultaneously. This is heavily used in Schoof's algorithm for counting points on elliptic curves.
See also

Schoof's algorithm

References

A. Brown: Algorithms for Elliptic Curves over Finite Fields, EPFL — LMA. Available at http://algo.epfl.ch/handouts/en/andrew.pdf
A. Enge: Elliptic Curves and their Applications to Cryptography: An Introduction. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1999.
N. Koblitz: A Course in Number Theory and Cryptography, Graduate Texts in Math. No. 114, Springer-Verlag, 1987. Second edition, 1994
Müller : Die Berechnung der Punktanzahl von elliptischen kurvenüber endlichen Primkörpern. Master's Thesis. Universität des Saarlandes, Saarbrücken, 1991.
G. Musiker: Schoof's Algorithm for Counting Points on 
 
 
. Available at http://www-math.mit.edu/~musiker/schoof.pdf
Schoof: Elliptic Curves over Finite Fields and the Computation of Square Roots mod p. Math. Comp., 44(170):483–494, 1985. Available at http://www.mat.uniroma2.it/~schoof/ctpts.pdf
R. Schoof: Counting Points on Elliptic Curves over Finite Fields. J. Theor. Nombres Bordeaux 7:219–254, 1995. Available at http://www.mat.uniroma2.it/~schoof/ctg.pdf
L. C. Washington: Elliptic Curves: Number Theory and Cryptography. Chapman & Hall/CRC, New York, 2003.
J. Silverman: The Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves, Springer-Verlag, GTM 106, 1986.

"
Category:Polynomials Category:Algebraic curves


