


Special linear Lie algebra




Special linear Lie algebra

In mathematics, the special linear Lie algebra of order n (denoted 
 
 
 
 ) is the Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  matrices with trace zero and with the Lie bracket 
 
 
 
 . This algebra is well studied and understood, and is often used as a model for the study of other Lie algebras. The Lie group that it generates is the special linear group.
Applications
The Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is central to the study of special relativity, general relativity and supersymmetry: its fundamental representation is the so-called spinor representation, while its adjoint representation generates the Lorentz group SO(3,1) of special relativity.
The algebra 
 
 
 
  plays an important role in the study of chaos and fractals, as it generates the Möbius group SL(2,R), which describes the automorphisms of the hyperbolic plane, the simplest Riemann surface of negative curvature; by contrast, SL(2,C) describes the automorphisms of the hyperbolic 3-dimensional ball.
Representation Theory of 
 
 

The simplest non-trivial Lie algebra is 
 
 
 
 , consisting of two by two matrices with zero trace. There are three basis elements, 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , with



 
  and 
 
 

The commutators are


 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 

Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a finite irreducible representation of 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be an eigenvector of 
 
 
 
  with the highest eigenvalue

 
 . Then,



or



Since 
 
 
 
  is the eigenvector of highest eigenvalue, 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, we can show that



and since h has a lowest eigenvalue, there is a 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . We will take the smallest 
 
 
 
  such that this happens.
We can then recursively calculate



and we find



Taking 
 
 
 
 
 , we get



Since we chose 
 
 
 
  to be the smallest exponent such that 
 
 
 
 , we conclude that 
 
 
 
  (for example by writing 
 
 
 
 
 ). From this, we see that


 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ... 
 
 

are all nonzero, and it is easy to show that they are linearly independent. Therefore, for each 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique, up to isomorphism, irreducible representation 
 
 
 
 
  of dimension 
 
 
 
  spanned by elements 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ... 
 
 
 
 .
The beautiful special case of 
 
 
 
 
  shows a general way to find irreducible representations of Lie Algebras. Namely, we divide the algebra to three subalgebras "h" (the Cartan Subalgebra), "e", and "f", which behave approximately like their namesakes in 
 
 
 
 . Namely, in a irreducible representation, we have a "highest" eigenvector of "h", on which "e" acts by zero. The basis of the irreducible representation is generated by the action of "f" on the highest eigenvectors of "h".
References

Etingof, Pavel. "Lecture Notes on Representation Theory".
A. L. Onishchik, E. B. Vinberg, V. V. Gorbatsevich, Structure of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Lie groups and Lie algebras, III. Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences, 41. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994. iv+248 pp. (A translation of Current problems in mathematics. Fundamental directions. Vol. 41, Akad. Nauk SSSR, Vsesoyuz. Inst. Nauchn. i Tekhn. Inform., Moscow, 1990. Translation by V. Minachin. Translation edited by A. L. Onishchik and E. B. Vinberg) ISBN 3-540-54683-9
V. L. Popov, E. B. Vinberg, Invariant theory. Algebraic geometry. IV. Linear algebraic groups. Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences, 55. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994. vi+284 pp. (A translation of Algebraic geometry. 4, Akad. Nauk SSSR Vsesoyuz. Inst. Nauchn. i Tekhn. Inform., Moscow, 1989. Translation edited by A. N. Parshin and I. R. Shafarevich) ISBN 3-540-54682-0

See also

Affine Weyl group
Finite Coxeter group
Hasse diagram
Linear algebraic group
Nilpotent orbit
Root system
sl2-triple
Weyl group

"
Category:Lie groups  


