


Krull–Schmidt category




Krull–Schmidt category

In category theory, a Krull–Schmidt category is a generalization of categories in which the Krull–Schmidt theorem holds. They arise, for example, in the study of finite-dimensional modules over an algebra.
Definition
Let C be an additive category, or more generally an additive 

 
 -linear category for a commutative ring 
 
 
 
 . We call C a Krull-Schmidt category provided that every object decomposes into a finite direct sum of objects having local endomorphism rings. Equivalently, C has split idempotents and the endomorphism ring of every object is semiperfect.
Properties
One has the analogue of the Krull–Schmidt theorem in Krull–Schmidt categories:
An object is called indecomposable if it is not isomorphic to a direct sum of two nonzero objects. In a Krull-Schmidt category we have that

an object is indecomposable if and only if its endomorphism ring is local.
every object is isomorphic to a finite direct sum of indecomposable objects.
if 
 
 
 
  where the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are all indecomposable, then 
 
 
 
 , and there exists a permutation 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .

One can define the Auslander–Reiten quiver of a Krull–Schmidt category.
Examples

An abelian category in which every object has finite length.1 This includes as a special case the category of finite-dimensional modules over an algebra.


The category of finitely-generated modules over a finite2 

 
 -algebra, where 
 
 
 
  is a commutative Noetherian complete local ring.3


The category of coherent sheaves on a complete variety over an algebraically-closed field.4

A non-example
The category of finitely-generated projective modules over the integers has split idempotents, and every module is isomorphic to a finite direct sum of copies of the regular module, the number being given by the rank. Thus the category has unique decomposition into indecomposables, but is not Krull-Schmidt since the regular module does not have a local endomorphism ring.
See also

Quiver
Karoubi envelope

Notes


References

Michael Atiyah (1956) On the Krull-Schmidt theorem with application to sheaves Bull. Soc. Math. France 84, 307–317.
Henning Krause, Krull-Remak-Schmidt categories and projective covers, May 2012.
Irving Reiner (2003) Maximal orders. Corrected reprint of the 1975 original. With a foreword by M. J. Taylor. London Mathematical Society Monographs. New Series, 28. The Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, Oxford. ISBN 0-19-852673-3.
Claus Michael Ringel (1984) Tame Algebras and Integral Quadratic Forms, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1099, Springer-Verlag, 1984.

"
Category:Category theory Category:Representation theory



This is the classical case, see for example Krause (2012), Corollary 3.3.3.↩
A finite 
 
 
 
 -algebra is an 
 
 
 
 -algebra which is finitely generated as an 
 
 
 
 -module.↩
Reiner (2003), Section 6, Exercises 5 and 6, p. 88.↩
Atiyah (1956), Theorem 2.↩




