


Graphical game theory




Graphical game theory

In game theory, the common ways to describe a game are the normal form and the extensive form. The graphical form is an alternate compact representation of a game using the interaction among participants.
Consider a game with 
 
 
 
  players with 
 
 
 
  strategies each. We will represent the players as nodes in a graph in which each player has a utility function that depends only on him and his neighbors. As the utility function depends on fewer other players, the graphical representation would be smaller.
Formal definition
A graphical game is represented by a graph 
 
 
 
 , in which each player is represented by a node, and there is an edge between two nodes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  iff their utility functions are depended on the strategy which the other player will choose. Each node 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  has a function 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the degree of vertex 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  specifies the utility of player 
 
 
 
  as a function of his strategy as well as those of his neighbors.
The size of the game's representation
For a general 
 
 
 
  players game, in which each player has 
 
 
 
  possible strategies, the size of a normal form representation would be 
 
 
 
 . The size of the graphical representation for this game is 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the maximal node degree in the graph. If 
 
 
 
 , then the graphical game representation is much smaller.
An example
In case where each player's utility function depends only on one other player:
Image:GraphicalGameExample.png|The graphical form of the described game
The maximal degree of the graph is 1, and the game can be described as 
 
 
 
  functions (tables) of size 
 
 
 
 . So, the total size of the input will be 
 
 
 
 .
Nash equilibrium
Finding Nash equilibrium in a game takes exponential time in the size of the representation. If the graphical representation of the game is a tree, we can find the equilibrium in polynomial time. In the general case, where the maximal degree of a node is 3 or more, the problem is NP-complete.
Further reading

Michael Kearns (2007) "Graphical Games". In Algorithmic Game Theory, N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, E. Tardos and V. Vazirani, editors, Cambridge University Press, September, 2007.
Michael Kearns, Michael L. Littman and Satinder Singh (2001) "Graphical Models for Game Theory".

"
Category:Game theory


