   NNPDF      NNPDF   NNPDF is the acronym used to identify the parton distribution functions from the NNPDF Collaboration. NNPDF parton densities are extracted from global fits to data based on a combination of a Monte Carlo method for uncertainty estimation and the use of neural networks as basic interpolating functions.  The NNPDF Methodology  The NNPDF approach can be divided into four main steps:   The generation of a large sample of Monte Carlo replicas of the original experimental data, in a way that central values, errors and correlations are reproduced with enough accuracy.  The training (minimization of the    χ  2     superscript  χ  2    \chi^{2}   ) of a set of PDFs parametrized by neural networks on each of the above MC replicas of the data. PDFs are parametrized at the initial evolution scale    Q  0  2     subscript   superscript  Q  2   0    Q^{2}_{0}   and then evolved to the experimental data scale    Q  2     superscript  Q  2    Q^{2}   by means of the DGLAP equations. Since the PDF parametrization is redundant, the minimization strategy is based in genetic algorithms .  The neural network training is stopped dynamically before entering into the overlearning regime, that is, so that the PDFs learn the physical laws which underlie experimental data without fitting simultaneously statistical noise.  Once the training of the MC replicas has been completed, a set of statistical estimators can be applied to the set of PDFs, in order to assess the statistical consistency of the results. For example, the stability with respect PDF parametrization can be explicitly verified.   The set of    N   r  e  p      subscript  N    r  e  p     N_{rep}   PDF sets (trained neural networks) provides a representation of the underlying PDF probability density, from which any statistical estimator can be computed.  Examples of PDF plots  The image below shows the gluon at small-x from the the NNPDF1.0 analysis , available through the LHAPDF interface  File:Gluon log ref.jpg|The NNPDF1.0 gluon  NNPDF Parton Distributions releases  The NNPDF releases are summarised in the following table:      PDF set   DIS data   Drell-Yan data   Jet data   LHC data   Independent param. of   s   s   s   and    s  ¯     normal-¯  s    \bar{s}      Heavy Quark masses   NNLO       NNPDF2.2   yes   yes   yes   yes   yes   yes   yes     NNPDF2.1   yes   yes   yes   no   yes   yes   yes     NNPDF2.0   yes   yes   yes   no   yes   no   no     NNPDF1.2   yes   no   no   no   yes   no   no     NNPDF1.0   yes   no   no   no   no   no   no       All PDF sets are available through the LHAPDF interface.  External links   The NNPDF Collaboration homepage  Download NNPDF Parton Distribution sets  The NNPDF1.0 analysis  The NNPDF Non-Singlet analysis  The LHAPDF interface   "  Category:Particle physics  Category:Physics software   