


Poloidal–toroidal decomposition




Poloidal–toroidal decomposition

In vector calculus, a poloidal–toroidal decomposition is a restricted form of the Helmholtz decomposition that is often used in the spherical-coordinates analysis of solenoidal vector fields, for example, magnetic fields and incompressible fluids.1 For a three-dimensional F, such that



can be expressed as the sum of a toroidal and poloidal vector fields:



where 
 
 
 
  is a radial vector in spherical coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 , and where 
 
 
 
  is a toroidal field



for scalar field 
 
 
 
 , and where 
 
 
 
  is a poloidal field



for scalar field 
 
 
 
 . This decomposition is symmetric in that the curl of a toroidal field is poloidal, and the curl of a poloidal field is toroidal. A toroidal vector field is tangential to spheres around the origin


 
 ,
while the curl of a poloidal field is tangential to those spheres


 
 .
The poloidal–toroidal decomposition is unique if it is required that the average of the scalar fields 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  vanishes on every sphere of radius 
 
 
 
 .
Cartesian decomposition
A poloidal–toroidal decompositions also exist in Cartesian coordinates, but a mean-field flow has to included in this case. For example, every solenoidal vector field can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  denote the unit vectors in the coordinate directions.
See also

Toroidal and poloidal

Notes
References

[http://cdsads.u-strasbg.fr/abs/1961hhs..book.....C Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic stability], Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan; International Series of Monographs on Physics, Oxford: Clarendon, 1961, p. 622.
Decomposition of solenoidal fields into poloidal fields, toroidal fields and the mean flow. Applications to the boussinesq-equations, Schmitt, B. J. and von Wahl, W; in The Navier-Stokes Equations II — Theory and Numerical Methods, pp. 291–305; Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Springer Berlin/ Heidelberg, Vol. 1530/ 1992.
[http://cdsads.u-strasbg.fr/abs/1999ApJS..121..247L Anelastic Magnetohydrodynamic Equations for Modeling Solar and Stellar Convection Zones], Lantz, S. R. and Fan, Y.; The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, Volume 121, Issue 1, Mar. 1999, pp. 247–264.
Plane poloidal-toroidal decomposition of doubly periodic vector fields: Part 1. Fields with divergence and Part 2. Stokes equations. G. D. McBain. ANZIAM J. 47 (2005)

.

.

"
Category:Vector calculus



↩




