


Trinomial tree




Trinomial tree

The trinomial tree is a lattice based computational model used in financial mathematics to price options. It was developed by Phelim Boyle in 1986. It is an extension of the binomial options pricing model, and is conceptually similar.1 It can also be shown that the approach is equivalent to the explicit finite difference method for option pricing.2
Formula
Under the trinomial method, the underlying stock price is modeled as a recombining tree, where, at each node the price has three possible paths: an up, down and stable or middle path.3 These values are found by multiplying the value at the current node by the appropriate factor 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  where





 
  (the structure is recombining)



and the corresponding probabilities are:








 
 .
In the above formulae
 
 
 
  is the length of time per step in the tree and is simply time to maturity divided by the number of time steps; 
 
 
 
  is the risk-free interest rate over this maturity; 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding volatility of the underlying; 
 
 
 
  is its corresponding dividend yield.4
As with the binomial model, these factors and probabilities are specified so as to ensure that the price of the underlying evolves as a martingale, while the moments - considering node spacing and probabilities - are matched to those of the log normal distribution5 (and with increasing accuracy for smaller time-steps). Note that for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  to be in the interval 
 
 
 
  the following condition on 
 
 
 
  has to be satisfied 
 
 
 
 .
Once the tree of prices has been calculated, the option price is found at each node largely as for the binomial model, by working backwards from the final nodes to today. The difference being that the option value at each non-final node is determined based on the three - as opposed to two - later nodes and their corresponding probabilities. The model is best understood visually - see, for example Trinomial Tree Option Calculator (Peter Hoadley).
If the length of time-steps 
 
 
 
  is taken as an exponentially distributed random variable and interpreted as the waiting time between two movements of the stock price then the resulting stochastic process is a birth-death process. The resulting model is soluble and there exist analytic pricing and hedging formulae for various options.
Application
The trinomial model is considered6 to produce more accurate results than the binomial model when fewer time steps are modelled, and is therefore used when computational speed or resources may be an issue. For vanilla options, as the number of steps increases, the results rapidly converge, and the binomial model is then preferred due to its simpler implementation. For exotic options the trinomial model (or adaptations) is sometimes more stable and accurate, regardless of step-size.
See also

Binomial options pricing model
Valuation of options
Option: Model implementation
Korn-Kreer-Lenssen Model
Implied trinomial tree

References


External links

Phelim Boyle, 1986. "Option Valuation Using a Three-Jump Process", International Options Journal 3, 7-12.

Paul Clifford et. al 2010. Pricing Options Using Trinomial Trees, University of Warwick
Tero Haahtela, 2010. "Recombining Trinomial Tree for Real Option Valuation with Changing Volatility", Aalto University, Working Paper Series.
Ralf Korn, Markus Kreer and Mark Lenssen, 1998. "Pricing of european options when the underlying stock price follows a linear birth-death process", Stochastic Models Vol. 14(3), pp 647 – 662
Tariq Scherer, 2010. "Create Trinomial Option Pricing Trees Using Excel Applescripts"

"
Category:Mathematical finance Category:Options (finance) Category:Finance theories Category:Models of computation Category:Trees (data structures)



Trinomial Method (Boyle) 1986↩
Mark Rubinstein↩
Trinomial Tree, geometric Brownian motion↩
John Hull presents alternative formulae; see: .↩
Pricing Options Using Trinomial Trees↩
On-Line Options Pricing & Probability Calculators↩




