


Poisson limit theorem




Poisson limit theorem

The law of rare events or Poisson limit theorem gives a Poisson approximation to the binomial distribution, under certain conditions.1 The theorem was named after Siméon Denis Poisson (1781–1840).
Statement
If


 
 , such that 
 
 

then



Example
Suppose that in an interval [0, 1000], 500 points are placed randomly. Now what is the number of points that will be placed in [0, 10]?
The probabilistically precise way of describing the number of points in the sub-interval would be to describe it as a binomial distribution 
 
 
 
 .
If we look here, the probability (that a random point will be placed in the sub-interval) is 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  so 
 
 
 
 .
The probability that 
 
 
 
  points lie in the sub-interval is



where: 
 
 
 
  is the probability of falling with in the interval. 
 
 
 
  gives the number of ways in which 
 
 
 
  elements can be selected. 
 
 
 
  gives the probability of the 
 
 
 
  elements falling in the interval. 
 
 
 
  counts the probability that 
 
 
 
  elements fall outside of the interval
But using the Poisson Theorem we can approximate it as



Proofs
According to factorial's rate of growth, we replace factorials of large numbers with approximations:


 
  After simplifying the fraction:


 
  After using the condition 
 
 
 
 :


 
  As 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  so:



Q.E.D.
Alternative Proof
If we make the stronger assumption 
 
 
 
  (rather than 
 
 
 
 ) then a simpler proof is possible without needing approximations for the factorials. Since 
 
 
 
 , we can rewrite 
 
 
 
 . We now have:



Taking each of these terms in sequence, 
 
 
 
 , meaning that 
 
 
 
 .
Now 
 
 
 
 . The first portion of this converges to 
 
 
 
 , and the second portion goes to 1, as 
 
 

This leaves us with 
 
 
 
 . Q.E.D.
Ordinary Generating Functions
It is also possible to demonstrate the theorem through the use of Ordinary Generating Functions (OGF). Indeed, the OGF of the binomial distribution is



by virtue of the Binomial Theorem. Taking the limit 
 
 
 
  while keeping the product 
 
 
 
  constant, we find



which is the OGF for the Poisson distribution. (The second equality holds due to the definition of the Exponential function.)
See also

De Moivre–Laplace theorem
Le Cam's theorem

References
"
Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Probability theorems



Papoulis, Pillai, Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes, 4th Edition↩




