


SIC-POVM




SIC-POVM

A symmetric, informationally complete, positive operator valued measure (SIC-POVM) is a special case of a generalized measurement on a Hilbert space, used in the field of quantum mechanics. A measurement of the prescribed form satisfies certain defining qualities that makes it an interesting candidate for a "standard quantum measurement," utilized in the study of foundational quantum mechanics. Furthermore, it has been shown that applications exist in quantum state tomography1 and quantum cryptography.2
Definition
Due to the use of SIC-POVMs primarily in quantum mechanics, Dirac notation will be used to represent elements associated with the Hilbert space.
In general, a POVM over a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  is defined as a set 
 
 
 
  of positive semidefinite operators

 
  on the Hilbert space that sum to the identity:



A SIC-POVM is more restrictive in that the operators must be subnormalized projectors related to one another such that they have the properties of symmetry and informational completeness.
In this context informational completeness means that the probabilities of observing the various outcomes entirely determines any quantum state being measured by the scheme. This requires 
 
 
 
  linearly independent operators. Symmetry means that the inner product of all pairs of subnormalized projectors 
 
 
 
  is a constant:



The combination of symmetry and informational completeness means 
 
 
 
  is composed entirely of operators of the form



where 
 
 
 
  is a rank-one projector.
Properties
Symmetry
As defined above, the distinct pairwise inner product of the pure states must be a constant. Remembering that 
 
 
 
  and setting 
 
 
 
 , its value can be thus demonstrated:


 
 
  From which it follows in general that



Superoperator
In using the SIC-POVM elements, an interesting superoperator can be constructed, the likes of which map 
 
 
 
 . This operator is most useful in considering the relation of SIC-POVMs with spherical t-designs. Consider the map



This operator acts on a SIC-POVM element in a way very similar to identity, in that



But since elements of a SIC-POVM can completely and uniquely determine any quantum state, this linear operator can be applied to the decomposition of any state, resulting in the ability to write the following:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  From here, the left inverse can be calculated3 to be 
 
 
 
 , and so with the knowledge that


 
 , an expression for a state 
 
 
 
  can be created in terms of a quasi-probability distribution, as follows:


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac notation for the density operator viewed in the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 . This shows that the appropriate quasi-probability distribution (termed as such because it may yield negative results) representation of the state 
 
 
 
  is given by



Finding SIC sets
Group covariance
General group covariance
A SIC-POVM 
 
 
 
  is said to be group covariant if there exists a group 
 
 
 
  with a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional unitary representation such that








The search for SIC-POVMs can be greatly simplified by exploiting the property of group covariance. Indeed, the problem is reduced to finding a normalized fiducial vector

 
  such that


 
 . The SIC-POVM is then the set generated by the group action of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 .
The case of Zd × Zd
So far, most SIC-POVM's have been found by considering group covariance under 
 
 
 
 .4 To construct the unitary representation, we map 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , the group of unitary operators on d-dimensions. Several operators must first be introduced. Let 
 
 
 
  be a basis for 
 
 
 
 , then the phase operator is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a root of unity and the shift operator as



Combining these two operators yields the Weyl operator

 
  which generates the Heisenberg-Weyl group. This is a unitary operator since


 
 
  It can be checked that the mapping 
 
 
 
  is a projective unitary representation. It also satisfies all of the properties for group covariance,5 and is useful for numerical calculation of SIC sets.
Zauner's conjecture
Given some of the useful properties of SIC-POVMs, it would be useful if it was positively known whether such sets could be constructed in a Hilbert space of arbitrary dimension. Originally proposed in the dissertation of Zauner,6 a conjecture about the existence of a fiducial vector for arbitrary dimensions was hypothesized.
More specifically,

For every dimension 
 
 
 
  there exists a SIC-POVM whose elements are the orbit of a positive rank-one operator 
 
 
 
  under the Heisenberg group

 
 . What is more, 
 
 
 
  commutes with an element T of the Jacobi group 
 
 
 
 . The action of T on 
 
 
 
  modulo the center has order three.

Utilizing the notion of group covariance on 
 
 
 
 , this can be restated as 7

For any dimension 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be an orthonormal basis for 
 
 
 
 , and define


 
  Then 
 
 
 
  such that the set 
 
 
 
  is a SIC-POVM

Partial results
Algebraic and analytical results for finding SIC sets have been shown in the limiting case where the dimension of the Hilbert space is 
 
 
 
 .891011 Furthermore, using the Heisenberg group covariance on 
 
 
 
 , numerical solutions have been found for all integers less than 
 
 
 
 .121314
The proof for the existence of SIC-POVMs for arbitrary dimensions remains an open question,15 but is an ongoing field of research in the quantum mechanics community.
Relation to spherical t-designs
A spherical t-design is a set of vectors 
 
 
 
  on the d-dimensional generalized hypersphere, such that the average value of any 
 
 
 
 -order polynomial 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  is equal to the average of 
 
 
 
  over all normalized vectors 
 
 
 
 . Defining 
 
 
 
  as the t-fold tensor product of the Hilbert spaces, and


 
  as the t-fold tensor product frame operator, it can be shown that16 a set of normalized vectors 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  forms a spherical t-design if and only if








It then immediately follows that every SIC-POVM is a 2-design, since


 
  which is precisely the necessary value that satisfies the above theorem.
Relation to MUBs
In a d-dimensional Hilbert space, two distinct bases 
 
 
 
 are said to be mutually unbiased if


 
  This seems similar in nature to the symmetric property of SIC-POVMs. In fact, the problem of finding a SIC-POVM is precisely the problem of finding equiangular lines in 
 
 
 
 ; whereas mutually unbiased bases are analogous to affine spaces. In fact it can be shown that the geometric analogy of finding a "complete set of 
 
 
 
  mutually unbiased bases is identical to the geometric structure analogous to a SIC-POVM17 ". It is important to note that the equivalence of these problems is in the strict sense of an abstract geometry, and since the space on which each of these geometric analogues differs, there's no guarantee that a solution on one space will directly correlate with the other.
An example of where this analogous relation has yet to necessarily produce results is the case of 6-dimensional Hilbert space, in which a SIC-POVM has been analytically computed using mathematical software, but no complete mutually unbiased bases has yet been discovered.18
References


See also

Measurement in quantum mechanics
Mutually unbiased bases
POVM
Quantum Bayesianism

"
Category:Quantum measurement Category:Quantum mechanics



C. M. Caves, C. A. Fuchs, and R. Schack, “Unknown Quantum States: The Quantum de Finetti Representation,” J. Math. Phys. 43, 4537–4559 (2002).
C. A. Fuchs and M. Sasaki, “Squeezing Quantum Information through a Classical Channel: Measuring the ‘Quantumness’ of a Set of Quantum States,” Quant. Info. Comp. 3, 377–404 (2003).
C.M. Caves (1999); http://info.phys.unm.edu/~caves/reports/infopovm.pdf
Robin Blume-Kohout, Joseph M. Renes, Andrew J. Scott, Carlton M. Caves, http://info.phys.unm.edu/papers/reports/sicpovm.html

G. Zauner, Quantendesigns – Grundzüge einer nichtkommutativen Designtheorie. Dissertation, Universität Wien, 1999.



A. Koldobsky and H. K¨onig, “Aspects of the Isometric Theory of Banach Spaces,” in Handbook of the Geometry of Banach Spaces, Vol. 1, edited by W. B. Johnson and J. Lindenstrauss, (North Holland, Dordrecht, 2001), pp. 899–939.
A.J. Scott, M. Grassl, "SIC-POVMs: A new computer study", Journal Mathematical Physics, Volume 51, 042203 (2010); http://arxiv.org/abs/0910.5784



D. M. Appleby, SIC-POVMs and the Extended Clifford Group, http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0412001 (2004).
J. M. Renes, R. Blume-Kohout, A. J. Scott, and C. M. Caves, Symmetric Informationally Complete Quantum Measurements, Journal of Mathematical Physics, 45 (2004), pp. 2171–2180.http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0310075.
W. K. Wootters, Quantum measurements and finite geometry. http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0406032v2, 2004.
M. Grassl, On SIC-POVMs and MUBs in Dimension 6. http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0406175v1, 2004




