


Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations




Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations
In [[mathematical physics]] the '''Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations''' or '''KZ equations''' are a set of additional constraints satisfied by the [[Correlation function (quantum field theory)|correlation functions]] of the [[conformal field theory]] associated with 
 an affine Lie algebra at a fixed level. They form a system of complex partial differential equations with regular singular points satisfied by the N-point functions of primary fields and can be derived using either the formalism of Lie algebras or that of vertex algebras. The structure of the genus zero part of the conformal field theory is encoded in the monodromy properties of these equations. In particular the braiding and fusion of the primary fields (or their associated representations) can be deduced from the properties of the four-point functions, for which the equations reduce to a single matrix-valued first order complex ordinary differential equation of Fuchsian type. Originally the Russian physicists Vadim Knizhnik and Alexander Zamolodchikov deduced the theory for SU(2) using the classical formulas of Gauss for the connection coefficients of the hypergeometric differential equation.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the affine Lie algebra with level 
 
 
 
  and dual Coxeter number

 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a vector from a zero mode representation of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the primary field associated with it. Let 
 
 
 
  be a basis of the underlying Lie algebra

 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  their representation on the primary field 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the Killing form. Then for 
 
 
 
  the Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations read



Informal derivation
The Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations result from the existence of null vectors in the 
 
 
 
 
  module. This is quite similar to the case in minimal models, where the existence of null vectors result in additional constraints on the correlation functions.
The null vectors of a 
 
 
 
  module are of the form



where 
 
 
 
  is a highest weight vector and 
 
 
 
  the conserved current associated with the affine generator 
 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is of highest weight, the action of most 
 
 
 
  on it vanish and only 
 
 
 
  remain. The operator-state correspondence then leads directly to the Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations as given above.
Mathematical formulation
Since the treatment in , the Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equation has been formulated mathematically in the language of vertex algebras due to  and . This approach was popularized amongst theoretical physicists by  and amongst mathematicians by .
The vacuum representation H0 of an affine Kac–Moody algebra at a fixed level can be encoded in a vertex algebra. The derivation 
 
 
 
  acts as the energy operator L0 on H0, which can be written as a direct sum of the non-negative integer eigenspaces of L0, the zero energy space being generated by the vacuum vector Ω. The eigenvalue of an eigenvector of L0 is called its energy. For every state a in L there is a vertex operator V(a,z) which creates a from the vacuum vector Ω, in the sense that



The vertex operators of energy 1 correspond to the generators of the affine algebra



where X ranges over the elements of the underlying finite-dimensional simple complex Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 .
There is an energy 2 eigenvector  which give the generators Ln of the Virasoro algebra associated to the Kac–Moody algebra by the Segal–Sugawara construction



If a has energy 
 
 
 
 , then the corresponding vertex operator has the form



The vertex operators satisfy



as well as the locality and associativity relations



These last two relations are understood as analytic continuations: the inner products with finite energy vectors of the three expressions define the same polynomials in  and  in the domains |z|  |w| and |z – w| i'' at the same level becomes a module for the vertex algebra, in the sense that for each a there is a vertex operator  on Hi such that



The most general vertex operators at a given level are intertwining operators

 
  between representations Hi and Hj where v lies in Hk. These operators can also be written as



but δ can now be rational numbers. Again these intertwining operators are characterized by properties



and relations with L0 and L−1 similar to those above.
When v is in the lowest energy subspace for L0 on Hk, an irreducible representation of 
 
 
 
 , the operator 
 
 
 
  is called a primary field of charge k.
Given a chain of n primary fields starting and ending at H0, their correlation or n-point function is defined by



In the physics literature the vi are often suppressed and the primary field written Φi(zi), with the understanding that it is labelled by the corresponding irreducible representation of 
 
 
 
 .
Vertex algebra derivation
If (Xs) is an orthonormal basis of 
 
 
 
  for the Killing form, the Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations may be deduced by integrating the correlation function



first in the w variable around a small circle centred at z; by Cauchy's theorem the result can be expressed as sum of integrals around n small circles centred at the zj's:



Integrating both sides in the z variable about a small circle centred on zi yields the ith Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equation.
Lie algebra derivation
It is also possible to deduce the Knizhnik–Zamodchikov equations without explicit use of vertex algebras. The term may be replaced in the correlation function by its commutator with Lr where r = 0, ±1. The result can be expressed in terms of the derivative with respect to zi. On the other hand Lr is also given by the Segal–Sugawara formula:



After substituting these formulas for Lr, the resulting expressions can be simplified using the commutator formulas



Original derivation
The original proof of , reproduced in , uses a combination of both of the above methods. First note that for X in 
 
 




Hence



On the other hand



so that



The result follows by using this limit in the previous equality.
Monodromy representation of KZ equation
In conformal field theory along the above definition the n-point correlation function of the primary field satisfies KZ equation. In particular, for 
 
 
 
  and non negative integers k there are k + 1 primary fields 
 
 
 
  's corresponding to spin j representation ( j = 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2,.., k/2). The correlation function 
 
 
 
  of the primary fields 
 
 
 
  's for the representation 
 
 
 
  takes values in the tensor product 
 
 
 
  and its KZ equation is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  as the above informal derivation.
This n-point correlation function can be analytically continued as multi-valued holomorphic function to the domain 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  . Due to this analytic continuation the holonomy of KZ equation can be described by the braid group

 
  introduced by Emil Artin. In general, A complex semi-simple Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  and its representations 
 
 
 
  give the linear representation of braid group


 
  as the holonomy of KZ equation. Oppositely, a KZ equation gives the linear representation of braid groups as its holonomy.
The action on 
 
 
 
  by the analytic continuation of KZ equation is called monodromy representation of KZ equation. In particular, if all 
 
 
 
  's have spin 1/2 representation then the linear representation obtained from KZ equation agrees with the representation constructed from operator algebra theory by Vaughan Jones. It is known that the monodromy representation of KZ equation with a general semi-simple Lie algebra agrees with the linear representation of braid group given by R-matrix of the corresponding quantum group.
Applications

Representation theory of affine Lie algebra and quantum groups
Braid groups
Topology of hyperplane complements
Knot theory and 3-folds

See also

Conformal field theory
Correlation functions
Quantum KZ equations

References






(Erratum in volume 19, pp. 675–682.)








"
Category:Lie algebras Category:Conformal field theory


