


Goodman relation




Goodman relation

In materials science and fatigue, the Goodman relation is an equation used to quantify the interaction of mean and alternating stresses on the fatigue life of a material.
A Goodman diagram,12 sometimes called a Haigh diagram3 or a Haigh-Soderberg diagram,4 is a graph of (linear) mean stress vs. (linear) alternating stress, showing when the material fails at some given number of cycles.
A scatterplot of experimental data shown on such a plot can often be approximated by a parabola known as the Gerber line, which can in turn be (conservatively) approximated by a straight line called the Goodman line. 56
Mathematical description
 The Goodman relation can be represented mathematically as:



Where 
 
 
 
  is the alternating stress, 
 
 
 
  is the mean stress, 
 
 
 
 
  is the fatigue limit for completely reversed loading, and 
 
 
 
  is the ultimate tensile strength of the material. The general trend given by the Goodman relation is one of decreasing fatigue life with increasing mean stress for a given level of alternating stress. The relation can be plotted to determine the safe cyclic loading of a part; if the coordinate given by the mean stress and the alternating stress lies under the curve given by the relation, then the part will survive. If the coordinate is above the curve, then the part will fail for the given stress parameters.7
References
Bibliography

Goodman, J., Mechanics Applied to Engineering, Longman, Green & Company, London, 1899
Hertzberg, Richard W., Deformation and Fracture Mechanics and Engineering Materials. John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ: 1996.
Mars, W. V., Computed dependence of rubber's fatigue behavior on strain crystallization. Rubber Chemistry and Technology, 82(1), 51-61. 2009

Further reading




"
Category:Materials science Category:Fracture mechanics Category:Rubber properties



Herbert J. Sutherland and John F. Mandell. "Optimized Goodman diagram for the analysis of fiberglass composites used in wind turbine blades".
David Roylance. "Fatigue". 2001.
"Fatigue Theory > Total Life (S-N) Analysis"
Tapany Udomphol. "Fatigue of metals". 2007.

"Fatigue" Figure 3.9
Hertzberg, p. 530-31.




