


Acyclic model




Acyclic model

In algebraic topology, a discipline within mathematics, the acyclic models theorem can be used to show that two homology theories are isomorphic. The theorem was developed by topologists Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders MacLane. They discovered that, when topologists were writing proofs to establish equivalence of various homology theories, there were numerous similarities in the processes. Eilenberg and MacLane then discovered the theorem to generalize this process.
It can be used to prove the Eilenberg–Zilber theorem.
Statement of the theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary category and 
 
 
 
  be the category of chain complexes of 
 
 
 
 -modules. Let 
 
 
 
  be covariant functors such that:



 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
There are 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  has a basis in 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  is a free functor.


 
  is 
 
 
 
 - and 
 
 
 
 -acyclic at these models, which means that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
 .

Then the following assertions hold:

Every natural transformation

 
  is induced by a natural chain map 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  are natural transformations, 
 
 
 
  are natural chain maps as before and 
 
 
 
  for all models 
 
 
 
 , then there is a natural chain homotopy between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In particular the chain map 
 
 
 
  is unique up to natural chain homotopy.1

Generalizations
Projective and acyclic complexes
What is above is one of the earliest versions of the theorem. Another version is the one that says that if 
 
 
 
  is a complex of projectives in an abelian category and 
 
 
 
  is an acyclic complex in that category, then any map 
 
 
 
  extends to a chain map 
 
 
 
 , unique up to homotopy.
This specializes almost to the above theorem if one uses the functor category 
 
 
 
  as the abelian category. Free functors are projective objects in that category. The morphisms in the functor category are natural transformations, so the constructed chain maps and homotopies are all natural. The difference is that in the above version, 
 
 
 
  being acyclic is a stronger assumption than being acyclic only at certain objects.
On the other hand, the above version almost implies this version by letting 
 
 
 
  a category with only one object. Then the free functor 
 
 
 
  is basically just free (and hence projective) module. 
 
 
 
  being acyclic at the models (there is only one) means nothing else than that the complex 
 
 
 
  is acyclic.
Acyclic classes
Then there is the grand theorem that unifies them all. Let 
 
 
 
  be an abelian category (for example 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ). A class 
 
 
 
  of chain complexes over 
 
 
 
  will be called an acyclic class provided:

The 0 complex is in 
 
 
 
 .
The complex 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
  if and only if the suspension of 
 
 
 
  does.
If the complexes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are homotopic and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .
Every complex in 
 
 
 
  is acyclic.
If 
 
 
 
  is a double complex, all of whose rows are in 
 
 
 
 , then the total complex of 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
 .

There are three natural examples of acyclic classes, although doubtless others exist. The first is that of homotopy contractible complexes. The second is that of acyclic complexes. In functor categories (e.g. the category of all functors from topological spaces to abelian groups), there is a class of complexes that are contractible on each object, but where the contractions might not be given by natural transformations. Another example is again in functor categories but this time the complexes are acyclic only at certain objects.
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the class of chain maps between complexes whose mapping cone belongs to 
 
 
 
 . Although 
 
 
 
  does not necessarily have a calculus of either right or left fractions, it has weaker properties of having homotopy classes of both left and right fractions that permit forming the class 
 
 
 
  gotten by inverting the arrows in 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be an augmented endofunctor on 
 
 
 
 , meaning there is given a natural transformation 
 
 
 
  (the identity functor on 
 
 
 
 ). We say that the chain complex 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -presentable if for each 
 
 
 
 , the chain complex


 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
 . The boundary operator is given by


 
 . We say that the chain complex functor 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -acyclic if the augmented chain complex 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
 .
Theorem. ''Let 
 
 
 
  be an acyclic class and 
 
 
 
  the corresponding class of arrows in the category of chain complexes. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -presentable and 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -acyclic. Then any natural transformation 
 
 
 
  extends, in the category 
 
 
 
  to a natural transformation of chain functors 
 
 
 
  and this is unique in 
 
 
 
  up to chain homotopies. If we suppose, in addition, that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -presentable, that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -acyclic, and that 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism, then 
 
 
 
  is homotopy equivalence.
Example
Here is an example of this last theorem in action. Let 
 
 
 
  be the category of triangulable spaces and 
 
 
 
  be the category of abelian group valued functors on 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the singular chain complex functor and 
 
 
 
  be the simplicial chain complex functor. Let 
 
 
 
  be the functor that assigns to each space 
 
 
 
  the space 
 
 
 
 . Here, 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -simplex and this functor assigns to 
 
 
 
  the sum of as many copies of each 
 
 
 
 -simplex as there are maps 
 
 
 
 . Then let 
 
 
 
  be defined by 
 
 
 
 . There is an obvious augmentation 
 
 
 
  and this induces one on 
 
 
 
 . It can be shown that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both 
 
 
 
 -presentable and 
 
 
 
 -acyclic (the proof that 
 
 
 
  is not entirely straightforward and uses a detour through simplicial subdivision, which can also be handled using the above theorem). The class 
 
 
 
  is the class of homology equivalences. It is rather obvious that 
 
 
 
  and so we conclude that singular and simplicial homology are isomorphic on 
 
 
 
 .
There are many other examples in both algebra and topology, some of which are described in M. Barr, Acyclic Models. AMS, 2002.
References



Schon, R. Acyclic models and excision. _Proc. Amer. Math. Soc._ 59~(1) (1976) 167--168.

"
Category:Homological algebra Category:Theorems in algebraic topology








