


Stress measures




Stress measures

The most commonly used measure of stress is the Cauchy stress tensor, often called simply the stress tensor or "true stress". However, several other measures of stress can be defined.123 Some such stress measures that are widely used in continuum mechanics, particularly in the computational context, are:

The Kirchhoff stress (
 
 
 
 ).
The Nominal stress (
 
 
 
 ).
The first Piola-Kirchhoff stress (
 
 
 
 ). This stress tensor is the transpose of the nominal stress (
 
 
 
 
 ).
The second Piola-Kirchhoff stress or PK2 stress (
 
 
 
 ).
The Biot stress (
 
 
 
 )

Definitions of stress measures
Consider the situation shown the following figure. The following definitions use the notations shown in the figure.



(Figure)
Quantities used in the definition of stress measures




In the reference configuration 
 
 
 
 , the outward normal to a surface element 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 
  and the traction acting on that surface is 
 
 
 
  leading to a force vector 
 
 
 
 . In the deformed configuration 
 
 
 
 , the surface element changes to 
 
 
 
  with outward normal 
 
 
 
 
  and traction vector 
 
 
 
  leading to a force 
 
 
 
 . Note that this surface can either be a hypothetical cut inside the body or an actual surface. The quantity 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient tensor.
Cauchy stress
The Cauchy stress (or true stress) is a measure of the force acting on an element of area in the deformed configuration. This tensor is symmetric and is defined via


 
  or


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the traction and 
 
 
 
  is the normal to the surface on which the traction acts.
Kirchhoff stress
The quantity 
 
 
 
  is called the Kirchhoff stress tensor and is used widely in numerical algorithms in metal plasticity (where there is no change in volume during plastic deformation).
Nominal stress/First Piola-Kirchhoff stress
The nominal stress 
 
 
 
  is the transpose of the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress (PK1 stress) 
 
 
 
 
  and is defined via


 
  or


 
  This stress is unsymmetric and is a two point tensor like the deformation gradient. This is because it relates the force in the deformed configuration to an oriented area vector in the reference configuration.
Second Piola-Kirchhoff stress
If we pull back 
 
 
 
  to the reference configuration, we have


 
  or,



The PK2 stress (
 
 
 
 ) is symmetric and is defined via the relation


 
  Therefore,



Biot stress
The Biot stress is useful because it is energy conjugate to the right stretch tensor

 
 . The Biot stress is defined as the symmetric part of the tensor 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the rotation tensor obtained from a polar decomposition of the deformation gradient. Therefore the Biot stress tensor is defined as


 
  The Biot stress is also called the Jaumann stress.
The quantity 
 
 
 
  does not have any physical interpretation. However, the unsymmetrized Biot stress has the interpretation



Relations between stress measures
Relations between Cauchy stress and nominal stress
From Nanson's formula relating areas in the reference and deformed configurations:


 
  Now,


 
  Hence,


 
  or,


 
  or,


 
  In index notation,


 
  Therefore,



Note that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not symmetric because 
 
 
 
  is not symmetric.
Relations between nominal stress and second P-K stress
Recall that


 
  and


 
  Therefore,


 
  or (using the symmetry of 
 
 
 
 ),


 
  In index notation,


 
  Alternatively, we can write



Relations between Cauchy stress and second P-K stress
Recall that


 
  In terms of the 2nd PK stress, we have


 
  Therefore,


 
  In index notation,


 
  Since the Cauchy stress (and hence the Kirchhoff stress) is symmetric, the 2n PK stress is also symmetric.
Alternatively, we can write


 
  or,



Clearly, from definition of the push-forward and pull-back operations, we have


 
  and


 
  Therefore, 
 
 
 
  is the pull back of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the push forward of 
 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Stress (physics)
Finite strain theory
Continuum mechanics
Hyperelastic material
Cauchy elastic material

References


"
Category:Solid mechanics Category:Continuum mechanics



J. Bonet and R. W. Wood, Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics for Finite Element Analysis, Cambridge University Press.↩
R. W. Ogden, 1984, Non-linear Elastic Deformations, Dover.↩
L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, Theory of Elasticity, third edition↩




