


Hurwitz quaternion order




Hurwitz quaternion order

The Hurwitz quaternion order is a specific order in a quaternion algebra over a suitable number field. The order is of particular importance in Riemann surface theory, in connection with surfaces with maximal symmetry, namely the Hurwitz surfaces.1 The Hurwitz quaternion order was studied in 1967 by Goro Shimura,2 but first explicitly described by Noam Elkies in 1998.3 For an alternative use of the term, see Hurwitz quaternion (both usages are current in the literature).
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be the maximal real subfield of 
 
 

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a 7th-primitive root of unity. The ring of integers of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , where the element 
 
 
 
  can be identified with the positive real 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the quaternion algebra, or symbol algebra



so that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  Also let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Let



Then 
 
 
 
  is a maximal order of 
 
 
 
 , described explicitly by Noam Elkies.4
Module structure
The order 
 
 
 
  is also generated by elements



and



In fact, the order is a free 
 
 
 
 -module over the basis 
 
 
 
 . Here the generators satisfy the relations



which descend to the appropriate relations in the (2,3,7) triangle group, after quotienting by the center.
Principal congruence subgroups
The principal congruence subgroup defined by an ideal 
 
 
 
  is by definition the group


 
 mod 
 
 

namely, the group of elements of reduced norm 1 in 
 
 
 
  equivalent to 1 modulo the ideal 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding Fuchsian group is obtained as the image of the principal congruence subgroup under a representation to PSL(2,R).
Application
The order was used by Katz, Schaps, and Vishne5 to construct a family of Hurwitz surfaces satisfying an asymptotic lower bound for the systole
 
 
 
  where g is the genus, improving an earlier result of Peter Buser and Peter Sarnak;6 see systoles of surfaces.
See also

(2,3,7) triangle group
Klein quartic
Macbeath surface
First Hurwitz triplet

References
"
Category:Riemann surfaces Category:Differential geometry of surfaces Category:Algebras Algebra Category:Systolic geometry



.
.
.
.
.





