


Zig-zag lemma




Zig-zag lemma

In mathematics, particularly homological algebra, the zig-zag lemma asserts the existence of a particular long exact sequence in the homology groups of certain chain complexes. The result is valid in every abelian category.
Statement
In an abelian category (such as the category of abelian groups or the category of vector spaces over a given field), let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be chain complexes that fit into the following short exact sequence:



Such a sequence is shorthand for the following commutative diagram:
commutative diagram representation of a short exact sequence of chain complexes
where the rows are exact sequences and each column is a complex.
The zig-zag lemma asserts that there is a collection of boundary maps



that makes the following sequence exact:
long exact sequence in homology, given by the Zig-Zag Lemma
The maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the usual maps induced by homology. The boundary maps 
 
 
 
  are explained below. The name of the lemma arises from the "zig-zag" behavior of the maps in the sequence. In an unfortunate overlap in terminology, this theorem is also commonly known as the "snake lemma," although there is another result in homological algebra with that name. Interestingly, the "other" snake lemma can be used to prove the zig-zag lemma, in a manner different from what is described below.
Construction of the boundary maps
The maps 
 
 
 
  are defined using a standard diagram chasing argument. Let 
 
 
 
  represent a class in 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
 . Exactness of the row implies that 
 
 
 
  is surjective, so there must be some 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . By commutativity of the diagram,



By exactness,



Thus, since 
 
 
 
  is injective, there is a unique element 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . This is a cycle, since 
 
 
 
  is injective and



since 
 
 
 
 . That is, 
 
 
 
 . This means 
 
 
 
  is a cycle, so it represents a class in 
 
 
 
 . We can now define



With the boundary maps defined, one can show that they are well-defined (that is, independent of the choices of c and b). The proof uses diagram chasing arguments similar to that above. Such arguments are also used to show that the sequence in homology is exact at each group.
See also

Mayer–Vietoris sequence

References





"
Category:Homological algebra Category:Lemmas


