


Whittaker model




Whittaker model

In representation theory, a branch of mathematics, the Whittaker model is a realization of a representation of a reductive algebraic group such as GL2 over a finite or local or global field on a space of functions on the group. It is named after E. T. Whittaker even though he never worked in this area, because  pointed out that for the group SL2(R) some of the functions involved in the representation are Whittaker functions.
Irreducible representations without a Whittaker model are sometimes called "degenerate", and those with a Whittaker model are sometimes called "generic". The representation θ10 of the symplectic group Sp4 is the simplest example of a degenerate representation.
Whittaker models for GL2
If G is the algebraic group GL2 and F is a local field, and τ is a fixed non-trivial character of the additive group of F and π is an irreducible representation of a general linear group G(F), then the Whittaker model for π is a representation π on a space of functions f on G(F) satisfying


 
   used Whittaker models to assign L-functions to admissible representations of GL2.
Whittaker models for GLn
Let 
 
 
 
  be the general linear group

 
 , 
 
 
 
  a smooth complex valued non-trivial additive character of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the subgroup of 
 
 
 
  consisting of unipotent upper triangular matrices. A non-degenerate character on 
 
 
 
  is of the form



for 
 
 
 
  ∈ 
 
 
 
  and non-zero 
 
 
 
 , ..., 
 
 
 
  ∈ 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a smooth representation of 
 
 
 
 , a Whittaker functional

 
  is a continuous linear functional on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  ∈ 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  ∈ 
 
 
 
 . Multiplicity one states that, for 
 
 
 
  unitary irreducible, the space of Whittaker functionals has dimension at most equal to one.
Whittaker models for reductive groups
If G is a split reductive group and U is the unipotent radical of a Borel subgroup B, then a Whittaker model for a representation is an embedding of it into the induced (Gelfand–Graev) representation Ind(χ), where χ is a non-degenerate character of U, such as the sum of the characters corresponding to simple roots.
See also

Gelfand–Graev representation, roughly the sum of Whittaker models over a finite field.
Kirillov model

References






J. A. Shalika, The multiplicity one theorem for 
 
 
, The Annals of Mathematics, 2nd. Ser., Vol. 100, No. 2 (1974), 171-193.

"
Category:Representation theory Category:Automorphic forms Category:Langlands program


