


Babenko–Beckner inequality




Babenko–Beckner inequality

In mathematics, the Babenko–Beckner inequality (after K. Ivan Babenko and William E. Beckner) is a sharpened form of the Hausdorff–Young inequality having applications to uncertainty principles in the Fourier analysis of Lp spaces. The (q, p)-norm of the n-dimensional Fourier transform is defined to be1



In 1961, Babenko2 found this norm for even integer values of q. Finally, in 1975, using Hermite functions as eigenfunctions of the Fourier transform, Beckner3 proved that the value of this norm for all 
 
 
 
  is



Thus we have the Babenko–Beckner inequality that



To write this out explicitly, (in the case of one dimension,) if the Fourier transform is normalized so that



then we have



or more simply



Main ideas of proof
Throughout this sketch of a proof, let


 
  (Except for q, we will more or less follow the notation of Beckner.)
The two-point lemma
Let 
 
 
 
  be the discrete measure with weight 
 
 
 
  at the points 
 
 
 
  Then the operator


 
  maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  with norm 1; that is,


 
  or more explicitly,


 
  for any complex a, b. (See Beckner's paper for the proof of his "two-point lemma".)
A sequence of Bernoulli trials
The measure 
 
 
 
  that was introduced above is actually a fair Bernoulli trial with mean 0 and variance 1. Consider the sum of a sequence of n such Bernoulli trials, independent and normalized so that the standard deviation remains 1. We obtain the measure 
 
 
 
  which is the n-fold convolution of 
 
 
 
  with itself. The next step is to extend the operator C defined on the two-point space above to an operator defined on the (n + 1)-point space of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the elementary symmetric polynomials.
Convergence to standard normal distribution
The sequence 
 
 
 
  converges weakly to the standard normal probability distribution

 
  with respect to functions of polynomial growth. In the limit, the extension of the operator C above in terms of the elementary symmetric polynomials with respect to the measure 
 
 
 
  is expressed as an operator T in terms of the Hermite polynomials with respect to the standard normal distribution. These Hermite functions are the eigenfunctions of the Fourier transform, and the (q, p)-norm of the Fourier transform is obtained as a result after some renormalization.
See also

Entropic uncertainty

References


"
Category:Inequalities



Iwo Bialynicki-Birula. Formulation of the uncertainty relations in terms of the Renyi entropies. arXiv:quant-ph/0608116v2↩
K.I. Babenko. An ineqality in the theory of Fourier analysis. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Ser. Mat. 25 (1961) pp. 531–542 English transl., Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. (2) 44, pp. 115–128↩
W. Beckner, Inequalities in Fourier analysis. Annals of Mathematics, Vol. 102, No. 6 (1975) pp. 159–182.↩




