


Loanable funds




Loanable funds

In economics, the loanable funds doctrine is a theory of the market interest rate. According to this approach, the interest rate is determined by the demand for and supply of loanable funds. The term loanable funds includes all forms of credit.
History
The loanable funds doctrine was formulated in the 1930s by British economist Dennis Robertson1 and Swedish economist Bertil Ohlin.2 However, Ohlin attributed its origin to Swedish economist Knut Wicksell and the so-called Stockholm school.
Basic Features
The loanable funds doctrine extends the classical theory, which determined the interest rate solely by savings and investment, in that it adds bank credit. The total amount of credit available in an economy can exceed private savings because the bank system is in a position to create credit out of thin air. Hence, the equilibrium (or market) interest rate is not only influenced by the propensities to save and invest but also by the creation or destruction of fiat money and credit.
If the bank system enhances credit, this will diminish the market interest rate below the natural rate. Wicksell had defined the natural rate as that interest rate which is compatible with a stable price level. Credit creation and credit destruction induce changes in the price level and in the level of economic activity.
According to Ohlin (op. cit., p. 222), one cannot say "that the rate of interest equalises planned savings and planned investment, for it obviously does not do that. How, then, is the height of the interest rate determined. The answer is that the rate of interest is simply the price of credit, and that is is therefore governed by the supply of and demand for credit. The banking system - through its ability to give credit - can influence, and to some extent does affect, the interest level."
In formal terms, the loanable funds doctrine determines the market interest rate through the following equilibrium condition:



where 
 
 
 
  denote the price level, real savings, and real investment, respectively, while 
 
 
 
  denotes the change in bank credit. Savings and investment are multiplied by the price level in order to get monetary variables since credit comes also in monetary terms.
Loanable Funds versus Liquidity Preference
During the 1930s, and again during the 1950s, the relationship between the loanable funds doctrine and its main competitor, the Keynesian liquidity preference doctrine, were discussed at length. Some authors considered the two approaches as largely equivalent3 but this issue is still unresolved.
Notes
"
Category:Economics terminology Category:Macroeconomics



Robertson, D. H. (1934) Industrial Fluctuation and the Natural Rate of Interest. The Economic Journal, vol. 44, pp. 650-656↩
Ohlin, B. (1937) Some Notes on the Stockholm Theory of Savings and Investment II. The Economic Journal, vol. 47, pp. 221-240.↩
Patinkin, D. (1958) Liquidity Preference and Loanable Funds: Stock and Flow Analysis. Economica vol. 25, pp. 300-318↩




