


Mean and predicted response




Mean and predicted response

In linear regression mean response and predicted response are values of the dependent variable calculated from the regression parameters and a given value of the independent variable. The values of these two responses are the same, but their calculated variances are different.
Straight line regression
In straight line fitting, the model is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the response variable, 
 
 
 
  is the explanatory variable, εi is the random error, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are parameters. The predicted response value for a given explanatory value, xd, is given by


 
  while the actual response would be



Expressions for the values and variances of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are given in linear regression.
Mean response is an estimate of the mean of the y population associated with xd, that is 
 
 
 
 . The variance of the mean response is given by


 
  This expression can be simplified to



To demonstrate this simplification, one can make use of the identity



The predicted response distribution is the predicted distribution of the residuals at the given point xd. So the variance is given by



The second part of this expression was already calculated for the mean response. Since 
 
 
 
  (a fixed but unknown parameter that can be estimated), the variance of the predicted response is given by



Confidence intervals
The 
 
 
confidence intervals are computed as 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the confidence interval for predicted response is wider than the interval for mean response. This is expected intuitively – the variance of the population of 
 
 
 
  values does not shrink when one samples from it, because the random variable εi does not decrease, but the variance of the mean of the 
 
 
 
  does shrink with increased sampling, because the variance in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  decrease, so the mean response (predicted response value) becomes closer to 
 
 
 
 .
This is analogous to the difference between the variance of a population and the variance of the sample mean of a population: the variance of a population is a parameter and does not change, but the variance of the sample mean decreases with increased samples.
General linear regression
The general linear model can be written as



Therefore since 
 
 
 
  the general expression for the variance of the mean response is


 
  where M is the covariance matrix of the parameters, given by


 
 .
See also

Prediction interval

References



"
Category:Regression analysis Category:Estimation theory


