


Elasticity of intertemporal substitution




Elasticity of intertemporal substitution

Elasticity of intertemporal substitution (or intertemporal elasticity of substitution) is a measure of responsiveness of the growth rate of consumption to the real interest rate.1 If the real rate rises, future consumption may increase due to increased return on savings; but future consumption may also decline as the saver decides to consume more immediately, to get a higher return on what is saved (i.e. not consumed). The net effect on future consumption is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.2
Mathematical definition
The definition depends on whether one is working in discrete or continuous time. We will see that for CRRA utility, the two approaches yield the same answer. The below functional forms assume that utility from consumption is time additively separable.
Discrete time
Total lifetime utility is given by


 
  In this setting, the real interest rate will be given by the following condition:


 
  A quantity of money 
 
 
 
  invested today costs 
 
 
 
  units of utility, and so must yield exactly that number of units of utility in the future when saved at the prevailing gross interest rate 
 
 
 
 . (If it yielded more, then the agent could make himself better off by saving more.)
Solving for the real interest rate, we see that


 
  In logs, we have


 
  Logs are very close to percentage changes, so we can interpret 
 
 
 
  as a net interest rate like 5%, whereas 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding gross interest rate like 1.05.
The elasticity of intertemporal substitution is defined as the percent change in consumption growth per percent increase in the net interest rate:


 
  By substituting in our log equation above, we can see that this definition is equivalent to the elasticity of consumption growth with respect to marginal utility growth:


 
  Either definition is correct, however, assuming that the agent is optimizing and has time separable utility.
Example
Let utility of consumption in period 
 
 
 
  be given by


 
  Since this utility function belongs to the family of CRRA utility functions we have 
 
 
 
  Thus,


 
  This can be rewritten as


 
  Hence, applying the above derived formula



Continuous time
Let total lifetime utility be given by



where 
 
 
 
  is shorthand for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the utility of consumption in (instant) time t, and 
 
 
 
  is the time discount rate. First define the measure of relative risk aversion (this is useful even if the model has no uncertainty or risk) as,


 
  then the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is defined as



If the utility function 
 
 
 
  is of the CRRA type:


 
  (with special case of 
 
 
 
  being 
 
 
 
 )
then the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is given by 
 
 
 
 . In general, a low value of theta (high intertemporal elasticity) means that consumption growth is very sensitive to changes in the real interest rate. For theta equal to 1, the growth rate of consumption responds one for one to changes in the real interest rate. A high theta implies an insensitive consumption growth.
Ramsey Growth model
In the Ramsey growth model, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution determines the speed of adjustment to the steady state and the behavior of the saving rate during the transition. If the elasticity is high then large changes in consumption are not very costly to consumers and as a result if the real interest rate is high they will save a large portion of their income. If the elasticity is low the consumption smoothing motive is very strong and because of this consumers will save a little and consume a lot if the real interest rate is high.
Estimates
Empirical estimates of the elasticity vary. Part of the difficulty stems from the fact that microeconomic studies come to different conclusions than macroeconomic studies which use aggregate data. A meta-analysis of 169 published studies reports a mean elasticity of 0.5, but also substantial differences across countries.3
References
"
Category:Consumer theory



Robert Hall, JPE
Intertemporal Substitution - EconModel
Cross-Country Heterogeneity in Intertemporal Substitution




