


Surgery obstruction




Surgery obstruction

In mathematics, specifically in surgery theory, the surgery obstructions define a map 
 
 
 
  from the normal invariants to the L-groups which is in the first instance a set-theoretic map (that means not necessarily a homomorphism) with the following property when 
 
 
 
 :
A degree-one normal map 
 
 
 
  is normally cobordant to a homotopy equivalence if and only if the image 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
Sketch of the definition
The surgery obstruction of a degree-one normal map has a relatively complicated definition.
Consider a degree-one normal map 
 
 
 
 . The idea in deciding the question whether it is normally cobordant to a homotopy equivalence is to try to systematically improve 
 
 
 
  so that the map 
 
 
 
  becomes 
 
 
 
 -connected (that means the homotopy groups 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 ) for high 
 
 
 
 . It is a consequence of Poincaré duality that if we can achieve this for 
 
 
 
  then the map 
 
 
 
  already is a homotopy equivalence. The word systematically above refers to the fact that one tries to do surgeries on 
 
 
 
  to kill elements of 
 
 
 
 . In fact it is more convenient to use homology of the universal covers to observe how connected the map 
 
 
 
  is. More precisely, one works with the surgery kernels

 
  which one views as 
 
 
 
 -modules. If all these vanish, then the map 
 
 
 
  is a homotopy equivalence. As a consequence of Poincaré duality on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  there is a 
 
 
 
 -modules Poincaré duality 
 
 
 
 , so one only has to watch half of them, that means those for which 
 
 
 
 .
Any degree-one normal map can be made 
 
 
 
 -connected by the process called surgery below the middle dimension. This is the process of killing elements of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  described here when we have 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . After this is done there are two cases.
1. If 
 
 
 
  then the only nontrivial homology group is the kernel 
 
 
 
 . It turns out that the cup-product pairings on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  induce a cup-product pairing on 
 
 
 
 . This defines a symmetric bilinear form in case 
 
 
 
  and a skew-symmetric bilinear form in case 
 
 
 
 . It turns out that these forms can be refined to 
 
 
 
 -quadratic forms, where 
 
 
 
 . These 
 
 
 
 -quadratic forms define elements in the L-groups 
 
 
 
 .
2. If 
 
 
 
  the definition is more complicated. Instead of a quadratic form one obtains from the geometry a quadratic formation, which is a kind of automorphism of quadratic forms. Such a thing defines an element in the odd-dimensional L-group 
 
 
 
 .
If the element 
 
 
 
  is zero in the L-group surgery can be done on 
 
 
 
  to modify 
 
 
 
  to a homotopy equivalence.
Geometrically the reason why this is not always possible is that performing surgery in the middle dimension to kill an element in 
 
 
 
  possibly creates an element in 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  or in 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 . So this possibly destroys what has already been achieved. However, if 
 
 
 
  is zero, surgeries can be arranged in such a way that this does not happen.
Example
In the simply connected case the following happens.
If 
 
 
 
  there is no obstruction.
If 
 
 
 
  then the surgery obstruction can be calculated as the difference of the signatures of M and X.
If 
 
 
 
  then the surgery obstruction is the Arf-invariant of the associated kernel quadratic form over 
 
 
 
 .
References






"
Category:Surgery theory


