


Merkle signature scheme




Merkle signature scheme

The Merkle signature scheme is a digital signature scheme based on hash trees (also called Merkle trees) and one-time signatures such as the Lamport signature scheme. It was developed by Ralph Merkle in the late 1970s and is an alternative to traditional digital signatures such as the Digital Signature Algorithm or RSA.
The advantage of the Merkle Signature Scheme is that it is believed to be resistant against quantum computer algorithms. The traditional public key algorithms, such as RSA and ELGamal would become insecure in case an effective quantum computer can be built (due to Shor's algorithm). The Merkle Signature Scheme however only depends on the existence of secure hash functions. This makes the Merkle Signature Scheme very adjustable and resistant to quantum computing.
Key generation
 The Merkle Signature Scheme can be used to sign a limited number of messages with one public key 
 
 
 
 . The number of possible messages must be a power of two, so we denote the possible number of messages as 
 
 
 
 .
The first step of generating the public key 
 
 
 
  is to generate the public keys 
 
 
 
  and private keys 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  one-time signatures. For each public key 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , a hash value 
 
 
 
  is computed. With these hash values 
 
 
 
  a hash tree is built.
Each node of the tree is represented as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the height of the node and 
 
 
 
  denotes the left-to-right position of the node. The height of a node is defined as the distance from the node to a leaf. Hence, a leaf of the tree has height 
 
 
 
  and the root has height 
 
 
 
 . Nodes with the same height are numbered from left to right, so 
 
 
 
  is the leftmost node of level 
 
 
 
 .
In the Merkle Tree the hash values 
 
 
 
  are the leaves of a binary tree, so that 
 
 
 
 . Each inner node of the tree is the hash value of the concatenation of its two children. For example 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In this way, a tree with 
 
 
 
  leaves and 
 
 
 
  nodes is built. The root of the tree, 
 
 
 
 , is the public key 
 
 
 
  of the Merkle Signature Scheme.
Signature generation
 To sign a message 
 
 
 
  with the Merkle Signature Scheme, the message 
 
 
 
  is signed with a one-time signature scheme, resulting in a signature 
 
 
 
 , first. This is done, by using one of the public and private key pairs 
 
 
 
 . [Need to define computation of 
 
 
 
 ]
The corresponding leaf of the hash tree to a one-time public key 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . We call the path in the hash tree from 
 
 
 
  to the root 
 
 
 
 . The path 
 
 
 
  consists of 
 
 
 
  nodes, 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  being the leaf and 
 
 
 
  being the root of the tree. To compute this path 
 
 
 
 , we need every child of the nodes 
 
 
 
 . We know that 
 
 
 
  is a child of 
 
 
 
 . To calculate the next node 
 
 
 
  of the path 
 
 
 
 , we need to know both children of 
 
 
 
 . So we need the brother node of 
 
 
 
 . We call this node 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 . Hence, 
 
 
 
  nodes 
 
 
 
  are needed, to compute every node of the path 
 
 
 
 . We now calculate and save these nodes 
 
 
 
 .
These nodes, plus the one-time signature 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is the signature 
 
 
 
  of the Merkle Signature Scheme. An example of an authentication path is illustrated in the figure on the right.
Signature verification
The receiver knows the public key 
 
 
 
 , the message 
 
 
 
 , and the signature 
 
 
 
 . At first, the receiver verifies the one-time signature 
 
 
 
  of the message 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a valid signature of 
 
 
 
 , the receiver computes 
 
 
 
  by hashing the public key of the one-time signature. For 
 
 
 
 , the nodes of 
 
 
 
  of the path 
 
 
 
  are computed with 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  equals the public key 
 
 
 
  of the merkle signature scheme, the signature is valid.
References

G. Becker. "Merkle Signature Schemes, Merkle Trees and Their Cryptanalysis", seminar 'Post Quantum Cryptology' at the Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany.
E. Dahmen, M. Dring, E. Klintsevich, J. Buchmann, L.C. Coronado Garca. "CMSS - an improved merkle signature scheme". Progress in Cryptology - Indocrypt 2006, 2006.
E. Klintsevich, K. Okeya, C.Vuillaume, J. Buchmann, E.Dahmen. "Merkle signatures with virtually unlimited signature capacity". 5th International Conference on Applied Cryptography and Network Security - ACNS07, 2007.
Ralph Merkle. "Secrecy, authentication and public key systems / A certified digital signature". Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, 1979. 1
S. Micali, M. Jakobsson, T. Leighton, M. Szydlo. "Fractal merkle tree representation and traversal". RSA-CT 03, 2003

External links

Efficient Use of Merkle Trees - RSA labs explanation of the original purpose of Merkle trees + Lamport signatures, as an efficient one-time signature scheme.

"
Category:Digital signature schemes Category:Hash-based cryptography


