


Landen's transformation




Landen's transformation

Landen's transformation is a mapping of the parameters of an elliptic integral, which shows how the value of the integral, changes when its parameters:amplitude and modular angle changes following some dependency. As a special case, we can see when the transformation does not change the value of the integral.

It was originally due to John Landen, although independently rediscovered by Carl Friedrich Gauss.
 

For example,the incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind 
 
 
 
  is


 
  If parameters will be φ' and k' then 
 
 


Landen's transformation shows how one can calculate second integral through first and formula connecting k and k'.
 

A comprehensive list of transformations included in the tables 21.6-2 and 21.6-3 "Mathematical Handbook for scientists and engineers" by G.A. Korn and T.M. Korn. Accordingly 21.6-3




(aa)
 

Where






Consider an example when the transformation does not change the value of the integral.

Let
 




and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are replaced by their arithmetic and geometric means respectively, that is





Obviously
 






Accordingly formula (aa)
 



(aaa)
 
As follows from the formula (aaa)
 



The same equation can be proved using a simple mathematical analysis.
 

The transformation, may be achieved purely by integration by substitution. It is convenient to first cast the integral in an algebraic form by a substitution of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  giving



A further substitution of 
 
 
 
  gives the desired result (in the algebraic form)



This latter step is facilitated by writing the radical as



and the infinitesimal as



so that the factor of 
 
 
 
  is easily recognized and cancelled between the two factors.
Arithmetic-geometric mean and Legendre's first integral
If the transformation is iterated a number of times, then the parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  converge very rapidly to a common value, even if they are initially of different orders of magnitude. The limiting value is called the arithmetic-geometric mean of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . In the limit, the integrand becomes a constant, so that integration is trivial



The integral may also be recognized as a multiple of Legendre's complete elliptic integral of the first kind. Putting 
 
 




Hence, for any 
 
 
 
 , the arithmetic-geometric mean and the complete elliptic integral of the first kind are related by



By performing an inverse transformation (reverse arithmetic-geometric mean iteration), that is









the relationship may be written as



which may be solved for the AGM of a pair of arbitrary arguments;




''The definition adopted here for 

, differs from that used in the arithmetic-geometric mean article, such that 

 here is 

 in that article.''
 

References

Louis V. King On The Direct Numerical Calculation Of Elliptic Functions And Integrals (Cambridge University Press, 1924)

"
Category:Elliptic functions


