


Curvelet




Curvelet

Curvelets are a non-adaptive technique for multi-scale object representation. Being an extension of the wavelet concept, they are becoming popular in similar fields, namely in image processing and scientific computing.
Wavelets generalize the Fourier transform by using a basis that represents both location and spatial frequency. For 2D or 3D signals, directional wavelet transforms go further, by using basis functions that are also localized in orientation. A curvelet transform differs from other directional wavelet transforms in that the degree of localisation in orientation varies with scale. In particular, fine-scale basis functions are long ridges; the shape of the basis functions at scale j is 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  so the fine-scale bases are skinny ridges with a precisely determined orientation.
Curvelets are an appropriate basis for representing images (or other functions) which are smooth apart from singularities along smooth curves, where the curves have bounded curvature, i.e. where objects in the image have a minimum length scale. This property holds for cartoons, geometrical diagrams, and text. As one zooms in on such images, the edges they contain appear increasingly straight. Curvelets take advantage of this property, by defining the higher resolution curvelets to be more elongated than the lower resolution curvelets. However, natural images (photographs) do not have this property; they have detail at every scale. Therefore, for natural images, it is preferable to use some sort of directional wavelet transform whose wavelets have the same aspect ratio at every scale.
When the image is of the right type, curvelets provide a representation that is considerably sparser than other wavelet transforms. This can be quantified by considering the best approximation of a geometrical test image that can be represented using only 
 
 
 
  wavelets, and analysing the approximation error as a function of 
 
 
 
 . For a Fourier transform, the squared error decreases only as 
 
 
 
 . For a wide variety of wavelet transforms, including both directional and non-directional variants, the squared error decreases as 
 
 
 
 . The extra assumption underlying the curvelet transform allows it to achieve 
 
 
 
 .
Efficient numerical algorithms exist for computing the curvelet transform of discrete data. The computational cost of a curvelet transform is approximately 10–20 times that of an FFT, and has the same dependence of 
 
 
 
  for an image of size 
 
 
 
 .
Curvelet construction
To construct a basic curvelet 
 
 
 
  and provide a tiling of the 2-D frequency space, two main ideas should be followed:

Consider polar coordinates in frequency domain
Construct curvelet elements being locally supported near wedges

The number of wedges is 
 
 
 
  at the scale 
 
 
 
 , i.e., it doubles in each second circular ring.
  Let 
 
 

 be the variable in frequency domain, and 
 
 
 
  be the polar coordinates in the frequency domain.
  We use the ansatz for the dilated basic curvelets in polar coordinates:



  To construct a basic curvelet with compact support near a ″basic wedge″, the two windows 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 need to have compact support. Here, we can simply take 
 
 
 
  to cover 
 
 
 
 with dilated curvelets and 
 
 
 
  such that each circular ring is covered by the translations of 
 
 
 
  .
  Then the admissibility yields

see Window Functions for more information

 For tiling a circular ring into 
 
 
 
  wedges, where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary positive integer, we need a 
 
 
 
 -periodic nonnegative window 
 
 
 
  with support inside 
 
 
 
  such that

 
 , for all 
 
 


 
  can be simply constructed as 
 
 
 
 -periodizations of a scaled window 
 
 
 
 .

 Then, it follows that


For a complete covering of the frequency plane including the region around zero, we need to define a low pass element




 that is supported on the unit circle, and where we do not consider any rotation.
Applications

Image Processing
Seismic Exploration
Fluid Mechanics
PDEs Solving
Compressed Sensing

See also

Shearlet transform
Bandelet transform
Contourlet transform
Fresnelet transform
Chirplet transform
Noiselet transform
Scale space

References

E. Candès and D. Donoho, "Curvelets – a surprisingly effective nonadaptive representation for objects with edges." In: A. Cohen, C. Rabut and L. Schumaker, Editors, Curves and Surface Fitting: Saint-Malo 1999, Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville (2000), pp. 105–120.
Majumdar Angshul Bangla Basic Character Recognition using Digital Curvelet Transform Journal of Pattern Recognition Research (JPRR), Vol 2. (1) 2007 p.17-26
Emmanuel Candes, Laurent Demanet, David Donoho and Lexing Ying Fast Discrete Curvelet Transforms
J Ma, G Plonka, The Curvelet Transform: Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, 2010 - ieeexplore.ieee.org
Jean-Luc Starck, Emmanuel J. Candès, and David L. Donoho, The Curvelet Transform for Image Denoising,: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, Vol. 11, No. 6, June 2002

External links

Curvelet.org homepage

"
Category:Image processing Category:Time–frequency analysis Category:Wavelets


