


Regular conditional probability




Regular conditional probability

Regular conditional probability is a concept that has developed to overcome certain difficulties in formally defining conditional probabilities for continuous probability distributions. It is defined as an alternative probability measure conditioned on a particular value of a random variable.
Motivation
Normally we define the conditional probability of an event A given an event B as:


 
  The difficulty with this arises when the event B is too small to have a non-zero probability. For example, suppose we have a random variable X with a uniform distribution on 
 
 
 
  and B is the event that 
 
 
 
  Clearly the probability of B in this case is 
 
 
 
  but nonetheless we would still like to assign meaning to a conditional probability such as 
 
 
 
  To do so rigorously requires the definition of a regular conditional probability.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a probability space, and let 
 
 
 
  be a random variable, defined as a Borel-measurable function from 
 
 
 
  to its state space

 
  Then a regular conditional probability is defined as a function 
 
 
 
  called a "transition probability", where 
 
 
 
  is a valid probability measure (in its second argument) on 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and a measurable function in E (in its first argument) for all 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
1



To express this in our more familiar notation:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  i.e. the topological support of the pushforward measure

 
  As can be seen from the integral above, the value of 
 
 
 
  for points x outside the support of the random variable is meaningless; its significance as a conditional probability is strictly limited to the support of T.
The measurable space

 
  is said to have the regular conditional probability property if for all probability measures

 
  on 
 
 
 
  all random variables on 
 
 
 
  admit a regular conditional probability. A Radon space, in particular, has this property.
See also conditional probability and conditional probability distribution.
Alternate definition
Consider a Radon space 
 
 
 
  (that is a probability measure defined on a Radon space endowed with the Borel sigma-algebra) and a real-valued random variable T. As discussed above, in this case there exists a regular conditional probability with respect to T. Moreover we can alternatively define the regular conditional probability for an event A given a particular value t of the random variable T in the following manner:



where the limit is taken over the net of open neighborhoods U of t as they become smaller with respect to set inclusion. This limit is defined if and only if the probability space is Radon, and only in the support of T, as described in the article. This is the restriction of the transition probability to the support of T. To describe this limiting process rigorously:
For every 
 
 
 
  there exists an open neighborhood U of t, such that for every open V with 
 
 



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the limit.
Example
To continue with our motivating example above, we consider a real-valued random variable X and write


 
  (where 
 
 
 
  for the example given.) This limit, if it exists, is a regular conditional probability for X, restricted to 
 
 

In any case, it is easy to see that this limit fails to exist for 
 
 
 
  outside the support of X: since the support of a random variable is defined as the set of all points in its state space whose every neighborhood has positive probability, for every point 
 
 
 
  outside the support of X (by definition) there will be an 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

Thus if X is distributed uniformly on 
 
 
 
  it is truly meaningless to condition a probability on "
 
 
 
 ".
See also

Conditioning (probability)
Disintegration theorem
Adherent point
Limit point

References


External links

Regular Conditional Probability on PlanetMath

"
Category:Probability theory Category:Measure theory



D. Leao Jr. et al. Regular conditional probability, disintegration of probability and Radon spaces. Proyecciones. Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 15–29, May 2004, Universidad Católica del Norte, Antofagasta, Chile PDF↩




