


Bispinor




Bispinor

In physics, a bispinor is an object with four complex components which transform in a specific way under Lorentz transformations: specifically, a bispinor is an element of a 4-dimensional complex vector space considered as a (½,0)⊕(0,½) representation of the Lorentz group.1 Bispinors are, for example, used to describe relativistic spin-½ wave functions.
In the Weyl basis, a bispinor


 
  consists of two (two-component) Weyl spinors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which transform, correspondingly, under (½,0) and (0,½) representations of the 
 
 
 
  group (the Lorentz group without parity transformations). Under parity transformation the Weyl spinors transform into each other.
The Dirac bispinor is connected with the Weyl bispinor by a unitary transformation to the Dirac basis,


 
  The Dirac basis is the one most widely used in the literature.
Expressions for Lorentz transformations of bispinors
A bispinor field 
 
 
 
  transforms according to a rule


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a Lorentz transformation. Here the coordinates of physical points are multiplied on the left by 
 
 
 
 , so the point with coordinate 
 
 
 
  before the transformation has coordinate 
 
 
 
  after the transformation.
In the Weyl basis, explicit transformation matrices for a boost 
 
 
 
  and for a rotation 
 
 
 
  are the following:2






Here 
 
 
 
  is the boost parameter, and 
 
 
 
  represents rotation around the 
 
 
 
  axis. 
 
 
 
  are the Pauli matrices. The exponential is the exponential map, in this case the matrix exponential defined by putting the matrix into the usual power series for the exponential function.
Properties
A bilinear form of bispinors can be reduced to five irreducible (under the Lorentz group) objects:

scalar, 
 
 
 
  ;
pseudo-scalar, 
 
 
 
  ;
vector, 
 
 
 
  ;
pseudo-vector, 
 
 
 
  ;
antisymmetric tensor, 
 
 
 
  ,

where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the gamma matrices.
A suitable Lagrangian for the relativistic spin-½ field can be built out of these, and is given as


 
  The Dirac equation can be derived from this Lagrangian by using the Euler–Lagrange equation.
Derivation of a bispinor representation
Introduction
This outline describes one type of bispinors as elements of a particular representation space of the (½,0)⊕ (0,½) representation of the Lorentz group. This representation space is related to, but not identical to, the (½,0)⊕ (0,½) representation space contained in the Clifford algebra over Minkowski spacetime as described in the article Spinors. Language and terminology is used as in Representation theory of the Lorentz group. The only property of Clifford algebras that is essential for the presentation is the defining property given in  below. The basis elements of 
 
 
 are labeled .
A representation of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of the Lorentz group 
 
 
 
  will emerge among matrices that will be chosen as a basis (as a vector space) of the complex Clifford algebra over spacetime. These 
 
 
 
  matrices are then exponentiated yielding a representation of . This representation, that turns out to be a 
 
 
 
  representation, will act on an arbitrary 4-dimensional complex vector space, which will simply be taken as , and its elements will be bispinors.
For reference, the commutation relations of 
 
 
 
  are
with the spacetime metric 
 
 
 
 .
The Gamma Matrices
Let γμ denote a set of four 4-dimensional Gamma matrices, here called the Dirac matrices. The Dirac matrices satisfy
where } is the anticommutator,  is a 
 
 
 
  unit matrix, and  is the spacetime metric with signature (-,+,+,+). This is the defining condition for a generating set of a Clifford algebra. Further basis elements  of the Clifford algebra are given by
Only six of the matrices  are linearly independent. This follows directly from their definition since −σνμ}}. They act on the subspace  the  span in the passive sense, according to
In , the second equality follows from property  of the Clifford algebra.
Lie algebra embedding of so(3;1) in Cℓ4(C)
Now define an action of 
 
 
 
  on the , and the linear subspace  they span in , given by
The last equality in (C4), which follows from (C2) and the property (D1) of the gamma matrices, shows that the  constitute a representation of 
 
 
 
  since the commutation relations in  are exactly those of 
 
 
 
 . The action of  can be either be thought of as 6-dimensional matrices  multiplying the basis vectors , since the space in  spanned by the  is 6-dimensional, or it can be thought of as the action by commutation on the . In the following,  }}
The  and the  are both (disjoint) subsets of the basis elements of Cℓ4(C), generated by the 4-dimensional Dirac matrices  in 4 spacetime dimensions. The Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  is thus embedded in Cℓ4(C) by 
 
 
 
  as the real subspace of Cℓ4(C) spanned by the . For a full description of the remaining basis elements other than  and  of the Clifford algebra, please see the article Dirac algebra.
Bispinors introduced
Now introduce any 4-dimensional complex vector space U where the γμ act by matrix multiplication. Here  C4}} will do nicely. Let  eωμνMμν}} be a Lorentz transformation and define the action of the Lorentz group on U to be



Since the  according to  constitute a representation of 
 
 
 
 , the induced map
according to general theory either is a representation or a projective representation of . It will turn out to be a projective representation. The elements of U, when endowed with the transformation rule given by S, are called bispinors or simply spinors.
A choice of Dirac matrices
It remains to choose a set of Dirac matrices  in order to obtain the spin representation 
 
 
 
 . One such choice, appropriate for the ultrarelativistic limit, is
where the  are the Pauli matrices. In this representation of the Clifford algebra generators, the  become
This representation is manifestly not irreducible, since the matrices are all block diagonal. But by irreducibility of the Pauli matrices, the representation cannot be further reduced. Since it is a 4-dimensional, the only possibility is that it is a 
 
 
 
  representation, i.e. a bispinor representation. Now using the recipe of exponentiation of the Lie algebra representation to obtain a representation of ,
a projective 2-valued representation is obtained. Here 
 
 
 
  is a vector of rotation parameters with , and 
 
 
 
  is a vector of boost parameters. With the conventions used here one may write
for a bispinor field. Here, the upper component corresponds to a right Weyl spinor. To include space parity inversion in this formalism, one sets 
as representative for 
 
 
 
 . It seen that the representation is irreducible when space parity inversion included.
An example
Let 2πM12}} so that 
 
 
 
  generates a rotation around the z-axis by an angle of 
 
 
 
 . Then  eiX {{=}} I ∈ SO(3;1)+}} but  -I ∈ GL(U)}}. Here, 
 
 
 
  denotes the identity element. If 
 
 
 
  is chosen instead, then still  eiX {{=}} I ∈ SO(3;1)+}}, but now  I ∈ GL(U)}}.
This illustrates the double valued nature of a spin representation. The identity in  gets mapped into either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  depending on the choice of Lie algebra element to represent it. In the first case, one can speculate that a rotation of an angle 
 
 
 
  will turn a bispinor into minus itself, and that it requires a 
 
 
 
  rotation to rotate a bispinor back into itself. What really happens is that the identity in  is mapped to 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  with an unfortunate choice of 
 
 
 
 .
It is impossible to continuously choose 
 
 
 
  for all  so that 
 
 
 
  is a continuous representation. Suppose that one defines 
 
 
 
  along a loop in 
 
 
 
  such that 2πtM12, 0 ≤ t ≤ 1}}. This is a closed loop in 
 
 
 
 , i.e. rotations ranging from 0 to 
 
 
 
  around the z-axis under the exponential mapping, but it is only "half"" a loop in 
 
 
 
 , ending at 
 
 
 
 . In addition, the value of 
 
 
 
  is ambiguous, since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  gives different values for 
 
 
 
 .
The Dirac algebra
The representation 
 
 
 
  on bispinors will induce a representation of  on 
 
 
 
 , the set of linear operators on U. This space corresponds to the Clifford algebra itself so that all linear operators on U are elements of the latter. This representation, and how it decomposes as a direct sum of irreducible  representations, is described in the article on Dirac algebra. One of the consequences is the decomposition of the bilinear forms on 
 
 
 
 . This decomposition hints how to couple any bispinor field with other fields in a Lagrangian to yield Lorentz scalars.
See also

Dirac spinor
Spin(3,1), the double cover of SO(3,1) by a spin group

Notes
References

P. Caban and J. Rembielinski, http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0507056v1 [Phys. Rev. A 72, 012103 (2005)]

.

"
Category:Quantum field theory



Caban and Rembielinski 2005, p. 2.↩
David Tong, Lectures on Quantum Field Theory (2012), Lecture 4↩




