


Backward differentiation formula




Backward differentiation formula

The backward differentiation formula (BDF) is a family of implicit methods for the numerical integration of ordinary differential equations. They are linear multistep methods that, for a given function and time, approximate the derivative of that function using information from already computed times, thereby increasing the accuracy of the approximation. These methods are especially used for the solution of stiff differential equations.
General formula
A BDF is used to solve the initial value problem



The general formula for a BDF can be written as 1



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the step size and 
 
 
 
 . The coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are chosen so that the method achieves order 
 
 
 
 , which is the maximum possible.
BDF methods are implicit and, as such, require the solution of nonlinear equations at each step. Typically, a modified Newton's method is used to solve these nonlinear equations.2
Specific formulas
The s-step BDFs with s  (for s = 1, 2, 3);  (for all s)

BDF1
 
 
 
 ; (this is the backward Euler method)
BDF2
 
 

BDF3
 
 

BDF4
 
 

BDF5
 
 

BDF6
 
 


Methods with s > 6 are not zero-stable so they cannot be used.3
Stability
The stability of numerical methods for solving stiff equations is indicated by their region of absolute stability. For the BDF methods, these regions are shown in the plots below.
Ideally, the region contains the left half of the complex plane, in which case the method is said to be A-stable. However, linear multistep methods with an order greater than 2 cannot be A-stable. The stability region of the higher-order BDF methods contain a large part of the left half-plane and in particular the whole of the negative real axis. The BDF methods are the most efficient linear multistep methods of this kind.4
References
Citations
Referred works


.

.

.

Further reading

BDF Methods at the SUNDIALS wiki (SUNDIALS is a library implementing BDF methods and similar algorithms).

"
Category:Numerical differential equations











