   Minimal prime ideal      Minimal prime ideal   In mathematics , especially in the area of algebra known as commutative algebra , certain prime ideals called minimal prime ideals play an important role in understanding rings and modules . The notion of height and Krull's principal ideal theorem use minimal primes.  Definition  A prime ideal P is said to be a minimal prime ideal over an ideal I if it is minimal among all prime ideals containing I . (Note that we do not exclude I even if it is a prime ideal.) A prime ideal is said to be a minimal prime ideal if it is a minimal prime ideal over the zero ideal .  A minimal prime ideal over an ideal I in a Noetherian ring R is precisely a minimal associated prime (also called isolated prime) of    R  /  I      R  I    R/I   ; this follows for instance from the primary decomposition of I .  Examples   In a commutative artinian ring , every maximal ideal is a minimal prime ideal.  In an integral domain , the only minimal prime ideal is the zero ideal.  In the ring Z of integers , the minimal prime ideals over a nonzero principal ideal ( n ) are the principal ideals ( p ), where p is a prime divisor of n . The only minimal prime ideal over the zero ideal is the zero ideal itself. Similar statements hold for any principal ideal domain .  If I is a p - primary ideal (for example, a power of p ), then p is the unique minimal prime ideal over I .   Properties  All rings are assumed to be commutative and unital .   Every proper ideal  I in a ring has at least one minimal prime ideal above it. The proof of this fact uses Zorn's lemma . Any maximal ideal containing I is prime, and such ideals exist, so the set of prime ideals containing I is non-empty. The intersection of a decreasing chain of prime ideals is prime. Therefore, the set of prime ideals containing I has a minimal element, which is a minimal prime over I .  Emmy Noether showed that in a Noetherian ring , there are only finitely many minimal prime ideals over any given ideal. ,  The fact remains true if "Noetherian" is replaced by the ascending chain conditions on radical ideals .  The radical     I      I    \sqrt{I}   of any proper ideal I coincides with the intersection of the minimal prime ideals over I . .  The set of zero divisors of a given ring contains the union of the minimal prime ideals .  Krull's principal ideal theorem describes important properties of minimal prime ideals.   References      "  Category:Commutative algebra  Category:Prime ideals   