


Amplitude amplification




Amplitude amplification

Amplitude amplification is a technique in quantum computing which generalizes the idea behind the Grover's search algorithm, and gives rise to a family of quantum algorithms. It was discovered by Gilles Brassard and Peter Høyer in 1997, 1 and independently rediscovered by Lov Grover in 1998. 2
In a quantum computer, amplitude amplification can be used to obtain a quadratic speedup over several classical algorithms.
Algorithm
The derivation presented here roughly follows the one given in .3 Assume we have an N-dimensional Hilbert space

 
  representing the state space of our quantum system, spanned by the orthonormal computational basis states 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore assume we have a Hermitian projection operator

 
 . Alternatively, 
 
 
 
  may be given in terms of a Boolean oracle function 
 
 
 
  and an orthonormal operational basis 
 
 
 
 , in which case


 
 . 
 
 
 
  can be used to partition 
 
 
 
  into a direct sum of two mutually orthogonal subspaces, the good subspace 
 
 
 
  and the bad subspace 
 
 
 
 :



Given a normalized state vector 
 
 
 
  which has nonzero overlap with both subspaces, we can uniquely decompose it as


 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the normalized projections of 
 
 
 
  into the subspaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. This decomposition defines a two-dimensional subspace 
 
 
 
 , spanned by the vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The probability of finding the system in a good state when measured is 
 
 
 
 .
Define a unitary operator 
 
 
 
 , where



 
  flips the phase of the states in the good subspace, whereas 
 
 
 
  flips the phase of the initial state 
 
 
 
 .
The action of this operator on 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  and


 
 . Thus in the 
 
 
 
  subspace 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a rotation by the angle 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .
Applying 
 
 

 
  times on the state 
 
 
 
  gives


 
 , rotating the state between the good and bad subspaces. After 
 
 
 
  iterations the probability of finding the system in a good state is 
 
 
 
 .
 The probability is maximized if we choose


 
 . Up until this point each iteration increases the amplitude of the good states, hence the name of the technique.
Applications
Assume we have an unsorted database with N elements, and an oracle function 
 
 
 
  which can recognize the good entries we are searching for, and 
 
 
 
  for simplicity.
If there are G such entries in the database in total, then we can find them by initializing the quantum computer into a uniform superposition


 
  of all the database elements, and running the above algorithm. In this case the overlap of the initial state with the good subspace is equal to the square root of the frequency of the good entries in the database, 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , we can approximate the number of required iterations as


 
  Measuring the state will now give one of the good entries with a high probability. Since each application of 
 
 
 
  requires a single oracle query (assuming that the oracle is implemented as a quantum gate), we can find a good entry with just 
 
 
 
  oracle queries, thus obtaining a quadratic speedup over the best possible classical algorithm.
If we set G to one, the above scenario essentially reduces to the original Grover search.
References
"
Category:Quantum algorithms Category:Search algorithms










