


Leon Simon




Leon Simon

Leon Melvyn Simon is a Bôcher Prize-winning1 mathematician. He is currently Professor in the Mathematics Department at Stanford University.
Biography
Academic career
Leon Simon, born 6 July 1945, received his BSc from the University of Adelaide in 1967, and his PhD in 1971 from the same institution, under the direction of James H. Michael. His doctoral thesis was titled Interior Gradient Bounds for Non-Uniformly Elliptic Equations. He was employed from 1968 to 1971 as a Tutor in Mathematics by the University.
Simon has since held a variety of academic positions. He worked first at Flinders University as a lecturer, then at Australian National University as a professor, at the University of Melbourne, the University of Minnesota, at ETH Zurich, and at Stanford. He first came to Stanford in 1973 as Visiting Assistant Professor and was awarded a full professorship in 1986.
Honours
In 1983 Simon was awarded the Australian Mathematical Society Medal. In the same year he was elected as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science. In 1994, he was awarded the Bôcher Memorial Prize.234 The Bôcher Prize is awarded every five years to a groundbreaking author in analysis. In the same year he was also elected a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.56 In May 2003 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society.7 In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.8
Work
Research activity
He has an Erdős number of 3. He has authored several mathematics textbooks, including the Lectures on Geometric Measure Theory9 and An Introduction to Multivariable Mathematics. He published the monograph Theorems on regularity and singularity of energy minimising maps in 1996, based in part on lectures he gave at Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH) in Zürich.
Teaching activity
Simon has more than 100 'mathematical descendants', according to the Mathematics Genealogy Project.10 Among his doctoral students there is Richard Schoen, a former winner of the Bôcher Memorial Prize.
See also

Geometric measure theory
Harmonic map
Minimal surface

References
Bibliography


.


.

References


.

External links



"
Category:1945 births Category:Living people Category:Australian mathematicians Category:Fellows of the Royal Society Category:Stanford University Department of Mathematics faculty Category:Fellows of the Australian Academy of Science Category:Fellows of the American Mathematical Society Category:Mathematical analysts



See .↩

See his brief biography .↩
See his extended biography at the MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive.↩


See the list of  available at the Royal Society web site.↩
List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society, retrieved 20 July 2013.↩
This is basically a textbook describing many results in geometric measure theory and the mathematical tools used in this field: see .↩
See the entry "Leon M. Simon" at the Mathematics Genealogy Project.↩




