


Pseudo-abelian category




Pseudo-abelian category

In mathematics, specifically in category theory, a pseudo-abelian category is a category that is preadditive and is such that every idempotent has a kernel .1 Recall that an idempotent morphism 
 
 
 
  is an endomorphism of an object with the property that 
 
 
 
 . Elementary considerations show that every idempotent then has a cokernel.2 The pseudo-abelian condition is stronger than preadditivity, but it is weaker than the requirement that every morphism have a kernel and cokernel, as is true for abelian categories.
Synonyms in the literature for pseudo-abelian include pseudoabelian and Karoubian.
Examples
Any abelian category, in particular the category Ab of abelian groups, is pseudo-abelian. Indeed, in an abelian category, every morphism has a kernel.
The category of associative rngs (not rings!) together with multiplicative morphisms is pseudo-abelian.
A more complicated example is the category of Chow motives. The construction of Chow motives uses the pseudo-abelian completion described below.
Pseudo-abelian completion
The Karoubi envelope construction associates to an arbitrary category 
 
 
 
 
  a category 
 
 
 
  together with a functor


 
  such that the image 
 
 
 
  of every idempotent 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  splits in 
 
 
 
 . When applied to a preadditive category

 
 , the Karoubi envelope construction yields a pseudo-abelian category 
 
 
 
  called the pseudo-abelian completion of 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, the functor


 
  is in fact an additive morphism.
To be precise, given a preadditive category 
 
 
 
  we construct a pseudo-abelian category 
 
 
 
  in the following way. The objects of 
 
 
 
  are pairs 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is an object of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is an idempotent of 
 
 
 
 . The morphisms


 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  are those morphisms


 
  such that 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . The functor


 
  is given by taking 
 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Citations


References



"
Category:Category theory



Artin, 1972, p. 413.
Lars Brünjes, Forms of Fermat equations and their zeta functions, Appendix A




