


Shear velocity




Shear velocity

Shear velocity, also called friction velocity, is a form by which a shear stress may be re-written in units of velocity. It is useful as a method in fluid mechanics to compare true velocities, such as the velocity of a flow in a stream, to a velocity that relates shear between layers of flow.
Shear velocity is used to describe shear-related motion in moving fluids. It is used to describe:

Diffusion and dispersion of particles, tracers, and contaminants in fluid flows
The velocity profile near the boundary of a flow (see Law of the wall)
Transport of sediment in a channel

Shear velocity also helps in thinking about the rate of shear and dispersion in a flow. Shear velocity scales well to rates of dispersion and bedload sediment transport. A general rule is that the shear velocity is about 1/10 of the mean flow velocity.



Where 
 
 
 
  is the shear stress in an arbitrary layer of fluid and 
 
 
 
  is the density of the fluid.
Typically, for sediment transport applications, the shear velocity is evaluated at the lower boundary of an open channel:



Where 
 
 
 
  is the shear stress given at the boundary.
Shear velocity can also be defined in terms of the local velocity and shear stress fields (as opposed to whole-channel values, as given above).
Friction Velocity in Turbulence
The friction velocity is often used as a scaling parameter for the fluctuating component of velocity in turbulent flows.1 One method of obtaining the shear velocity is through non-dimensionalization of the turbulent equations of motion. For example, in a fully developed turbulent channel flow or turbulent boundary layer, the stream-wise momentum equation in the very near wall region reduces to:


 
 .
By integrating in the y-direction once, then non-dimensionalizing with an unknown velocity scale 
 
 
 
  and viscous length scale 
 
 
 
 , the equation reduces down to:



or


 
 .
Since the right hand side is in non-dimensional variables, they must be of order 1. This results in the left hand side also being of order one, which in turn give us a velocity scale for the turbulent fluctuations (as seen above):


 
 .
Here, 
 
 
 
  refers to the local shear stress at the wall.
References
Whipple, K. X (2004), III: Flow Around Bends: Meander Evolution, 12.163 Course Notes, MIT. http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/earth-atmospheric-and-planetary-sciences/12-163-surface-processes-and-landscape-evolution-fall-2004/lecture-notes/3_flow_around_bends.pdf
"
Category:Fluid mechanics Category:Geophysics Category:Geomorphology Category:Sedimentology



H. Schlichting, K. Gersten, "Boundary-Layer Theory" 8th edition Springer 1999 ISBN 978-81-8128-121-0.




