


Relation between Schrödinger's equation and the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics




Relation between Schrödinger's equation and the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics

This article relates the Schrödinger equation with the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics using a simple nonrelativistic one-dimensional single-particle Hamiltonian composed of kinetic and potential energy.
Background
Schrödinger's equation
Schrödinger's equation, in bra–ket notation, is



where 
 
 
 
  is the Hamiltonian operator. We have assumed for simplicity that there is only one spatial dimension.
The Hamiltonian operator can be written



where 
 
 
 
  is the potential energy, m is the mass and we have assumed for simplicity that there is only one spatial dimension 
 
 
 
 .
The formal solution of the equation is



where we have assumed the initial state is a free-particle spatial state 
 
 
 
 .
The transition probability amplitude for a transition from an initial state 
 
 
 
  to a final free-particle spatial state 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  is



Path integral formulation
The path integral formulation states that the transition amplitude is simply the integral of the quantity



over all possible paths from the initial state to the final state. Here S is the classical action.
The reformulation of this transition amplitude, originally due to Dirac1 and conceptualized by Feynman,2 forms the basis of the path integral formulation.3
From Schrödinger's equation to the path integral formulation
Note: the following derivation is heuristic (it is valid in cases in which the potential, 
 
 
 
 , commutes with the momentum, 
 
 
 
 ). Following Feynman, this derivation can be made rigorous by writing the momentum, 
 
 
 
 , as the product of mass, 
 
 
 
 , and a difference in position at two points,  and , separated by a time difference, 
 
 
 
 , thus quantizing distance.



Note 2: There are two errata on page 11 in Zee, both of which are corrected here.
We can divide the time interval 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  segments of length



The transition amplitude can then be written



We can insert the identity matrix



 
  times between the exponentials to yield



Each individual transition probability can be written



We can insert the identity



into the amplitude to yield



where we have used the fact that the free particle wave function is


 
 .
The integral over p can be performed (see Common integrals in quantum field theory) to obtain



The transition amplitude for the entire time period is



If we take the limit of large 
 
 
 
  the transition amplitude reduces to



where S is the classical action given by



and L is the classical Lagrangian given by



Any possible path of the particle, going from the initial state to the final state, is approximated as a broken line and included in the measure of the integral



This expression actually defines the manner in which the path integrals are to be taken. The coefficient in front is needed to ensure that the expression has the correct dimensions, but it has no actual relevance in any physical application.
This recovers the path integral formulation from Schrödinger's equation.
References
"
Category:Concepts in physics Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum field theory Category:Schrödinger equation



↩
↩
↩




