


Wiener sausage




Wiener sausage


For the food sometimes called a Wiener (sausage), see hot dog or Vienna sausage.


  In the mathematical field of probability, the Wiener sausage is a neighborhood of the trace of a Brownian motion up to a time t, given by taking all points within a fixed distance of Brownian motion. It can be visualized as a sausage of fixed radius whose centerline is Brownian motion. The Wiener sausage was named after Norbert Wiener by  because of its relation to the Wiener process; the name is also a pun on Vienna sausage, as "Wiener" means "Viennese" in German.
The Wiener sausage is one of the simplest non-Markovian functionals of Brownian motion. Its applications include stochastic phenomena including heat conduction. It was first described by , and it was used by  to explain results of a Bose–Einstein condensate, with proofs published by .
Definitions
The Wiener sausage Wδ(t) of radius δ and length t is the set-valued random variable on Brownian paths b (in some Euclidean space) defined by


 
  is the set of points within a distance δ of some point b(x) of the path b with 0≤x≤t.
The volume of the Wiener sausage
There has been a lot of work on the behavior of the volume (Lebesgue measure) |Wδ(t)| of the Wiener sausage as it becomes thin (δ→0); by rescaling, this is essentially equivalent to studying the volume as the sausage becomes long (t→∞).
showed that in 3 dimensions the expected value of the volume of the sausage is


 
  In dimension d at least 3 the volume of the Wiener sausage is asymptotic to


 
  as t tends to infinity. In dimensions 1 and 2 this formula gets replaced by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively. , a student of Spitzer, proved similar results for generalizations of Wiener sausages with cross sections given by more general compact sets than balls.
References






Especially chapter 22.


(Reprint of 1964 edition)

An advanced monograph covering the Wiener sausage.


"
Category:Mathematical physics Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Stochastic processes


