


Grunwald–Wang theorem




Grunwald–Wang theorem

In algebraic number theory, the Grunwald–Wang theorem is a local-global principle stating that—except in some precisely defined cases—an element x in a number field K is an nth power in K if it is an nth power in the completion

 
  for all but finitely many primes 
 
 
 
  of K. For example, a rational number is a square of a rational number if it is a square of a p-adic number for almost all primes p. The Grunwald–Wang theorem is an example of a local-global principle.
It was introduced by , but there was a mistake in this original version that was found and corrected by . The theorem considered by Grunwald and Wang was more general than the one stated above as they discussed the existence of cyclic extensions with certain local properties, and the statement about nth powers is a consequence of this.
History
, a student of Hasse, gave an incorrect proof of the erroneous statement that an element in a number field is an nth power if it is an nth power locally almost everywhere.  gave another incorrect proof of this incorrect statement. However  discovered the following counter-example: 16 is a p-adic 8th power for all odd primes p, but is not a rational or 2-adic 8th power. In his doctoral thesis  written under Artin, Wang gave and proved the correct formulation of Grunwald's assertion, by describing the rare cases when it fails. This result is what is now known as the Grunwald–Wang theorem. The history of Wang's counterexample is discussed in 
Wang's counter-example
Grunwald's original claim that an element that is an nth power almost everywhere locally is an nth power globally can fail in two distinct ways: the element can be an nth power almost everywhere locally but not everywhere locally, or it can be an nth power everywhere locally but not globally.
An element that is an nth power almost everywhere locally but not everywhere locally
The element 16 in the rationals is an 8th power at all places except 2, but is not an 8th power in the 2-adic numbers.
It is clear that 16 is not a 2-adic 8th power, and hence not a rational 8th power, since the 2-adic valuation of 16 is 4 which is not divisible by 8.
Generally, 16 is an 8th power in a field K if and only if the polynomial 
 
 
 
  has a root in K. Write



Thus, 16 is an 8th power in K if and only if 2, −2 or −1 is a square in K. Let p be any odd prime. It follows from the multiplicativity of the Legendre symbol that 2, −2 or −1 is a square modulo p. Hence, by Hensel's lemma, 2, −2 or −1 is a square in 
 
 
 
 .
An element that is an nth power everywhere locally but not globally
16 is not an 8th power in 
 
 
 
  although it is an 8th power locally everywhere (i.e. in 
 
 
 
  for all p). This follows from the above and the equality 
 
 
 
 .
A consequence of Wang's counterexample
Wang's counterexample has the following interesting consequence showing that one cannot always find a cyclic Galois extension of a given degree of a number field in which finitely many given prime places split in a specified way:
There exists no cyclic degree 8 extension 
 
 
 
  in which the prime 2 is totally inert (i.e., such that 
 
 
 
  is unramified of degree 8).
Special fields
For any 
 
 
 
  let



Note that the 
 
 
 
 th cyclotomic field is



A field is called s-special if it contains 
 
 
 
 , but neither 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  nor 
 
 
 
 .
Statement of the theorem
Consider a number field K and a natural number n. Let S be a finite (possibly empty) set of primes of K and put



The Grunwald–Wang theorem says that



unless we are in the special case which occurs when the following two conditions both hold:



 
  is s-special with an 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  divides n.


 
  contains the special set

 
  consisting of those (necessarily 2-adic) primes 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is s-special.

In the special case the failure of the Hasse principle is finite of order 2: the kernel of



is Z/2Z, generated by the element η.
Explanation of Wang's counter-example
The field of rational numbers 
 
 
 
  is 2-special since it contains 
 
 
 
 , but neither 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  nor 
 
 
 
 . The special set is 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the special case in the Grunwald–Wang theorem occurs when n is divisible by 8, and S contains 2. This explains Wang's counter-example and shows that it is minimal. It is also seen that an element in 
 
 
 
  is an nth power if it is a p-adic nth power for all p.
The field 
 
 
 
  is 2-special as well, but with 
 
 
 
 . This explains the other counter-example above.1
See also

The Hasse norm theorem states that for cyclic extensions an element is a norm if it is a norm everywhere locally.

Notes
References








"
Category:Class field theory Category:Theorems in algebraic number theory



See Chapter X of Artin–Tate.




