


Liouville's formula




Liouville's formula

In mathematics, Liouville's formula, also known as the Abel-Jacobi-Liouville Identity, is an equation that expresses the determinant of a square-matrix solution of a first-order system of homogeneous linear differential equations in terms of the sum of the diagonal coefficients of the system. The formula is named after the French mathematician Joseph Liouville. Jacobi's formula provides another representation of the same mathematical relationship.
Liouville's formula is a generalization of Abel's identity and can be used to prove it. Since Liouville's formula relates the different linearly independent solutions of the system of differential equations, it can help to find one solution from the other(s), see the example application below.
Statement of Liouville's formula
Consider the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional first-order homogeneous linear differential equation



on an interval

 
  of the real line, where 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  denotes a square matrix of dimension 
 
 
 
  with real or complex entries. Let 
 
 
 
  denote a matrix-valued solution on 
 
 
 
 , meaning that each 
 
 
 
  is a square matrix of dimension 
 
 
 
  with real or complex entries and the derivative satisfies



Let



denote the trace of , the sum of its diagonal entries. If the trace of 
 
 
 
  is a continuous function, then the determinant of 
 
 
 
  satisfies



for all 
 
 
 
  and  in 
 
 
 
 .
Example application
This example illustrates how Liouville's formula can help to find the general solution of a first-order system of homogeneous linear differential equations. Consider



on the open interval 
 
 

 
 . Assume that the easy solution



is already found. Let



denote another solution, then



is a square-matrix-valued solution of the above differential equation. Since the trace of 
 
 
 
  is zero for all 
 
 
 
 , Liouville's formula implies that the determinant

is actually a constant independent of 
 
 
 
 . Writing down the first component of the differential equation for 
 
 
 
 , we obtain using () that



Therefore, by integration, we see that



involving the natural logarithm and the constant of integration . Solving equation () for  and substituting for  gives



which is the general solution for 
 
 
 
 . With the special choice  0}} and  1}} we recover the easy solution we started with, the choice  1}} and  0}} yields a linearly independent solution. Therefore,



is a so-called fundamental solution of the system.
Proof of Liouville's formula
We omit the argument 
 
 
 
  for brevity. By the Leibniz formula for determinants, the derivative of the determinant of  can be calculated by differentiating one row at a time and taking the sum, i.e.
Since the matrix-valued solution 
 
 
 
  satisfies the equation 
 
 
 
 , we have for every entry of the matrix 
 
 




or for the entire row



When we subtract from the 
 
 
 th row the linear combination



of all the other rows, then the value of the determinant remains unchanged, hence



for every } by the linearity of the determinant with respect to every row. Hence
by () and the definition of the trace. It remains to show that this representation of the derivative implies Liouville's formula.
Fix . Since the trace of 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be continuous function on 
 
 
 
 , it is bounded on every closed and bounded subinterval of 
 
 
 
  and therefore integrable, hence



is a well defined function. Differentiating both sides, using the product rule, the chain rule, the derivative of the exponential function and the fundamental theorem of calculus, we obtain



due to the derivative in (). Therefore, 
 
 
 
  has to be constant on 
 
 
 
 , because otherwise we would obtain a contradiction to the mean value theorem (applied separately to the real and imaginary part in the complex-valued case). Since  det Φ(x0)}}, Liouville's formula follows by solving the definition of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
References




"
Category:Mathematical identities Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Articles containing proofs


