


Vickrey–Clarke–Groves auction




Vickrey–Clarke–Groves auction

In auction theory, a Vickrey–Clarke–Groves (VCG) auction is a type of sealed-bid auction of multiple items. Bidders submit bids that report their valuations for the items, without knowing the bids of the other people in the auction. The auction system assigns the items in a socially optimal manner: it charges each individual the harm they cause to other bidders.1 It also gives bidders an incentive to bid their true valuations, by ensuring that the optimal strategy for each bidder is to bid their true valuations of the items. It is a generalization of a Vickrey auction for multiple items.
The auction is named after William Vickrey,2 Edward H. Clarke,3 and Theodore Groves4 for their papers that successively generalized the idea.
Formal description

Notation

For any set of auctioned items 
 
 
 
  and any set of bidders 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the social value of the VCG auction for a given bid-combination. For a bidder 
 
 
 
 
  and item 
 
 
 
 , let the bidder's bid for the item be 
 
 
 
 .

Assignment

A bidder 
 
 
 
  whose bid for an item 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
 
 , is an "overbid" wins the item, but pays 
 
 
 
 , which is the social cost of his winning that is incurred by the rest of the agents.

Explanation

Indeed, the set of bidders other than 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . When item 
 
 
 
  is available, they could attain welfare 
 
 
 
 
  The winning of the item by 
 
 
 
  reduces the set of available items to 
 
 
 
 , however, so that the attainable welfare is now 
 
 
 
 . The difference between the two levels of welfare is therefore the loss in attainable welfare suffered by the rest bidders, as predicted, given the winner 
 
 
 
  got the item 
 
 
 
 
 . This quantity depends on the offers of the rest agents and is unknown to agent 
 
 
 
 .

Winner's utility

The winning bidder whose bid is his true value 
 
 
 
  for the item 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  derives maximum utility 
 
 

Examples
Example #1
See the example with apples in the Generalization section of Vickrey Auction.
Example #2
Assume that there are two bidders, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , two items, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and each bidder is allowed to obtain one item. We let 
 
 
 
 
  be bidder 
 
 
 
 's valuation for item 
 
 
 
 . Assume 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . We see that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  would prefer to receive item 
 
 
 
 ; however, the socially optimal assignment gives item 
 
 
 
 
  to bidder 
 
 
 
  (so his achieved value is 
 
 
 
 ) and item 
 
 
 
  to bidder 
 
 
 
  (so his achieved value is 
 
 
 
 
 ). Hence, the total achieved value is 
 
 
 
 , which is optimal.
If person 
 
 
 
  were not in the auction, person 
 
 
 
  would still be assigned to 
 
 
 
 , and hence person 
 
 
 
 
  can gain nothing. The current outcome is 
 
 
 
  hence 
 
 
 
  is charged 
 
 
 
 .
If person 
 
 
 
  were not in the auction, 
 
 
 
 
  would be assigned to 
 
 
 
 , and would have valuation 
 
 
 
 . The current outcome is 3 hence 
 
 
 
  is charged 
 
 
 
 .
Example #3
Here we will look at a multiple item auction. Consider the situation when there are 
 
 
 
 
  bidders, 
 
 
 
  houses, and values 
 
 
 
 , representing the value player 
 
 
 
  has for house 
 
 
 
 . Possible outcomes in this auction are characterized by bipartite matchings, pairing houses with people. If we know the values, then maximizing social welfare reduces to computing a maximum weight bipartite matching.
If we do not know the values, then we instead solicit bids 
 
 
 
 
 , asking each player 
 
 
 
  how much he would wish to bid for house 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
  if bidder 
 
 
 
  receives house 
 
 
 
 
  in the matching 
 
 
 
 . Now compute 
 
 
 
 , a maximum weight bipartite matching with respect to the bids, and compute


 
 .
The first term is another max weight bipartite matching, and the second term can be computed easily from 
 
 
 
 .
Optimality of Truthful Bidding
The following is a proof that bidding one's true valuations for the auctioned items is optimal.5
For each bidder 
 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be his true valuation of an item 
 
 
 
 , and suppose (without loss of generality) that 
 
 
 
  wins 
 
 
 
  upon submitting his true valuations. Then the net utility 
 
 
 
 
  attained by 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 

 
 . As 
 
 
 
  is independent of 
 
 
 
 
 , the maximization of net utility is pursued by the mechanism along with the maximization of corporate gross utility 
 
 
 
  for the declared bid 
 
 
 
 .
Let us form the difference 
 
 
 
  between net utility 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  under truthful bidding 
 
 
 
  gotten item 
 
 
 
 , and net utility 
 
 
 
  of bidder 
 
 
 
  under non-truthful bidding 
 
 
 
 
  for item 
 
 
 
  gotten item 
 
 
 
  on utility 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the maximum corporate gross utility obtained with the non-truthful bidding. But the allocation assigning 
 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is different from the allocation of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  which gets maximum true gross corporate utility. Hence 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  q.e.d.
More general setting
We can consider a more general setting6 of the VCG mechanism. Consider a set 
 
 
 
  of possible outcomes and 
 
 
 
  bidders which have different valuations for each outcome. This can be expressed as, function



for each bidder 
 
 
 
  which expresses the value it has for each alternative. In this auction, each bidder will submit his valuation and the VCG mechanism will choose the alternative 
 
 
 
 
  that maximizes 
 
 
 
  and charge prices 
 
 
 
  given by:



where 
 
 
 
 , that is, 
 
 
 
 
  is a function that only depends on the valuation of the other players. This alone gives a truthful mechanism, that is, a mechanism where bidding the true valuation is a dominant strategy.
We could take, for example, 
 
 
 
 , but we would have all prices negative, which might not be desirable. We would rather prefer that players give money to the mechanism than the other way around. The function:



is called Clark pivot rule.
On the other hand, if we do not know the values 
 
 
 
 , we can solicit bids 
 
 
 
 . The mechanism then chooses 
 
 
 
 
  maximizing the revenue 
 
 
 
 , treating the bids like the values. We then set



Intuitively, the mechanism charges player 
 
 
 
  his externality, or the decrease in optimal social welfare when he is included in the auction.
The Clark pivot rule has some very good properties as:

it is individually rational, i.e., 
 
 
 
 . It means that all the players are getting positive utility by participating in the auction. No one is forced to bid.


it has no positive transfers, i.e., 
 
 
 
 
 . The mechanism does not need to pay anything to the bidders.

See also

Preference revelation

References
"
Category:Game theory Category:Mechanism design Category:Auctioneering



↩
↩
↩
↩
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~arielpro/15896/docs/notes14.pdf↩
↩




