


Oscar Lanford




Oscar Lanford

 Oscar Eramus Lanford III (January 6, 1940 – November 16, 2013) was an American mathematician working on mathematical physics and dynamical systems theory.1
Professional career
Born in New York, Lanford was awarded his undergraduate degree from Wesleyan University and the Ph.D. from Princeton University in 1966 under the supervision of Arthur Wightman.2 He has served as a professor of mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, and a professor of physics at the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques (IHES) in Bures-sur-Yvette, France. , he has been with the department of mathematics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zürich (ETH Zürich).
Proof of the rigidity conjectures
Lanford gave the first proof that the Feigenbaum-Cvitanovic functional equation


 
  has an even analytic solution g and that this fixed point g of the Feigenbaum renormalisation operator T is hyperbolic with a one-dimensional unstable manifold. This provided the first mathematical proof of the rigidity conjectures of Feigenbaum. The proof was computer assisted. The hyperbolicity of the fixed point is essential to explain the Feigenbaum universality observed experimentally by Mitchell Feigenbaum and Coullet-Tresser. Feigenbaum has studied the logistic family and looked at the sequence of Period doubling bifurcations. Amazingly the asymptotic behavior near the accumulation point appeared universal in the sense that the same numerical values would appear. The logistic family

 
  of maps on the interval [0,1] for example would lead to the same asymptotic law of the ratio of the differences 
 
 
 
  between the bifurcation values a(n) than 
 
 
 
 . The result is that 
 
 
 
  converges to the Feigenbaum constants

 
  which is a "universal number" independent of the map f. The bifurcation diagram has become an icon of chaos theory.
Campanino and Epstein also gave a proof of the fixed point without computer assistance but did not establish its hyperbolicity. They cite in their paper Lanfords computer assisted proof. There are also lecture notes of Lanford from 1979 in Zurich and announcements in 1980. The hyperbolicity is essential to verify the picture discovered numerically by Feigenbaum and independently by Coullet and Tresser. Lanford later gave a shorter proof using the Leray-Schauder fixed point theorem but establishing only the fixed point without the hyperbolicity. Lyubich published in 1999 the first not computer assisted proof which also establishes hyperbolicity. Work of Sullivan later showed that the fixed point is unique in the class of real valued quadratic like germs.
Awards and honors
Lanford was the recipient of the 1986 United States National Academy of Sciences award in Applied Mathematics and Numerical Analysis and holds an honorary doctorate from Wesleyan University.
In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.3
Selected publications




See also

Dobrushin-Lanford-Ruelle equations

References









[http://www.verw.ethz.ch/cgi-win/Who.exe?ID=617〈=engl ETH Who's who] accessed on April 29, 2007 through 

External links

Home page of Oscar E. Lanford III

"
Category:Wesleyan University alumni Category:Princeton University alumni Category:University of California, Berkeley faculty Category:20th-century mathematicians Category:2013 deaths Category:Fellows of the American Mathematical Society Category:1940 births



↩
↩
List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society, retrieved 2013-01-27.↩




