


Discrete Fourier transform (general)




Discrete Fourier transform (general)

This article is about the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) over any ring, commonly called a number-theoretic transform (NTT) in the case of finite fields. For specific information on the discrete Fourier transform over the complex numbers, see discrete Fourier transform.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be any ring, let 
 
 
 
  be an integer, and let 
 
 
 
  be a principal nth root of unity, defined by:1






 
  for 
 
 


The discrete Fourier transform maps an n-tuple

 
  of elements of 
 
 
 
  to another n-tuple 
 
 
 
 
  of elements of 
 
 
 
  according to the following formula:



By convention, the tuple 
 
 
 
  is said to be in the time domain and the index 
 
 
 
  is called time. The tuple 
 
 
 
 
  is said to be in the frequency domain and the index 
 
 
 
  is called frequency. The tuple 
 
 
 
  is also called the spectrum of 
 
 
 
 . This terminology derives from the applications of Fourier transforms in signal processing.
If 
 
 
 
  is an integral domain (which includes fields), it is sufficient to choose 
 
 
 
 
  as a primitive nth root of unity, which replaces the condition (1) by:2


 
  for 
 
 

Proof: take 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , giving:


 
  where the sum matches (1). Since 
 
 
 
  is a primitive root of unity, 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
  is an integral domain, the sum must be zero. ∎
Another simple condition applies in the case where n is a power of two: (1) may be replaced by 
 
 
 
 .3
Inverse
The inverse of the discrete Fourier transform is given as:



where 
 
 
 
  is the multiplicative inverse of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  (if this inverse does not exist, the DFT cannot be inverted).
Proof: Substituting (2) into the right-hand-side of (3), we get



This is exactly equal to 
 
 
 
 , because 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 
  (by (1) with 
 
 
 
 ), and 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 . ∎
Matrix formulation
Since the discrete Fourier transform is a linear operator, it can be described by matrix multiplication. In matrix notation, the discrete Fourier transform is expressed as follows:


 
  The matrix for this transformation is called the DFT matrix.
Similarly, the matrix notation for the inverse Fourier transform is



Polynomial formulation4
Sometimes it is convenient to identify an 
 
 
 
 -tuple 
 
 
 
  with a formal polynomial



By writing out the summation in the definition of the discrete Fourier transform (2), we obtain:



This means that 
 
 
 
  is just the value of the polynomial 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,



The Fourier transform can therefore be seen to relate the coefficients and the values of a polynomial: the coefficients are in the time-domain, and the values are in the frequency domain. Here, of course, it is important that the polynomial is evaluated at the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity, which are exactly the powers of 
 
 
 
 .
Similarly, the definition of the inverse Fourier transform (3) can be written:



With



this means that



We can summarize this as follows: if the values of 
 
 
 
  are the coefficients of 
 
 
 
 , then the values of 
 
 
 
  are the coefficients of 
 
 
 
 , up to a scalar factor and reordering.
Special cases
Complex numbers
If 
 
 
 
  is the field of complex numbers, then the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity can be visualized as points on the unit circle of the complex plane. In this case, one usually takes



which yields the usual formula for the complex discrete Fourier transform:



Over the complex numbers, it is often customary to normalize the formulas for the DFT and inverse DFT by using the scalar factor 
 
 
 
  in both formulas, rather than 
 
 
 
  in the formula for the DFT and 
 
 
 
  in the formula for the inverse DFT. With this normalization, the DFT matrix is then unitary. Note that 
 
 
 
  does not make sense in an arbitrary field.
Finite fields
If 
 
 
 
  is a finite field, where 
 
 
 
  is a prime power, then the existence of a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root automatically implies that 
 
 
divides

 
  (because the multiplicative order of each element must divide the size of the multiplicative group of 
 
 
 
 , which is 
 
 
 
 ). This in particular ensures that 
 
 
 
  is invertible, so that the notation 
 
 
 
  in (3) makes sense.
An application of the discrete Fourier transform over 
 
 
 
  is the reduction of Reed–Solomon codes to BCH codes in coding theory. Such transform can be carried out efficiently with proper fast algorithms, for example, cyclotomic fast Fourier transform.
Number-theoretic transform
The number-theoretic transform (NTT) is obtained by specializing the discrete Fourier transform to 
 
 
 
 , the integers modulo a prime 
 
 
. This is a finite field, and primitive 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity exist whenever 
 
 
 
  divides 
 
 
 
 , so we have 
 
 
 
  for a positive integer 
 
 
 
 . Specifically, let 
 
 
 
  be a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity, then an 
 
 
 
 th root of unity 
 
 
 
  can be found by letting 
 
 
 
 .
e.g
for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 

 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 

when 
 
 




The number theoretic transform may be meaningful in the ring

 
 , even when the modulus 
 
 
 
  is not prime, provided a principal root of order n exists. Special cases of the number theoretic transform such as the Fermat Number Transform (m = 2k+1), used by the Schönhage–Strassen algorithm, or Mersenne Number Transform (m = 2k − 1) use a composite modulus.
Discrete weighted transform
The discrete weighted transform (DWT) is a variation on the discrete Fourier transform over arbitrary rings involving weighting the input before transforming it by multiplying elementwise by a weight vector, then weighting the result by another vector.5 The Irrational base discrete weighted transform is a special case of this.
Properties
Most of the important attributes of the complex DFT, including the inverse transform, the convolution theorem, and most fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithms, depend only on the property that the kernel of the transform is a principal root of unity. These properties also hold, with identical proofs, over arbitrary rings. In the case of fields, this analogy can be formalized by the field with one element, considering any field with a primitive nth root of unity as an algebra over the extension field 
 
 

In particular, the applicability of 
 
 
fast Fourier transform algorithms to compute the NTT, combined with the convolution theorem, mean that the number-theoretic transform gives an efficient way to compute exact convolutions of integer sequences. While the complex DFT can perform the same task, it is susceptible to round-off error in finite-precision floating point arithmetic; the NTT has no round-off because it deals purely with fixed-size integers that can be exactly represented.
Fast algorithms
For the implementation of a "fast" algorithm (similar to how FFT computes the DFT), it is often desirable that the transform length is also highly composite, e.g., a power of two. However, there are specialized fast Fourier transform algorithms for finite fields, such as Wang and Zhu's algorithm,6 that are efficient regardless of whether the transform length factors.
See also

Discrete Fourier transform (complex)
Gauss sum
Convolution
Multiplication algorithm

References


External links

http://www.apfloat.org/ntt.html

"
Category:Fourier analysis



Martin Fürer, "Faster integer multiplication", STOC 2007 Proceedings, pp. 57–66. Section 2: The Discrete Fourier Transform.


R. Lidl and G. Pilz. Applied Abstract Algebra, 2nd edition. Wiley, 1999, pp. 217-219.

Yao Wang and Xuelong Zhu, "A fast algorithm for the Fourier transform over finite fields and its VLSI implementation", IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 6(3)572–577, 1988




