   One-class classification      One-class classification  In [[machine learning]], '''one-class classification''', also known as '''unary classification''', tries to ''identify'' objects of a specific class amongst all objects, by learning from a [[training set]] containing only the objects of that class. This is different from and more difficult than the traditional [[classification (mac hine learning)|classification]] problem, which tries to distinguish between two or more classes with the training set containing objects from all the classes. An example is the classification of the operational status of a nuclear plant as 'normal': 1 In this scenario, there are (fortunately) few or no examples of catastrophic system states, only the statistics of normal operation are known. The term One-class classification was coined by Moya & Hush (1996) 2 and many applications can be found in scientific literature, for example outlier detection , anomaly detection , novelty detection .  A similar problem is PU learning , in which a binary classifier is learned in a semi-supervised way from only positive and unlabeled samples. 3  PU learning  In PU learning, two sets of samples are assumed to be available for training: the positive set   P   P   P   and a mixed set    U   U   U   , which is assumed to contain both positive and negative samples, but without these being labeled as such. This contrasts with other forms of semisupervised learning, where it is assumed that a labeled set containing examples of both classes is available in addition to unlabeled samples. A variety of techniques exist to adapt supervised classifiers to the PU learning setting, including variants of the EM algorithm . PU learning has been successfully applied to text , 4 5 6 time series, 7 and bioinformatics tasks. 8  See also   Multiclass classification   References  "  Category:Statistical classification  Category:Classification algorithms     Tax, D. (2001) One-class classiﬁcation: Concept-learning in the absence of counter-examples. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Delft, The Netherlands. ↩  Moya, M. and Hush, D. (1996). "Network constraints and multi- objective optimization for one-class classification". Neural Networks , 9(3):463–474. ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     