


Brumer–Stark conjecture




Brumer–Stark conjecture

The Brumer–Stark conjecture is a conjecture in algebraic number theory giving a rough generalization of both the analytic class number formula for Dedekind zeta functions, and also of Stickelberger's theorem about the factorization of Gauss sums. It is named after Armand Brumer and Harold Stark.
It arises as a special case (abelian and first-order) of Stark's conjecture, when the place that splits completely in the extension is finite. There are very few cases where the conjecture is known to be valid. Its importance arises, for instance, from its connection with Hilbert's twelfth problem.
Statement of the conjecture
Let 
 
 
 
  be an abelian extension of global fields, and let 
 
 
 
  be a set of places of 
 
 
 
  containing the Archimedean places and the prime ideals that ramify in 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
 
 -imprimitive equivariant Artin L-function

 
  is obtained from the usual equivariant Artin L-function by removing the Euler factors corresponding to the primes in 
 
 
 
  from the Artin L-functions from which the equivariant function is built. It is a function on the complex numbers taking values in the complex group ring

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Galois group of 
 
 
 
 . It is analytic on the entire plane, excepting a lone simple pole at 
 
 
 
 .
Let  be the group of roots of unity in 
 
 
 
 . The group 
 
 
 
  acts on ; let 
 
 
 
  be the annihilator of  as a 
 
 
 
 -module. An important theorem, first proved by C. L. Siegel and later independently by Takuro Shintani, states that 
 
 
 
  is actually in 
 
 
 
 . A deeper theorem, proved independently by Pierre Deligne and Ken Ribet, Daniel Barsky, and Pierrette Cassou-Noguès, states that 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 . In particular, 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the cardinality of .
The ideal class group of 
 
 
 
  is a 

 
 -module. From the above discussion, we can let 
 
 
 
  act on it. The Brumer–Stark conjecture says the following:1
Brumer–Stark Conjecture. For each nonzero fractional ideal

 
  of 
 
 
 
 , there is an "anti-unit" 
 
 
 
  such that




The extension 
 
 
 
  is abelian.

The first part of this conjecture is due to Armand Brumer, and Harold Stark originally suggested that the second condition might hold. The conjecture was first stated in published form by John Tate.2
The term "anti-unit" refers to the condition that ε{{!}}ν}} is required to be 1 for each Archimedean place 
 
 
 
 .3
Progress
The Brumer Stark conjecture is known to be true for extensions 
 
 
 
  where



 
  is cyclotomic: this follows from Stickelberger's theorem4


 
  is abelian over 
 
 
5


 
  is a quadratic extension6


 
  is a biquadratic extension7

Function field analogue
The analogous statement in the function field case is known to be true, having been proved by John Tate and Pierre Deligne, with a different proof by David Hayes.8
References
"
Category:Conjectures Category:Field theory Category:Algebraic number theory Category:Zeta and L-functions




Tate, John, [http://www.digizeitschriften.de/dms/img/?PPN=PPN320141322_0010&DMDID;;=dmdlog26 Brumer–Stark–Stickelberger], Séminaire de Théorie des Nombres, Univ. Bordeaux I Talence, (1980-81), exposé no. 24.










