


Kalman decomposition




Kalman decomposition

In control theory, a Kalman decomposition provides a mathematical means to convert a representation of any linear time-invariant control system to a form in which the system can be decomposed into a standard form which makes clear the observable and controllable components of the system. This decomposition results in the system being presented with a more illuminating structure, making it easier to draw conclusions on the system's reachable and observable subspaces.
Notation
The derivation is identical for both discrete-time as well as continuous time LTI systems. The description of a continuous time linear system is






where


 
  is the "state vector",


 
  is the "output vector",


 
  is the "input (or control) vector",


 
  is the "state matrix",


 
  is the "input matrix",


 
  is the "output matrix",


 
  is the "feedthrough (or feedforward) matrix".
Similarly, a discrete-time linear control system can be described as






with similar meanings for the variables. Thus, the system can be described using the tuple consisting of four matrices 
 
 
 
 . Let the order of the system be 
 
 
 
 .
Then, the Kalman decomposition is defined as a transformation of the tuple 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  as follows:












 
  is an 
 
 
 
  invertible matrix defined as



where



 
  is a matrix whose columns span the subspace of states which are both reachable and unobservable.


 
  is chosen so that the columns of 
 
 
 
  are a basis for the reachable subspace.


 
  is chosen so that the columns of 
 
 
 
  are a basis for the unobservable subspace.


 
  is chosen so that 
 
 
 
  is invertible.

By construction, the matrix 
 
 
 
  is invertible. It can be observed that some of these matrices may have dimension zero. For example, if the system is both observable and controllable, then 
 
 
 
 , making the other matrices zero dimension.
Standard Form
By using results from controllability and observability, it can be shown that the transformed system 
 
 
 
  has matrices in the following form:












This leads to the conclusion that

The subsystem 
 
 
 
  is both reachable and observable.
The subsystem 
 
 
 
  is reachable.
The subsystem 
 
 
 
  is observable.

See also

Observability
Controllability

External links

Lectures on Dynamic Systems and Control, Lecture 25 - Mohammed Dahleh, Munther Dahleh, George Verghese — MIT OpenCourseWare

"
Category:Control theory


