


Common integrals in quantum field theory




Common integrals in quantum field theory

There are common integrals in quantum field theory that appear repeatedly.1 These integrals are all variations and generalizations of gaussian integrals to the complex plane and to multiple dimensions. Other integrals can be approximated by versions of the gaussian integral. Fourier integrals are also considered.
Variations on a simple gaussian integral
Gaussian integral
The first integral, with broad application outside of quantum field theory, is the gaussian integral.



In physics the factor of 1/2 in the argument of the exponential is common.
Note:



Thus we obtain



Slight generalization of the gaussian integral



where we have scaled


 
 .
Integrals of exponents and even powers of x



and



In general



Note that the integrals of exponents and odd powers of x are 0, due to odd symmetry.
Integrals with a linear term in the argument of the exponent



This integral can be performed by completing the square:



Therefore:



Integrals with an imaginary linear term in the argument of the exponent
The integral



is proportional to the Fourier transform of the gaussian where 
 
 
 
  is the conjugate variable of 
 
 
 
 .
By again completing the square we see that the Fourier transform of a gaussian is also a gaussian, but in the conjugate variable. The larger 
 
 
 
  is, the narrower the gaussian in 
 
 
 
  and the wider the gaussian in 
 
 
 
 . This is a demonstration of the uncertainty principle.
Integrals with a complex argument of the exponent
The integral of interest is (for an example of an application see Relation between Schrödinger's equation and the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics)



We now assume that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  may be complex.
Completing the square



By analogy with the previous integrals



This result is valid as an integration in the complex plane as long as 
 
 
 
  has a positive imaginary part.
Gaussian integrals in higher dimensions
The one-dimensional integrals can be generalized to multiple dimensions.2



Here 
 
 
 
  is a real symmetric matrix.
This integral is performed by diagonalization of 
 
 
 
  with an orthogonal transformation



where 
 
 
 
  is a diagonal matrix and 
 
 
 
  is an orthogonal matrix. This decouples the variables and allows the integration to be performed as 
 
 
 
  one-dimensional integrations.
This is best illustrated with a two-dimensional example.
Example: Simple gaussian integration in two dimensions
The gaussian integral in two dimensions is



where 
 
 
 
  is a two-dimensional symmetric matrix with components specified as



and we have used the Einstein summation convention.
Diagonalize the matrix
The first step is to diagonalize the matrix.3 Note that



where, since 
 
 
 
  is a real symmetric matrix, we can choose 
 
 
 
  to be orthogonal, and hence also a unitary matrix. 
 
 
 
  can be obtained from the eigenvectors of 
 
 
 
 . We choose 
 
 
 
  such that:  is diagonal.
Eigenvalues of A
To find the eigenvectors of 
 
 
 
  one first finds the eigenvalues

 
  of 
 
 
 
  given by



The eigenvalues are solutions of the characteristic polynomial



which are



Eigenvectors of A
Substitution of the eigenvalues back into the eigenvector equation yields



From the characteristic equation we know



Also note



The eigenvectors can be written as:



for the two eigenvectors. Here 
 
 
 
  is a normalizing factor given by



It is easily verified that the two eigenvectors are orthogonal to each other.
Construction of the orthogonal matrix
The orthogonal matrix is constructed by assigning the normalized eigenvectors as columns in the orthogonal matrix



Note that 
 
 
 
 .
If we define



then the orthogonal matrix can be written



which is simply a rotation of the eigenvectors with the inverse:



Diagonal matrix
The diagonal matrix becomes



with eigenvectors



Numerical example



The eigenvalues are



The eigenvectors are



where



Then



The diagonal matrix becomes



with eigenvectors



Rescale the variables and integrate
With the diagonalization the integral can be written



where



Since the coordinate transformation is simply a rotation of coordinates the Jacobian determinant of the transformation is one yielding



The integrations can now be performed.



which is the advertised solution.
Integrals with complex and linear terms in multiple dimensions
With the two-dimensional example it is now easy to see the generalization to the complex plane and to multiple dimensions.
Integrals with a linear term in the argument



Integrals with an imaginary linear term



Integrals with a complex quadratic term



Integrals with differential operators in the argument
As an example consider the integral4



where 
 
 
 
  is a differential operator with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  functions of spacetime, and 
 
 
 
  indicates integration over all possible paths. In analogy with the matrix version of this integral the solution is



where



and 
 
 
 
 , called the propagator, is the inverse of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac delta function.
Similar arguments yield



and



See Path-integral formulation of virtual-particle exchange for an application of this integral.
Integrals that can be approximated by the method of steepest descent
In quantum field theory n-dimensional integrals of the form



appear often. Here 
 
 
 
  is the reduced Planck's constant and f is a function with a positive minimum at 
 
 
 
 . These integrals can be approximated by the method of steepest descent.
For small values of Planck's constant, f can be expanded about its minimum


 
 .
Here 
 
 
 
  is the n by n matrix of second derivatives evaluated at the minimum of the function.
If we neglect higher order terms this integral can be integrated explicitly.



Integrals that can be approximated by the method of stationary phase
A common integral is a path integral of the form



where 
 
 
 
  is the classical action and the integral is over all possible paths that a particle may take. In the limit of small 
 
 
 
  the integral can be evaluated in the stationary phase approximation. In this approximation the integral is over the path in which the action is a minimum. Therefore, this approximation recovers the classical limit of mechanics.
Fourier integrals
Dirac delta function
The Dirac delta function in spacetime can be written as a Fourier transform5



In general, for any dimension 
 
 




Fourier integrals of forms of the Coulomb potential
Laplacian of 1/r
While not an integral, the identity in three-dimensional Euclidean space



where



is a consequence of Gauss's theorem and can be used to derive integral identities. For an example see Longitudinal and transverse vector fields.
This identity implies that the Fourier integral representation of 1/r is



Yukawa Potential: The Coulomb potential with mass
The Yukawa potential in three dimensions can be represented as an integral over a Fourier transform6



where



See Static forces and virtual-particle exchange for an application of this integral.
In the small m limit the integral reduces to 
 
 
 
 . To derive this result note:



Modified Coulomb potential with mass



where the hat indicates a unit vector in three dimensional space. The derivation of this result is as follows:



Note that in the small 
 
 
 
  limit the integral goes to the result for the Coulomb potential since the term in the brackets goes to 
 
 
 
 .
Longitudinal potential with mass



where the hat indicates a unit vector in three dimensional space. The derivation for this result is as follows:



Note that in the small 
 
 
 
  limit the integral reduces to



Transverse potential with mass



In the small mr limit the integral goes to



For large distance, the integral falls off as the inverse cube of r



For applications of this integral see Darwin Lagrangian and Darwin interaction in a vacuum.
Angular integration in cylindrical coordinates
There are two important integrals. The angular integration of an exponential in cylindrical coordinates can be written in terms of Bessel functions of the first kind78



and



For applications of these integrals see Magnetic interaction between current loops in a simple plasma or electron gas.
Bessel functions
Integration of the cylindrical propagator with mass
First power of a Bessel function



See Abramowitz and Stegun.9
For 
 
 
 
 , we have10



For an application of this integral see Two line charges embedded in a plasma or electron gas.
Squares of Bessel functions
The integration of the propagator in cylindrical coordinates is11



For small mr the integral becomes



For large mr the integral becomes



For applications of this integral see Magnetic interaction between current loops in a simple plasma or electron gas.
In general



Integration over a magnetic wave function
The two-dimensional integral over a magnetic wave function is12



Here, M is a confluent hypergeometric function. For an application of this integral see Charge density spread over a wave function.
See also

Relation between Schrödinger's equation and the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics

References
"
  Category:Mathematical physics



 pp. 13-15↩
↩
↩
Zee, pp. 21-22.↩
Zee, p. 23.↩
Zee, p. 26, 29.↩
 p. 402↩
 p. 113↩
 Section 11.4.44↩
Jackson, p. 116↩
I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, p. 679↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, Section 11.4.28↩




