


Bootstrapping populations




Bootstrapping populations

Starting with a sample

 
  observed from a random variable X having a given distribution law with a set of non fixed parameters which we denote with a vector 
 
 
 
 , a parametric inference problem consists of computing suitable values – call them estimates – of these parameters precisely on the basis of the sample. An estimate is suitable if replacing it with the unknown parameter does not cause major damage in next computations. In Algorithmic inference, suitability of an estimate reads in terms of compatibility with the observed sample.
In this framework, resampling methods are aimed at generating a set of candidate values to replace the unknown parameters that we read as compatible replicas of them. They represent a population of specifications of a random vector 
 
 
1 compatible with an observed sample, where the compatibility of its values has the properties of a probability distribution. By plugging parameters into the expression of the questioned distribution law, we bootstrap entire populations of random variables compatible with the observed sample.
The rationale of the algorithms computing the replicas, which we denote population bootstrap procedures, is to identify a set of statistics 
 
 
 
  exhibiting specific properties, denoting a well behavior, w.r.t. the unknown parameters. The statistics are expressed as functions of the observed values 
 
 
 
 , by definition. The 
 
 
 
  may be expressed as a function of the unknown parameters and a random seed specification 
 
 
 
  through the sampling mechanism

 
 , in turn. Then, by plugging the second expression in the former, we obtain 
 
 
 
  expressions as functions of seeds and parameters – the master equations – that we invert to find values of the latter as a function of: i) the statistics, whose values in turn are fixed at the observed ones; and ii) the seeds, which are random according to their own distribution. Hence from a set of seed samples we obtain a set of parameter replicas.
Method
Given a 
 
 
 
  of a random variable X and a sampling mechanism

 
  for X, the realization x is given by 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 . Focusing on well-behaved statistics,












  
 
 












for their parameters, the master equations read












  
 
 












For each sample seed 
 
 
 
  a vector of parameters 
 
 
 
  is obtained from the solution of the above system with 
 
 
 
  fixed to the observed values. Having computed a huge set of compatible vectors, say N, the empirical marginal distribution of 
 
 
 
  is obtaineded by:










(2)





where 
 
 
 
  is the j-th component of the generic solution of (1) and where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function of 
 
 
 
  in the interval 
 
 
 
  Some indeterminacies remain if X is discrete and this we will be considered shortly. The whole procedure may be summed up in the form of the following Algorithm, where the index 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  denotes the parameter vector from which the statistics vector is derived.
Algorithm




Generating parameter populations through a bootstrap





Given a sample 
 
 
 
  from a random variable with parameter vector 
 
 
 
  unknown,

Identify a vector of well-behaved statistics

 
  for 
 
 
 
 ;
compute a specification 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  from the sample;
repeat for a satisfactory number N of iterations:
 
draw a sample seed 
 
 
 
  of size m from the seed random variable;
get 
 
 
 
  as a solution of (1) in θ with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ;
add 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ; population.





 You may easily see from a table of sufficient statistics that we obtain the curve in the picture on the left by computing the empirical distribution (2) on the population obtained through the above algorithm when: i) X is an Exponential random variable, ii) 
 
 
 
 , and


 
 , and the curve in the picture on the right when: i) X is a Uniform random variable in 
 
 
 
 , ii) 
 
 
 
 , and


 
 .
Remark
Note that the accuracy with which a parameter distribution law of populations compatible with a sample is obtained is not a function of the sample size. Instead, it is a function of the number of seeds we draw. In turn, this number is purely a matter of computational time but does not require any extension of the observed data. With other bootstrapping methods focusing on a generation of sample replicas (like those proposed by ) the accuracy of the estimate distributions depends on the sample size.
Example
For 
 
 
 
  expected to represent a Pareto distribution, whose specification requires values for the parameters 
 
 
 
  and k,2 we have that the cumulative distribution function reads: 


 
 .
A sampling mechanism

 
  has 
 
 
uniform seed U and explaining function 
 
 
 
  described by:



A relevant statistic 
 
 
 
  is constituted by the pair of joint sufficient statistics for 
 
 
 
  and K, respectively 
 
 
 
 . The master equations read






with 
 
 
 
 .
Figure on the right reports the three-dimensional plot of the empirical cumulative distribution function (2) of 
 
 
 
 .
Notes


References





"
Category:Computational statistics Category:Algorithmic inference Category:Resampling (statistics)



By default, capital letters (such as U, X) will denote random variables and small letters (u, x) their corresponding realizations.↩
We denote here with symbols a and k the Pareto parameters elsewhere indicated through k and 
 
 
 
 .↩




