


Burau representation




Burau representation

In mathematics the Burau representation is a representation of the braid groups, named after and originally studied by the German mathematician Werner Burau1 during the 1930s. The Burau representation has two common and near-equivalent formulations, the reduced and unreduced Burau representations.
Definition
 Consider the braid group  to be the mapping class group of a disc with 
 
 
 
  marked points . The homology group  is free abelian of rank 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, the invariant subspace of  (under the action of ) is primitive and infinite cyclic. Let  be the projection onto this invariant subspace. Then there is a covering space  corresponding to this projection map. Much like in the construction of the Alexander polynomial, consider  as a module over the group-ring of covering transformations 
 
 
. As such a -module,  is free of rank 
 
 
 
 . By the basic theory of covering spaces,  acts on , and this representation is called the reduced Burau representation.
The unreduced Burau representation has a similar definition, namely one replaces  with its (real, oriented) blow-up at the marked points. Then instead of considering  one considers the relative homology  where  is the part of the boundary of  corresponding to the blow-up operation together with one point on the disc's boundary. 
 
 
 
  denotes the lift of 
 
 
 
  to . As a -module this is free of rank 
 
 
 
 .
By the homology long exact sequence of a pair, the Burau representations fit into a short exact sequence




where  (resp. ) is the reduced (resp. unreduced) Burau -module and  is the complement to the diagonal subspace, in other words:



and  acts on  by the permutation representation.
Explicit matrices
Let  denote the standard generators of the braid group . Then the unreduced Burau representation may be given explicitly by mapping



for 
 
 
 
 , where  denotes the 
 
 
 
  identity matrix. Likewise, for 
 
 
 
  the reduced Burau representation is given by









while for 
 
 
 
 , it maps



Bowling alley interpretation
Vaughan Jones2 gave the following interpretation of the unreduced Burau representation of positive braids for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  – i.e. for braids that are words in the standard braid group generators containing no inverses – which follows immediately from the above explicit description:
Given a positive braid 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  strands, interpret it as a bowling alley with 
 
 
 
  intertwining lanes. Now throw a bowling ball down one of the lanes and assume that at every crossing where its path crosses over another lane, it falls down with probability 
 
 
 
  and continues along the lower lane. Then the 
 
 
 
 'th entry of the unreduced Burau representation of 
 
 
 
  is the probability that a ball thrown into the 
 
 
 
 'th lane ends up in the 
 
 
 
 'th lane.
Relation to the Alexander polynomial
If a knot 
 
 
 
  is the closure of a braid 
 
 
 
  in , then, up to multiplication by a unit in , the Alexander polynomial  of 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  where  is the reduced Burau representation of the braid 
 
 
 
 .
For example, if  σ1σ2}} in , one finds by using the explicit matrices above that


 
  and the closure of  is the unknot whose Alexander polynomial is 
 
 
 
 .
Faithfulness
The first nonfaithful Burau representations are found without the use of computer, using a notion of winding number or contour integration.3 A more conceptual understanding 4 interprets the linking or winding as coming from Poincaré duality in first homology relative to the basepoint of a covering space, and uses the intersection form (traditionally called Squier's Form as Craig Squier was the first to explore its properties).5 Stephen Bigelow combined computer techniques and the Long-Paton theorem to show that the Burau representation is not faithful for 
 
 
 
 .678 Bigelow moreover provides an explicit non-trivial element in the kernel as a word in the standard generators of the braid group: let


 
  Then an element of the kernel is given by the commutator



The Burau representation for 
 
 
 
  has been known to be faithful for some time. The faithfulness of the Burau representation when 
 
 
 
  is an open problem. The Burau representation appears as a summand of the Jones representation, and for 
 
 
 
 , the faithfulness of the Burau representation is equivalent to that of the Jones representation, which on the other hand is related to the question of whether or not the Jones polynomial is an unknot detector.9
Geometry
Squier showed that the Burau representation preserves a sesquilinear form.10 Moreover, when the variable 
 
 
 
  is chosen to be a transcendental unit complex number near 
 
 
 
  it is a positive-definite Hermitian pairing, thus the Burau representation can be thought of as a map into the Unitary group.
References
External links



"
Category:Braid groups Category:Representation theory





J. Moody, The faithfulness question for the Burau representation, Proc. AMS 1993
D D Long, M Paton, The Burau representation is not faithful for 
 
 
 
 , Topology 32 (1993)


S. Bigelow,International Congress of Mathematicians, Beijing, 2002
V. Turaev, Faithful representations of the braid groups, Bourbaki 1999-2000






