


Sandwich theory




Sandwich theory

 Sandwich theory12 describes the behaviour of a beam, plate, or shell which consists of three layers - two facesheets and one core. The most commonly used sandwich theory is linear and is an extension of first order beam theory. Linear sandwich theory is of importance for the design and analysis of sandwich panels, which are of use in building construction, vehicle construction, airplane construction and refrigeration engineering.
Some advantages of sandwich construction are:

Sandwich cross sections are composite. They usually consist of a low to moderate stiffness core which is connected with two stiff exterior face-sheets. The composite has a considerably higher shear stiffness to weight ratio than an equivalent beam made of only the core material or the face-sheet material. The composite also has a high tensile strength to weight ratio.
The high stiffness of the face-sheet leads to a high bending stiffness to weight ratio for the composite.

The behavior of a beam with sandwich cross-section under a load differs from a beam with a constant elastic cross section as can be observed in the adjacent figure. If the radius of curvature during bending is large compared to the thickness of the sandwich beam and the strains in the component materials are small, the deformation of a sandwich composite beam can be separated into two parts

deformations due to bending moments or bending deformation, and
deformations due to transverse forces, also called shear deformation.

Sandwich beam, plate, and shell theories usually assume that the reference stress state is one of zero stress. However, during curing, differences of temperature between the face-sheets persist because of the thermal separation by the core material. These temperature differences, coupled with different linear expansions of the face-sheets, can lead to a bending of the sandwich beam in the direction of the warmer face-sheet. If the bending is constrained during the manufacturing process, residual stresses can develop in the components of a sandwich composite. The superposition of a reference stress state on the solutions provided by sandwich theory is possible when the problem is linear. However, when large elastic deformations and rotations are expected, the initial stress state has to be incorporated directly into the sandwich theory.
Engineering sandwich beam theory
 In the engineering theory of sandwich beams,3 the axial strain is assumed to vary linearly over the cross-section of the beam as in Euler-Bernoulli theory, i.e.,


 
  Therefore the axial stress in the sandwich beam is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Young's modulus which is a function of the location along the thickness of the beam. The bending moment in the beam is then given by


 
  The quantity 
 
 
 
  is called the ' flexural stiffness' of the sandwich beam. The shear force

 
  is defined as



Using these relations, we can show that the stresses in a sandwich beam with a core of thickness 
 
 
 
  and modulus 
 
 
 
  and two facesheets each of thickness 
 
 
 
  and modulus 
 
 
 
 , are given by











Derivation of engineering sandwich beam stresses





Since


 
  we can write the axial stress as


 
  The equation of equilibrium for a two-dimensional solid is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the shear stress. Therefore,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a constant of integration. Therefore,


 
  Let us assume that there are no shear tractions applied to the top face of the sandwich beam. The shear stress in the top facesheet is given by


 
  At 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
 . Then the shear stress at the top of the core, 
 
 
 
 
 , is given by


 
  Similarly, the shear stress in the core can be calculated as


 
  The integration constant 
 
 
 
  is determined from the continuity of shear stress at the interface of the core and the facesheet. Therefore,


 
  and








For a sandwich beam with identical facesheets and unit width, the value of 
 
 
 
  is


 
 
  If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  can be approximated as


 
  and the stresses in the sandwich beam can be approximated as


 
 
  If, in addition, 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  and the approximate stresses in the beam are


 
 
  If we assume that the facesheets are thin enough that the stresses may be assumed to be constant through the thickness, we have the approximation





Hence the problem can be split into two parts, one involving only core shear and the other involving only bending stresses in the facesheets.
Linear sandwich theory
Bending of a sandwich beam with thin facesheets
 The main assumptions of linear sandwich theories of beams with thin facesheets are:

the transverse normal stiffness of the core is infinite, i.e., the core thickness in the z-direction does not change during bending
the in-plane normal stiffness of the core is small compared to that of the facesheets, i.e., the core does not lengthen or compress in the x-direction
the facesheets behave according to the Euler-Bernoulli assumptions, i.e., there is no xz-shear in the facesheets and the z-direction thickness of the facesheets does not change

However, the xz shear-stresses in the core are not neglected.
Constitutive assumptions
The constitutive relations for two-dimensional orthotropic linear elastic materials are


 
  The assumptions of sandwich theory lead to the simplified relations


 
  and



The equilibrium equations in two dimensions are


 
  The assumptions for a sandwich beam and the equilibrium equation imply that


 
  Therefore, for homogeneous facesheets and core, the strains also have the form



Kinematics
 
Let the sandwich beam be subjected to a bending moment 
 
 
 
  and a shear force 
 
 
 
 . Let the total deflection of the beam due to these loads be 
 
 
 
 . The adjacent figure shows that, for small displacements, the total deflection of the mid-surface of the beam can be expressed as the sum of two deflections, a pure bending deflection 
 
 
 
  and a pure shear deflection 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,



From the geometry of the deformation we observe that the engineering shear strain (
 
 
 
 ) in the core is related the effective shear strain in the composite by the relation


 
  Note the shear strain in the core is larger than the effective shear strain in the composite and that small deformations (
 
 
 
 ) are assumed in deriving the above relation. The effective shear strain in the beam is related to the shear displacement by the relation



The facesheets are assumed to deform in accordance with the assumptions of Euler-Bernoulli beam theory. The total deflection of the facesheets is assumed to be the superposition of the deflections due to bending and that due to core shear. The 
 
 
 
 -direction displacements of the facesheets due to bending are given by


 
  The displacement of the top facesheet due to shear in the core is


 
  and that of the bottom facesheet is


 
  The normal strains in the two facesheets are given by


 
  Therefore



Stress-displacement relations
The shear stress in the core is given by


 
  or,





The normal stresses in the facesheets are given by


 
  Hence,





Resultant forces and moments
The resultant normal force in a facesheet is defined as


 
  and the resultant moments are defined as


 
  where


 
  Using the expressions for the normal stress in the two facesheets gives





In the core, the resultant moment is


 
  The total bending moment in the beam is


 
  or,





The shear force 
 
 
 
  in the core is defined as





where 
 
 
 
  is a shear correction coefficient. The shear force in the facesheets can be computed from the bending moments using the relation


 
  or,





For thin facesheets, the shear force in the facesheets is usually ignored.4
Bending and shear stiffness
The bending stiffness of the sandwich beam is given by


 
  From the expression for the total bending moment in the beam, we have


 
  For small shear deformations, the above expression can be written as


 
  Therefore, the bending stiffness of the sandwich beam (with 
 
 
 
 ) is given by





and that of the facesheets is





The shear stiffness of the beam is given by


 
  Therefore the shear stiffness of the beam, which is equal to the shear stiffness of the core, is





Relation between bending and shear deflections
A relation can be obtained between the bending and shear deflections by using the continuity of tractions between the core and the facesheets. If we equate the tractions directly we get


 
  At both the facesheet-core interfaces 
 
 
 
  but at the top of the core 
 
 
 
  and at the bottom of the core 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, traction continuity at 
 
 
 
  leads to


 
  The above relation is rarely used because of the presence of second derivatives of the shear deflection. Instead it is assumed that


 
  which implies that





Governing equations
Using the above definitions, the governing balance equations for the bending moment and shear force are


 
 
  We can alternatively express the above as two equations that can be solved for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  as


 
 
  Using the approximations


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the intensity of the applied load on the beam, we have





Several techniques may be used to solve this system of two coupled ordinary differential equations given the applied load and the applied bending moment and displacement boundary conditions.
Temperature dependent alternative form of governing equations
Assuming that each partial cross section fulfills Bernoulli's hypothesis, the balance of forces and moments on the deformed sandwich beam element can be used to deduce the bending equation for the sandwich beam.
 The stress resultants and the corresponding deformations of the beam and of the cross section can be seen in Figure 1. The following relationships can be derived using the theory of linear elasticity:56


 
  where








transverse displacement of the beam







Average shear strain in the sandwich







Rotation of the facesheets







Shear strain in the core







Bending moment in the core







Bending stiffness of the sandwich beam







Bending moment in the facesheets







Bending stiffness of the facesheets







Shear force in the core







Shear force in the facesheets







Shear stiffness of the core







Additional bending as a consequence of a temperature drop







Temperature coefficient of expansion of the converings



Superposition of the equations for the facesheets and the core leads to the following equations for the total shear force 
 
 
 
  and the total bending moment 
 
 
 
 :


 
 
  We can alternatively express the above as two equations that can be solved for 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,



Solution approaches
 The bending behavior and stresses in a continuous sandwich beam can be computed by solving the two governing differential equations.
Analytical approach
For simple geometries such as double span beams under uniformly distributed loads, the governing equations can be solved by using appropriate boundary conditions and using the superposition principle. Such results are listed in the standard DIN EN 14509:20067(Table E10.1). Energy methods may also be used to compute solutions directly.
Numerical approach
The differential equation of sandwich continuous beams can be solved by the use of numerical methods such as finite differences and finite elements. For finite differences Berner8 recommends a two-stage approach. After solving the differential equation for the normal forces in the cover sheets for a single span beam under a given load, the energy method can be used to expand the approach for the calculation of multi-span beams. Sandwich continuous beam with flexible cover sheets can also be laid on top of each other when using this technique. However, the cross-section of the beam has to be constant across the spans.
A more specialized approach recommended by Schwarze9 involves solving for the homogeneous part of the governing equation exactly and for the particular part approximately. Recall that the governing equation for a sandwich beam is


 
  If we define


 
  we get


 
  Schwarze uses the general solution for the homogeneous part of the above equation and a polynomial approximation for the particular solution for sections of a sandwich beam. Interfaces between sections are tied together by matching boundary conditions. This approach has been used in the open source code swe2.
Practical Importance
Results predicted by linear sandwich theory correlate well with the experimentally determined results. The theory is used as a basis for the structural report which is needed for the construction of large industrial and commercial buildings which are clad with sandwich panels . Its use is explicitly demanded for approvals and in the relevant engineering standards.10
See also

Bending
Beam theory
Composite material
Hill yield criteria
Sandwich structured composite
Sandwich plate system
Composite honeycomb
Timoshenko beam theory
Plate theory

References


Bibliography

Klaus Berner, Oliver Raabe: Bemessung von Sandwichbauteilen. IFBS-Schrift 5.08, IFBS e.V., Düsseldorf 2006.
Ralf Möller, Hans Pöter, Knut Schwarze: Planen und Bauen mit Trapezprofilen und Sandwichelementen. Band 1, Ernst & Sohn, Berlin 2004, ISBN 3-433-01595-3.

External links

Institute for Sandwich Technology
http://www.diabgroup.com/europe/literature/e_pdf_files/man_pdf/sandwich_hb.pdf DIAB Sandwich Handbook
http://www.swe1.com Programm zur Ermittlung der Schnittgrössen und Spannungen von Sandwich-Wandplatten mit biegeweichen Deckschichten (Open Source)
http://www.swe2.com Computation of sandwich beams with corrugated faces (Open Source)

"
Category:Mechanics Category:Structural engineering Category:Composite materials



Plantema, F, J., 1966, Sandwich Construction: The Bending and Buckling of Sandwich Beams, Plates, and Shells, Jon Wiley and Sons, New York.↩
Zenkert, D., 1995, An Introduction to Sandwich Construction, Engineering Materials Advisory Services Ltd, UK.↩


K. Stamm, H. Witte: Sandwichkonstruktionen - Berechnung, Fertigung, Ausführung. Springer-Verlag, Wien - New York 1974.↩
Knut Schwarze: „Numerische Methoden zur Berechnung von Sandwichelementen“. In Stahlbau. 12/1984, .↩
EN 14509 (D):Self-supporting double skin metal faced insulating panels. November 2006.↩
Klaus Berner: Erarbeitung vollständiger Bemessungsgrundlagen im Rahmen bautechnischer Zulassungen für Sandwichbauteile.Fraunhofer IRB Verlag, Stuttgart 2000 (Teil 1).↩






