


Rota–Baxter algebra




Rota–Baxter algebra
In mathematics, a Rota–Baxter algebra is an algebra, usually over a field k, together with a particular k-linear map R which satisfies the weight-θ Rota–Baxter identity. It appeared first in the work of the American mathematician Glen E. Baxter1 in the realm of probability theory. Baxter's work was further explored from different angles by Gian-Carlo Rota,234 Pierre Cartier,5 and Frederic V. Atkinson,6 among others. Baxter’s derivation of this identity that later bore his name emanated from some of the fundamental results of the famous probabilist Frank Spitzer in random walk theory.78
Definition and first properties
Let A be a k-algebra with a k-linear map R on A and let θ be a fixed parameter in k. We call A a Rota-Baxter k-algebra and R a Rota-Baxter operator of weight θ if the operator R satisfies the following Rota–Baxter relation of weight θ:



The operator R:= θ id − R also satisfies the Rota–Baxter relation of weight θ.
Examples
Integration by Parts
Integration by parts is an example of a Rota–Baxter algebra of weight 0. Let 
 
 
 
  be the algebra of continuous functions from the real line to the real line. Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous function. Define integration as the Rota–Baxter operator



Let G(x) = I(g)(x) and F(x) = I(f)(x). Then the formula for integration for parts can be written in terms of these variables as



In other words



which shows that I is a Rota–Baxter algebra of weight 0.
Spitzer identity
The Spitzer identity appeared is named after the American mathematician Frank Spitzer. It is regarded as a remarkable stepping stone in the theory of sums of independent random variables in fluctuation theory of probability. It can naturally be understood in terms of Rota–Baxter operators.
Bohnenblust–Spitzer identity
See also

Dendriform algebra

Notes
External links

Li Guo. WHAT IS...a Rota-Baxter Algebra? Notices of the AMS, December 2009, Volume 56 Issue 11

"
Category:Algebras Category:Combinatorics



↩
; ibid. 75, 330–334, (1969). Reprinted in: Gian-Carlo Rota on Combinatorics: Introductory papers and commentaries, J.P.S. Kung Ed., Contemp. Mathematicians, Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1995.↩
G.-C. Rota, Baxter operators, an introduction, In: Gian-Carlo Rota on Combinatorics, Introductory papers and commentaries, J.P.S. Kung Ed., Contemp. Mathematicians, Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1995.↩
G.-C. Rota and D. Smith, Fluctuation theory and Baxter algebras, Instituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica, IX, 179–201, (1972). Reprinted in: Gian-Carlo Rota on Combinatorics: Introductory papers and commentaries, J.P.S. Kung Ed., Contemp. Mathematicians, Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1995.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




