


Prime manifold




Prime manifold

In topology (a mathematical discipline) a prime manifold is an n-manifold that cannot be expressed as a non-trivial connected sum of two n-manifolds. Non-trivial means that neither of the two is an n-sphere. A similar notion is that of an irreducible n-manifold, which is one in which any embedded (n − 1)-sphere bounds an embedded n-ball. Implicit in this definition is the use of a suitable category, such as the category of differentiable manifolds or the category of piecewise-linear manifolds.
The notions of irreducibility in algebra and manifold theory are related. An irreducible manifold is prime, although the converse does not hold. From an algebraist's perspective, prime manifolds should be called "irreducible"; however the topologist (in particular the 3-manifold topologist) finds the definition above more useful. The only compact, connected 3-manifolds that are prime but not irreducible are the trivial 2-sphere bundle over the circle S1 and the twisted 2-sphere bundle over S1.
According to a theorem of Hellmuth Kneser and John Milnor, every compact, orientable 3-manifold is the connected sum of a unique (up to homeomorphism) collection of prime 3-manifolds.
Definitions
Let us consider specifically 3-manifolds.
Irreducible manifold
A 3-manifold is irreducible if any smooth sphere bounds a ball. More rigorously, a differentiable connected 3-manifold 
 
 
 
  is irreducible if every differentiable submanifold

homeomorphic to a sphere bounds a subset 
 
 
 
  (that is, 
 
 
 
 ) which is homeomorphic to the closed ball


 
  The assumption of differentiability of 
 
 
 
  is not important, because every topological 3-manifold has a unique differentiable structure. The assumption that the sphere is smooth (that is, that it is a differentiable submanifold) is however important: indeed the sphere must have a tubular neighborhood.
A 3-manifold that is not irreducible is reducible.
Prime manifolds
A connected 3-manifold 
 
 
 
  is prime if it cannot be obtained as a connected sum

 
  of two manifolds neither of which is the 3-sphere 
 
 
 
  (or, equivalently, neither of which is the homeomorphic to 
 
 
 
 ).
Examples
Euclidean space
Three-dimensional Euclidean space

 
  is irreducible: all smooth 2-spheres in it bound balls.
On the other hand, Alexander's horned sphere is a non-smooth sphere in 
 
 
 
  that does not bound a ball. Thus the stipulation that the sphere be smooth is necessary.
Sphere, lens spaces
The 3-sphere

 
  is irreducible. The product space

 
  is not irreducible, since any 2-sphere 
 
 
 
  (where 'pt' is some point of 
 
 
 
 ) has a connected complement which is not a ball (it is the product of the 2-sphere and a line).
A lens space

 
  with 
 
 
 
  (and thus not the same as 
 
 
 
 ) is irreducible.
Prime manifolds and irreducible manifolds
A 3-manifold is irreducible if and only if it is prime, except for two cases: the product 
 
 
 
  and the non-orientable fiber bundle of the 2-sphere over the circle 
 
 
 
  are both prime but not irreducible.
From irreducible to prime
An irreducible manifold 
 
 
 
  is prime. Indeed, if we express 
 
 
 
  as a connected sum


 
  then 
 
 
 
  is obtained by removing a ball each from 
 
 
 
  and from 
 
 
 
 , and then gluing the two resulting 2-spheres together. These two (now united) 2-spheres form a 2-sphere in 
 
 
 
 . The fact that 
 
 
 
  is irreducible means that this 2-sphere must bound a ball. Undoing the gluing operation, either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is obtained by gluing that ball to the previously removed ball on their borders. This operation though simply gives a 3-sphere. This means that one of the two factors 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  was in fact a (trivial) 3-sphere, and 
 
 
 
  is thus prime.
From prime to irreducible
Let 
 
 
 
  be a prime 3-manifold, and let 
 
 
 
  be a 2-sphere embedded in it. Cutting on 
 
 
 
  one may obtain just one manifold 
 
 
 
  or perhaps one can only obtain two manifolds 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In the latter case, gluing balls onto the newly created spherical boundaries of these two manifolds gives two manifolds 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is prime, one of these two, say 
 
 
 
 , is 
 
 
 
 . This means 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  minus a ball, and is therefore a ball itself. The sphere 
 
 
 
  is thus the border of a ball, and since we are looking at the case where only this possibility exists (two manifolds created) the manifold 
 
 
 
  is irreducible.
It remains to consider the case where it is possible to cut 
 
 
 
  along 
 
 
 
  and obtain just one piece, 
 
 
 
 . In that case there exists a closed simple curve

 
  in 
 
 
 
  intersecting 
 
 
 
  at a single point. Let 
 
 
 
  be the union of the two tubular neighborhoods of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The boundary 
 
 
 
  turns out to be a 2-sphere that cuts 
 
 
 
  into two pieces, 
 
 
 
  and the complement of 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is prime and 
 
 
 
  is not a ball, the complement must be a ball. The manifold 
 
 
 
  that results from this fact is almost determined, and a careful analysis shows that it is either 
 
 
 
  or else the other, non-orientable, fiber bundle of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 .
Bibliography



See also

3-manifold
Connected sum
Prime decomposition (3-manifold)

"
Category:Manifolds


