


Quantum t-design




Quantum t-design

A Quantum t-design is a probability distribution over pure quantum states which can duplicate properties of the probability distribution over the Haar measure for polynomials of degree t or less. Specifically, the average of any polynomial function of degree t over the design is exactly the same as the average over Haar measure. Here the Haar measure is a uniform probability distribution over all quantum states. These designs are usually unique, and thus almost always calculable. Two particularly important types of t-designs in quantum mechanics are spherical and unitary t-designs.
Spherical t-designs are designs where points of the design (i.e. the points being used for the averaging process) are points on a unit sphere. Spherical t-designs and variations thereof have been considered lately and found useful in quantum information theory,1 quantum cryptography and other related fields.
Unitary designs are analogous to spherical designs in that they approximate the entire unitary group via a finite collection of unitary matrices. Unitary designs have been found useful in information theory2 and quantum computing. Unitary designs are especially useful in quantum computing since most operations are represented by unitary operators.
Motivation
In a d-dimensional Hilbert space when averaging over all quantum pure states the natural group is SU(d), the special unitary group of dimension d. The Haar measure is, by definition, the unique group-invariant measure, so it is used to average properties that are not unitarily invariant over all states, or over all unitaries.
A particularly widely used example of this is the spin 
 
 
 
  system. For this system the relevant group is SU(2) which is the group of all 2x2 unitary operators. Since every 2x2 unitary operator is a rotation of the Bloch sphere, the Haar measure for spin-1/2 particles is invariant under all rotations of the Bloch sphere. This implies that the Haar measure is the rotationally invariant measure on the Bloch sphere, which can be thought of as a constant density distribution over the surface of the sphere.
Another recent application is the fact that a symmetric informationally complete POVM is also a spherical 2-design. Also, since a 2-design must have more than 
 
 
 
  elements, a SIC-POVM is a minimal 2-design.
Spherical Designs
Complex projective (t,t)-designs have been studied in quantum information theory as quantum 2-designs, and in t-designs of vectors in the unit sphere in 
 
 
 
  which, when transformed to vectors in 
 
 
 
  become complex projective (t/2,t/2)-designs.
Formally, we define3 a complex projective (t,t)-design as a probability distribution over quantum states 
 
 
 
  if



Here, the integral over states is taken over the Haar measure on the unit sphere in 
 
 

Exact t-designs over quantum states cannot be distinguished from the uniform probability distribution over all states when using t copies of a state from the probability distribution. However in practice even t-designs may be difficult to compute. For this reason approximate t-designs are useful.
Approximate (t,t)-designs are most useful due to their ability to be efficiently implemented. i.e. it is possible to generate a quantum state 
 
 
 
  distributed according to the probability distribution 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  time. This efficient construction also implies that the POVM of the operators 
 
 
 
  can be implemented in 
 
 
 
  time.
The technical definition of an approximate (t,t)-design is:
If 
 
 

and 
 
 

then 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -approximate (t,t)-design.
It is possible, though perhaps inefficient, to find an 
 
 
 
 -approximate (t,t) design consisting of quantum pure states for a fixed t.
Construction
For convenience N is assumed to be a power of 2.
Using the fact that for any N there exists a set of 
 
 
 
  functions {0,...,N-1} 
 
 
 
  {0,...,N-1} such that for any distinct 
 
 
 
  {0,...,N-1} the image under f, where f is chosen at random from S, is exactly the uniform distribution over tuples of d elements of {0,...,N-1}.
Let 
 
 
 
  be drawn from the Haar measure. Let 
 
 
 
  be the probability distribution of 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
 . Finally let 
 
 
 
  be drawn from P. If we define 
 
 
 
  with probability 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with probability 
 
 
 
  then: 
 
 
 
  for odd j and 
 
 
 
  for even j.
Using this and Gaussian quadrature we can construct 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is an approximate (t,t)-design.
Unitary Designs
Elements of the unitary design are elements of the unitary group, U(d), the group of 
 
 
 
  unitary matrices. A t-design of unitary operators will generate a t-design of states.
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is your unitary design (i.e. a set of unitary operators). Then for any pure state 
 
 
 
  let 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  will always be a t-design for states.
Formally define4 a unitary t-design, X, if



Observe that the space linearly spanned by the matrices 
 
 
 
  over all choices of U is identical to the restriction 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  This observation leads to a conclusion about the duality between unitary designs and unitary codes.
Using the permutation maps it is possible5 to verify directly that a set of unitary matrices forms a t-design.6
One direct result of this is that for any finite 
 
 


With equality if and only if X is a t-design.
1 and 2-designs have been examined in some detail and absolute bounds for the dimension of X, |X|, have been derived.7
Bounds for unitary designs
Define 
 
 
 
  as the set of functions homogeneous of degree t in 
 
 
 
  and homogeneous of degree t in 
 
 
 
 , then if for every 
 
 
 
 :



then X is a unitary t-design.
We further define the inner product for functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  as the average value of 
 
 
 
  as:



and 
 
 
 
  as the average value of 
 
 
 
  over any finite subset 
 
 
 
 .
it follows that X is a unitary t-design iff 
 
 
 
 .
From the above it is demonstrable that if X is a t-design then 
 
 
 
  is an absolute bound for the design. This imposes an upper bound on the size of a unitary design. This bound is absolute meaning it depends only on the strength of the design or the degree of the code, and not the distances in the subset, X.

A unitary code is a finite subset of the unitary group in which a few inner product values occur between elements. Specifically, a unitary code is defined as a finite subset 
 
 
 
  if for all 
 
 
 
  in X 
 
 
 
  takes only distinct values.
It follows that 
 
 
 
  and if U and M are orthogonal
 
 

Notes
"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum information science Category:Information theory Category:Quantum information theory



A. Hayashi, T. Hashimoto, M. Horibe. Reexamination of optimal quantum state estimation of pure states. Phys. Rev. A, 72: 032325, 2006. Also quant-ph/0410207.
C. Dankert, R. Cleve, J. Emerson, and E. Livine, Exact and approximate unitary 2-designs: constructions and applications, (2006).
[quant-ph/0701126 Quantum t-designs: t-wise independence in the quantum world]
[0809.3813 Unitary designs and codes]

B. Collins and P. ´ Sniady, Integration with respect to the Haar measure on unitary, orthogonal and symplectic group, Comm. Math. Phys.,264 (2006), 773–795.
D. Gross, K. Audenaert, and J. Eisert, Evenly distributed unitaries: on the structure of unitary designs, J. Math. Phys., 48 (2007),052104, 22.




