


Threefish




Threefish

Threefish is a symmetric-key tweakable block cipher designed as part of the Skein hash function, an entry in the NIST hash function competition. Threefish uses no S-boxes or other table lookups in order to avoid cache timing attacks;1 its nonlinearity comes from alternating additions with exclusive ORs. In that respect, it is similar to Salsa20, TEA, and the SHA-3 candidates CubeHash and BLAKE.
Threefish and the Skein hash function were designed by Bruce Schneier, Niels Ferguson, Stefan Lucks, Doug Whiting, Mihir Bellare, Tadayoshi Kohno, Jon Callas, and Jesse Walker.
Description of the cipher2
At first the block, the tweak and the key (of length 256, 512 or 1024 bits) is converted into 
 
 
 
  words of 64 bit length each. These words are treated as 64bit unsigned Little endian integers throughout the cipher. All additions and subtractions are defined modulo 
 
 

Key schedule
Threefish uses 
 
 
 
  different round keys (
 
 
 
 : Number of rounds). To calculate these keys the original key words 
 
 
 
  are appended by an additional key word 
 
 
 
 . The tweak words 
 
 
 
  are appended with an additional tweak word too.





The round key words 
 
 
 
  are now defined like this:



Mix function
The mix function takes a tuple of words 
 
 
 
  and returns another tuple of words 
 
 
 
 . The function is defined like this:




 
  is a fixed set of rotation constants chosen to achieve maximum diffusion.
A full Threefish round
If 
 
 
 
  the round key 
 
 
 
  is added to the words. Afterwards the mix function is applied to consecutive words and the resulting words are permutated using a fixed permutation.
Threefish256 and Threefish512 apply this round 72 times. Threefish1024 applies it 80 times.
Final operations
After all rounds are applied the last round key is added to the words and the words are converted back to a string of bytes.
Security
In October 2010, an attack that combines rotational cryptanalysis with the rebound attack was published. The attack mounts a known-key distinguisher against 53 of 72 rounds in Threefish-256, and 57 of 72 rounds in Threefish-512. It also affects the Skein hash function.3 This is a follow-up to the earlier attack published in February, which breaks 39 and 42 rounds respectively.4 In response to this attack, the Skein team tweaked the rotation constants used in Threefish and thereby the key schedule constants for round 3 of the NIST hash function competition.5
In 2009, a related key boomerang attack against a reduced round Threefish version was published. For the 32-round version, the time complexity is 
 
 
 
  and the memory complexity is 
 
 
 
 
 ; for the 33-round version, the time complexity is 
 
 
 
  with a negligible memory usage. The attacks also work against the tweaked version of Threefish: for the 32-round version, the time complexity is 
 
 
 
  and the memory complexity is 
 
 
 
 ; for the 33-round version, the time complexity is 
 
 
 
  with a negligible memory usage.6
See also

Twofish
Blowfish (cipher)

References
External links

"The Skein Hash Function Family" Homepage of the Skein Hash Function Family.

"
Category:Block ciphers Category:Free ciphers



 The paper in which Threefish was introduced.









