


Hawking energy




Hawking energy

The Hawking energy or Hawking mass is one of the possible definitions of mass in general relativity. It is a measure of the bending of ingoing and outgoing rays of light that are orthogonal to a 2-sphere surrounding the region of space whose mass is to be defined.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a 3-dimensional sub-manifold of a relativistic spacetime, and let 
 
 
 
  be a closed 2-surface. Then the Hawking mass 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is defined1 to be



where 
 
 
 
  is the mean curvature of 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
In the Schwarzschild metric, the Hawking mass of any sphere 
 
 
 
  about the central mass is equal to the value 
 
 
 
  of the central mass.
A result of Geroch2 implies that Hawking mass satisfies an important monotonicity condition. Namely, if 
 
 
 
  has nonnegative scalar curvature, then the Hawking mass of 
 
 
 
  is non-decreasing as the surface 
 
 
 
  flows outward at a speed equal to the inverse of the mean curvature. In particular, if 
 
 
 
  is a family of connected surfaces evolving according to



where 
 
 
 
  is the mean curvature of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the unit vector opposite of the mean curvature direction, then



Said otherwise, Hawking mass is increasing for the inverse mean curvature flow.3
Hawking mass is not necessarily positive. However, it is asymptotic to the ADM4 or the Bondi mass, depending on whether the surface is asymptotic to spatial infinity or null infinity.5
See also

Mass in general relativity
Inverse mean curvature flow

References

Section 6.1 in 

"
Category:General relativity



[http://books.google.com/books?id=HRr3jdBDXIgC&pg;;=PA122#v=onepage Page 21] of Schoen, Richard, 2005, "Mean Curvature in Riemannian Geometry and General Relativity," in Global Theory of Minimal Surfaces: Proceedings of the Clay Mathematics Institute 2001 Summer School, David Hoffman (Ed.), p.113-136.
Geroch, Robert. 1973. "Energy Extraction." .
[http://books.google.com/books?id=HRr3jdBDXIgC&pg;;=PA124#v=onepage Lemma 9.6] of Schoen (2005).
Section 4 of Yuguang Shi, Guofang Wang and Jie Wu (2008), "On the behavior of quasi-local mass at the infinity along nearly round surfaces".
Section 2 of Shing Tung Yau (2002), "Some progress in classical general relativity," Geometry and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations, Volume 29.




