


Stein's unbiased risk estimate




Stein's unbiased risk estimate

In statistics, Stein's unbiased risk estimate (SURE) is an unbiased estimator of the mean-squared error of "a nearly arbitrary, nonlinear biased estimator."1 In other words, it provides an indication of the accuracy of a given estimator. This is important since the true mean-squared error of an estimator is a function of the unknown parameter to be estimated, and thus cannot be determined exactly.
The technique is named after its discoverer, Charles Stein.2
Formal statement
Let 
 
 
 
  be an unknown parameter and let 
 
 
 
  be a measurement vector whose components are independent and distributed normally with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
 
 
 . Suppose 
 
 
 
  is an estimator of 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 , and can be written 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is weakly differentiable. Then, Stein's unbiased risk estimate is given by3


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 th component of the function 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  is the Euclidean norm.
The importance of SURE is that it is an unbiased estimate of the mean-squared error (or squared error risk) of 
 
 
 
 , i.e.


 
  with



Thus, minimizing SURE can act as a surrogate for minimizing the MSE. Note that there is no dependence on the unknown parameter 
 
 
 
  in the expression for SURE above. Thus, it can be manipulated (e.g., to determine optimal estimation settings) without knowledge of 
 
 
 
 
 .
Proof
We wish to show that


 
 . We start by expanding the MSE as


 
 
  Now we use  integration by parts to rewrite the last term:


 
 
  Substituting this into the expression for the MSE, we arrive at



Applications
A standard application of SURE is to choose a parametric form for an estimator, and then optimize the values of the parameters to minimize the risk estimate. This technique has been applied in several settings. For example, a variant of the James–Stein estimator can be derived by finding the optimal shrinkage estimator.4 The technique has also been used by Donoho and Johnstone to determine the optimal shrinkage factor in a wavelet denoising setting.5
References
"
Category:Error Category:Estimation theory Category:Risk




↩
↩

↩




