


Hele-Shaw flow




Hele-Shaw flow

Hele-Shaw flow (named after Henry Selby Hele-Shaw) is defined as Stokes flow between two parallel flat plates separated by an infinitesimally small gap. Various problems in fluid mechanics can be approximated to Hele-Shaw flows and thus the research of these flows is of importance. Approximation to Hele-Shaw flow is specifically important to micro-flows. This is due to manufacturing techniques, which creates shallow planar configurations, and the typically low Reynolds numbers of micro-flows.
The governing equation of Hele-Shaw flows is identical to that of the inviscid potential flow and to the flow of fluid through a porous medium (Darcy's law). It thus permits visualization of this kind of flow in two dimensions.
Mathematical formulation of Hele-Shaw flows
(Figure)
A schematic description of a Hele-Shaw configuration.

Let 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  be the directions parallel to the flat plates, and 
 
 
 
  the perpendicular direction, with 
 
 
 
  being the gap between the plates (at 
 
 
 
 ). When the gap between plates is asymptotically small



the velocity profile in the 
 
 
 
  direction is parabolic (i.e. is a quadratic function of the coordinate in this direction). The equation relating the pressure gradient to the velocity is,



where 
 
 
 
  is the velocity , 
 
 
 
  is the local pressure, 
 
 
 
  is the fluid viscosity.
This relation and the uniformity of the pressure in the narrow direction 
 
 
 
  permits us to integrate the velocity with regard to 
 
 
 
  and thus to consider an effective velocity field in only the two dimensions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . When substituting this equation into the continuity equation and integrating over 
 
 
 
  we obtain the governing equation of Hele-Shaw flows,



This equation is supplemented by the no-penetration boundary conditions on the side walls of the geometry,



where 
 
 
 
  is a unit vector perpendicular to the side wall.
Hele-Shaw cell
The term Hele-Shaw cell is commonly used for cases in which a fluid is injected into the shallow geometry from above or below the geometry, and when the fluid is bounded by another liquid or gas. For such flows the boundary conditions are defined by pressures and surface tensions.
See also

Diffusion-limited aggregation
Lubrication theory
Stokes flow
Hele-Shaw clutch


A mechanical transmission clutch invented by Prof. Hele-Shaw, using the principles of a Hele-Shaw flow
 

References


[http://www.cambridge.org/uk/series/sSeries.asp?code=CML&srt;;=T An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics by G. K. Batchelor] at Cambridge Mathematical Library.
Hermann Schlichting, Klaus Gersten, Boundary Layer Theory, 8th ed. Springer-Verlag 2004, ISBN 81-8128-121-7
L. M. Milne-Thomson (1996). Theoretical Hydrodynamics. Dover Publications, Inc.

"
Category:Fluid dynamics


