


Linear motion




Linear motion

Linear motion (also called rectilinear motion1) is a motion along a straight line, and can therefore be described mathematically using only one spatial dimension. The linear motion can be of two types: uniform linear motion with constant velocity or zero acceleration; non uniform linear motion with variable velocity or non-zero acceleration. The motion of a particle (a point-like object) along a line can be described by its position 
 
 
 
 , which varies with 
 
 
 
  (time). An example of linear motion is an athlete running 100m along a straight track.2
Linear motion is the most basic of all motion. According to Newton's first law of motion, objects that do not experience any net force will continue to move in a straight line with a constant velocity until they are subjected to a net force. Under everyday circumstances, external forces such as gravity and friction can cause an object to change the direction of its motion, so that its motion cannot be described as linear.3
One may compare linear motion to general motion. In general motion, a particle's position and velocity are described by vectors, which have a magnitude and direction. In linear motion, the directions of all the vectors describing the system are equal and constant which means the objects move along the same axis and do not change direction. The analysis of such systems may therefore be simplified by neglecting the direction components of the vectors involved and dealing only with the magnitude.4
Neglecting the rotation and other motions of the Earth, an example of linear motion is the ball thrown straight up and falling back straight down.
Displacement
The motion in which all the particles of a body move through the same distance in the same time is called translatory motion. There are two types of translatory motions: rectilinear motion; curvilinear motion. Since linear motion is a motion in a single dimension, the distance traveled by an object in particular direction is the same as displacement.5 The SI unit of displacement is the metre.67 If 
 
 
 
  is the initial position of an object and 
 
 
 
  is the final position, then mathematically the displacement is given by:



The equivalent of displacement in rotational motion is the angular displacement 
 
 
 
  measured in radian. The displacement of an object cannot be greater than the distance. Consider a person travelling to work daily. Overall displacement when he returns home is zero, since the person ends up back where he started, but the distance travelled is clearly not zero.
Velocity
Velocity is defined as the rate of change of displacement with respect to time.8 The SI unit of velocity is 
 
 
 
  or metre per second.9
Average velocity
The average velocity is the ratio of total displacement 
 
 
 
  taken over time interval 
 
 
 
 . Mathematically, it is given by:1011


where:

 
  is the time at which the object was at position 
 
 


 
  is the time at which the object was at position 
 
 

Instantaneous velocity
The instantaneous velocity can be found by differentiating the displacement with respect to time.




Speed
Speed is the absolute value of velocity i.e. speed is always positive. The unit of speed is metre per second.12 If 
 
 
 
  is the speed then,



The magnitude of the instantaneous velocity is the instantaneous speed.
Acceleration
Acceleration is defined as the rate of change of velocity with respect to time. Acceleration is the second derivative of displacement i.e. acceleration can be found by differentiating position with respect to time twice or differentiating velocity with respect to time once.13 The SI unit of acceleration is 
 
 
 
  or metre per second squared.14
If 
 
 
 
  is the average acceleration and 
 
 
 
  is the average velocity over the time interval 
 
 
 
  then mathematically,



The instantaneous acceleration is the limit of the ratio 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  approaches zero i.e.,




Jerk
The rate of change of acceleration, the third derivative of displacement is known as jerk.15 The SI unit of jerk is 
 
 
 
 . In the UK jerk is also called as jolt.
Jounce
The rate of change of jerk, the fourth derivative of displacement is known as jounce.16 The SI unit of jounce is 
 
 
 
  which can be pronounced as metres per quartic second.
Equations of kinematics
In case of constant acceleration, the four physical quantities acceleration, velocity, time and displacement can be related by using the Equations of motion171819












here,

 
  is the initial velocity

 
  is the final velocity

 
  is the acceleration

 
  is the displacement

 
  is the time
These relationships can be demonstrated graphically. The gradient of a line on a displacement time graph represents the velocity. The gradient of the velocity time graph gives the acceleration while the area under the velocity time graph gives the displacement. The area under an acceleration time graph gives the change in velocity.
Analogy between linear and rotational motion
The following table refers to rotation of a rigid body about a fixed axis
 
 
 
  is arclength, 
 
 
 
  is the distance from the axis to any point, and 
 
 
 
  is the tangential acceleration, which is the component of the acceleration that is parallel to the motion. In contrast, the centripetal acceleration, 
 
 
 
 , is perpendicular to the motion. The component of the force parallel to the motion, or equivalently, perpendicular to the line connecting the point of application to the axis is 
 
 
 
 . The sum is over 
 
 
 
  particles and/or points of application.




Analogy between Linear Motion and Rotational motion20



Linear motion





Displacement = 
 
 






Velocity = 
 
 






Acceleration = 
 
 






Mass = 
 
 






Force = 
 
 






Momentum= 
 
 






Kinetic energy = 
 
 






The following table shows the analogy in derived SI units: 
See also

Centripetal force
Inertial frame of reference
Linear actuator
Linear bearing
Mechanics of planar particle motion
Motion graphs and derivatives
Reciprocating motion
Rectilinear propagation
Uniformly accelerated linear motion

References
Further reading

Resnick, Robert and Halliday, David (1966), Physics, Chapter 3 (Vol I and II, Combined edition), Wiley International Edition, Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 66-11527
Tipler P.A., Mosca G., "Physics for Scientists and Engineers", Chapter 2 (5th edition), W. H. Freeman and company: New York and Basing stoke, 2003.

External links
"
Category:Classical mechanics Category:Linear motion



Resnick, Robert and Halliday, David (1966), Physics, Section 3-4↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩

↩

↩
↩
↩
↩




