


Vector spherical harmonics




Vector spherical harmonics

In mathematics, vector spherical harmonics (VSH) are an extension of the scalar spherical harmonics for the use with vector fields.
Definition
Several conventions have been used to define the VSH.12345 We follow that of Barrera et al.. Given a scalar spherical harmonic 
 
 
 
  we define three VSH:















being 
 
 
 
  the unitary vector along the radial direction and 
 
 
 
  the position vector of the point with spherical coordinates 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
  and
 
 
 
 . The radial factors are included to guarantee that the dimensions of the VSH are the same as the ordinary spherical harmonics and that the VSH do not depend on the radial spherical coordinate.
The interest of these new vector fields is to separate the radial dependence from the angular one when using spherical coordinates, so that a vector field admits a multipole expansion



The labels on the components reflect that 
 
 
 
  is the radial component of the vector field, while 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are transverse components.
Main Properties
Symmetry
Like the scalar spherical harmonics, the VSH satisfy



Orthogonality
The VSH are orthogonal in the usual three-dimensional way



but also in the Hilbert space


















Vector multipole moments
The orthogonality relations allow to compute the spherical multipole moments of a vector field as









The gradient of a scalar field
Given the multipole expansion of a scalar field



we can express its gradient in terms of the VSH as



Divergence
For any multipole field we have









By superposition we obtain the divergence of any vector field



we see that the component on 
 
 
 
  is always solenoidal.
Curl
For any multipole field we have









By superposition we obtain the curl of any vector field



Examples
First vector spherical harmonics





:* 
 
 

:* 
 
 

:* 
 
 






:*
 
 

:*
 
 

:*
 
 

:*
 
 

:*
 
 

:*
 
 

The expression for negative values of m are obtained applying the symmetry relations.
Applications
Electrodynamics
The VSH are especially useful in the study of multipole radiation fields. For instance, a magnetic multipole is due to an oscillating current with angular frequency 
 
 
 
  and complex amplitude



and the corresponding electric and magnetic fields can be written as






Substituting into Maxwell equations, Gauss' law is automatically satisfied



while Faraday's law decouples in



Gauss' law for the magnetic field implies



and Ampère-Maxwell's equation gives



In this way, the partial differential equations have been transformed into a set of ordinary differential equations.
Fluid dynamics
In the calculation of the Stokes' law for the drag that a viscous fluid exerts on a small spherical particle, the velocity distribution obeys Navier-Stokes equations neglecting inertia, i.e.






with the boundary conditions






being 
 
 
 
  the relative velocity of the particle to the fluid far from the particle. In spherical coordinates this velocity at infinity can be written as



The last expression suggest an expansion on spherical harmonics for the liquid velocity and the pressure






Substitution in the Navier-Stokes equations produces a set of ordinary differential equations for the coefficients.
See also

Spherical harmonics
Spin spherical harmonics
Multipole expansion
Electromagnetic radiation
Spherical coordinates
Spherical basis


References


External links

Vector Spherical Harmonics at Eric Weisstein's Mathworld

"

Category:Vector calculus



R.G. Barrera, G.A. Estévez and J. Giraldo, Vector spherical harmonics and their application to magnetostatics, Eur. J. Phys. 6 287-294 (1985)
B. Carrascal, G.A. Estevez, P. Lee and V. Lorenzo '' Vector spherical harmonics and their application to classical electrodynamics'', Eur. J. Phys., 12, 184-191 (1991)
E. L. Hill, The theory of Vector Spherical Harmonics, Am. J. Phys. 22, 211-214 (1954)
E. J. Weinberg, Monopole vector spherical harmonics, Phys. Rev. D. 49, 1086-1092 (1994)
P.M. Morse and H. Feshbach, Methods of Theoretical Physics, Part II, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1898-1901 (1953)




