


Acoustic streaming




Acoustic streaming

Acoustic streaming is a steady current in a fluid driven by the absorption of high amplitude acoustic oscillations. This phenomenon can be observed near sound emitters, or in the standing waves within a Kundt's tube. It is the less-known opposite of sound generation by a flow.
There are two situations where sound is absorbed in its medium of propagation:

during propagation.1 The attenuation coefficient is 
 
 
 
 , following Stokes' law (sound attenuation). This effect is more intense at elevated frequencies and is much greater in air (where attenuation occurs on a characteristic distance 
 
 
 
 ~10 cm at 1 MHz) than in water (
 
 
 
 ~100 m at 1 MHz). In air it is known as the Quartz wind.
near a boundary. Either when sound reaches a boundary, or when a boundary is vibrating in a still medium.2 A wall vibrating parallel to itself generates a shear wave, of attenuated amplitude within the Stokes oscillating boundary layer. This effect is localised on an attenuation length of characteristic size 
 
 
 
  whose order of magnitude is a few micrometres in both air and water at 1 MHz.

Origin: a body force due to acoustic absorption in the fluid
Acoustic streaming is a non-linear effect. 3 We can decompose the velocity field in a vibration part and a steady part 
 
 
 
 . The vibration part 
 
 
 
  is due to sound, while the steady part is the acoustic streaming velocity (average velocity). The Navier–Stokes equations implies for the acoustic streaming velocity:



The steady streaming originates from a steady body force 
 
 
 
  that appears on the right hand side. This force is a function of what is known as the Reynolds stresses in turbulence 
 
 
 
 . The Reynolds stress depends on the amplitude of sound vibrations, and the body force reflects diminutions in this sound amplitude.
We see that this stress is non-linear (quadratic) in the velocity amplitude. It is non vanishing only where the velocity amplitude varies. If the velocity of the fluid oscillates because of sound as 
 
 
 
 , the quadratic non-linearity generates a steady force proportional to 
 
 
 
 .
Order of magnitude of acoustic streaming velocities
Even if viscosity is responsible for acoustic streaming, the value of viscosity disappears from the resulting streaming velocities in the case of near-boundary acoustic steaming.
The order of magnitude of streaming velocities are:4

near a boundary (outside of the boundary layer):



 
  with 
 
 
 
  the sound vibration velocity and 
 
 
 
  along the wall boundary. The flow is directed towards decreasing sound vibrations (vibration nodes).

near a vibrating bubble5 of rest radius a, whose radius pulsates with relative amplitude 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ), and whose center of mass also periodically translates with relative amplitude 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ). with a phase shift 
 
 






far from walls6

 
  far from the origin of the flow ( with 
 
 
 
 the acoustic power, 
 
 
 
  the dynamic viscosity and 
 
 
 
  the celerity of sound). Nearer from the origin of the flow, the velocity scales as the root of 
 
 
 
 .

References
"
Category:Acoustics



see video on http://www.lmfa.ec-lyon.fr/perso/Valery.Botton/english/videos_streaming.html

Sir James Lighthill (1978) "Acoustic streaming", 61, 391, Journal of Sound and Vibration
Squires, T. M. & Quake, S. R. (2005) Microfluidics: Fluid physics at the nanoliter scale, Review of Modern Physics, vol. 77, page 977






