


Unfolding (functions)




Unfolding (functions)

In mathematics, an unfolding of a function is a certain family of functions.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth manifold and consider a smooth mapping 
 
 
 
  Let us assume that for given 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifold, and consider the family of mapping (parameterised by 
 
 
 
 ) given by 
 
 
 
  We say that 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -parameter unfolding of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  In other words the functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the same: the function 
 
 
 
  is contained in, or is unfolded by, the family 
 
 

Let 
 
 
 
  be given by 
 
 
 
  An example of an unfolding of 
 
 
 
  would be 
 
 
 
  given by


 
  As is the case with unfoldings, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called variables and 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called parameters - since they parameterise the unfolding.
In practice we require that the unfoldings have certain nice properties. In 
 
 
 
  notice that 
 
 
 
  is a smooth mapping from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and so belongs to the function space

 
  As we vary the parameters of the unfolding we get different elements of the function space. Thus, the unfolding induces a function 
 
 
 
  The space 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the group of diffeomorphisms of 
 
 
 
  etc., acts on 
 
 
 
  The action is given by 
 
 
 
  If 
 
 
 
  lies in the orbit of 
 
 
 
  under this action then there is a diffeomorphic change of coordinates in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which takes 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  (and vice versa). One nice property that we may like to impose is that


 
  where "
 
 
 
 " denotes "transverse to". This property ensures that as we vary the unfolding parameters we can predict - by knowing how the orbit foliate

 
  - how the resulting functions will vary.
There is an idea of a versal unfolding. Every versal unfolding has the property that 
 
 
 
 , but the converse is false. Let 
 
 
 
  be local coordinates on 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  denote the ring of smooth functions. We define the Jacobian ideal of 
 
 
 
  denoted by 
 
 
 
  as follows:


 
  Then a basis for a versal unfolding of 
 
 
 
  is given by quotient


 
  This quotient is known as the local algebra of 
 
 
 
  The dimension of the local algebra is called the Milnor number of 
 
 
 
 . The minimum number of unfolding parameters for a versal unfolding is equal to the Milnor number; that is not to say that every unfolding with that many parameters will be versal! Consider the function 
 
 
 
  A calculation shows that


 
  This means that 
 
 
 
  give a basis for a versal unfolding, and that


 
  is a versal unfolding. A versal unfolding with the minimum possible number of unfolding parameters is called a miniversal unfolding.
Sometimes unfoldings are called deformations, versal unfoldings are called versal deformations, etc.
An important object associated to an unfolding is its bifurcation set. This set lives in the parameter space of the unfolding, and gives all parameter values for which the resulting function has degenerate singularities.
References

V. I. Arnold, S. M. Gussein-Zade & A. N. Varchenko, Singularities of differentiable maps, Volume 1, Birkhäuser, (1985).
J. W. Bruce & P. J. Giblin, Curves & singularities, second edition, Cambridge University press, (1992).

"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Singularity theory


