


Polynomial SOS




Polynomial SOS

In mathematics, a form (i.e. a homogeneous polynomial) h(x) of degree 2m in the real n-dimensional vector x is sum of squares of forms (SOS) if and only if there exist forms 
 
 
 
  of degree m such that



Explicit sufficient conditions for a form to be SOS have been found.12 However every real nonnegative form can be approximated as closely as desired (in the 
 
 
 
 -norm of its coefficient vector) by a sequence of forms 
 
 
 
  that are SOS.3
Square matricial representation (SMR)
To establish whether a form h(x) is SOS amounts to solving a convex optimization problem. Indeed, any h(x) can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is a vector containing a base for the forms of degree m in x (such as all monomials of degree m in x), the prime ′ denotes the transpose, H is any symmetric matrix satisfying



and 
 
 
 
  is a linear parameterization of the linear space



The dimension of the vector 
 
 
 
  is given by



whereas the dimension of the vector 
 
 
 
  is given by



Then, h(x) is SOS if and only if there exists a vector 
 
 
 
  such that



meaning that the matrix 
 
 
 
  is positive-semidefinite. This is a linear matrix inequality (LMI) feasibility test, which is a convex optimization problem. The expression 
 
 
 
  was introduced in 4 with the name square matricial representation (SMR) in order to establish whether a form is SOS via an LMI. This representation is also known as Gram matrix.5
Examples

Consider the form of degree 4 in two variables 
 
 
 
 . We have





Since there exists α such that 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
 
 , it follows that h(x) is SOS.
 


Consider the form of degree 4 in three variables 
 
 
 
 . We have





Since 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , it follows that h(x) is SOS.
 

Matrix SOS
A matrix form F(x) (i.e., a matrix whose entries are forms) of dimension r and degree 2m in the real n-dimensional vector x is SOS if and only if there exist matrix forms 
 
 
 
  of degree m such that



Matrix SMR
To establish whether a matrix form F(x) is SOS amounts to solving a convex optimization problem. Indeed, similarly to the scalar case any F(x) can be written according to the SMR as



where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker product of matrices, H is any symmetric matrix satisfying



and 
 
 
 
  is a linear parameterization of the linear space



The dimension of the vector 
 
 
 
  is given by



Then, F(x) is SOS if and only if there exists a vector 
 
 
 
  such that the following LMI holds:



The expression 
 
 
 
  was introduced in 6 in order to establish whether a matrix form is SOS via an LMI.
References
See also

Sum-of-squares optimization

"
Category:Homogeneous polynomials Category:Real algebraic geometry













