


Area theorem (conformal mapping)




Area theorem (conformal mapping)

In the mathematical theory of conformal mappings, the area theorem gives an inequality satisfied by the power series coefficients of certain conformal mappings. The theorem is called by that name, not because of its implications, but rather because the proof uses the notion of area.
Statement
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is analytic and injective in the punctured open unit disk

 
  and has the power series representation


 
  then the coefficients 
 
 
 
  satisfy



Proof
The idea of the proof is to look at the area uncovered by the image of 
 
 
 
 . Define for 
 
 



 
  Then 
 
 
 
  is a simple closed curve in the plane. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the unique bounded connected component of 
 
 
 
 . The existence and uniqueness of 
 
 
 
  follows from Jordan's curve theorem.
If 
 
 
 
  is a domain in the plane whose boundary is a smooth simple closed curve 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  provided that 
 
 
 
  is positively oriented around 
 
 
 
 . This follows easily, for example, from Green's theorem. As we will soon see, 
 
 
 
  is positively oriented around 
 
 
 
  (and that is the reason for the minus sign in the definition of 
 
 
 
 ). After applying the chain rule and the formula for 
 
 
 
 , the above expressions for the area give


 
  Therefore, the area of 
 
 
 
  also equals to the average of the two expressions on the right hand side. After simplification, this yields


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes complex conjugation. We set 
 
 
 
  and use the power series expansion for 
 
 
 
 , to get


 
  (Since 
 
 
 
  the rearrangement of the terms is justified.) Now note that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and is zero otherwise. Therefore, we get


 
  The area of 
 
 
 
  is clearly positive. Therefore, the right hand side is positive. Since 
 
 
 
 , by letting 
 
 
 
 , the theorem now follows.
It only remains to justify the claim that 
 
 
 
  is positively oriented around 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  satisfy 
 
 
 
 , say. For very small 
 
 
 
 , we may write the expression for the winding number of 
 
 
 
  around 
 
 
 
 , and verify that it is equal to 
 
 
 
 . Since, 
 
 
 
  does not pass through 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  (as 
 
 
 
  is injective), the invariance of the winding number under homotopy in the complement of 
 
 
 
  implies that the winding number of 
 
 
 
  around 
 
 
 
  is also 
 
 
 
 . This implies that 
 
 
 
  and that 
 
 
 
  is positively oriented around $D_r$, as required.
Uses
The inequalities satisfied by power series coefficients of conformal mappings were of considerable interest to mathematicians prior to the solution of the Bieberbach conjecture. The area theorem is a central tool in this context. Moreover, the area theorem is often used in order to prove the Koebe 1/4 theorem, which is very useful in the study of the geometry of conformal mappings.
References



"
Category:Theorems in complex analysis Category:Articles containing proofs


