


ASC CDL




ASC CDL

The American Society of Cinematographers Color Decision List (ASC CDL) is a format for the exchange of basic primary color grading information between equipment and software from different manufacturers. The format defines the math for three functions: Slope, Offset and Power. Each function uses a number for the red, green, and blue color channels for a total of nine numbers comprising a single color decision. A tenth number, Saturation, specified in the Version 1.2 release, applies to the R, G, and B color channels in combination.
The ASC CDL was developed by the ASC Technology Committee, a combined group of cinematographers, post-production engineers, and other motion picture industry professionals.
Although the basic controls of most color correction systems are similar, they differ somewhat in specific implementation and detail. The ASC CDL is a common standard that color correctors can translate their proprietary settings to and from. The ASC CDL functions are mathematically orthogonal primitives that can be used to represent vendor-specific corrections. ASC CDL correction functions also in some cases can appear in the user interface and be used directly.
The ASC CDL allows color corrections made with one device at one location to be applied or modified by other devices elsewhere. For example a cinematographer filming on location can create a color correction with a small portable device, sending the ASC CDL color correction to a colorist in post-production to use as a starting point for final color correction. To communicate "looks" usefully in this fashion, calibrations, viewing environments, devices, and any output transforms (e.g. film look) must be managed very carefully; in general, they should be identical at origination and subsequent viewing.
The ASC has defined an XML schema for exchanging ASC CDL data, along with other metadata about what image(s) the color corrections were applied to, the type of input signal used, and the viewing device and environment. They have also standardized methods for using ASC CDL data within the following file formats:

Avid Log Exchange (ALE)
Film Log EDL Exchange (FLEx)
CMX Edit Decision List

Combined Function
The formula for ASC CDL color correction is:



where


 
  is the color graded pixel code value


 
  is the input pixel code value (0=black, 1=white)


 
  is slope (any number 0 or greater, nominal value is 1.0)


 
  is offset (any number, nominal value is 0)


 
  is power (any number greater than 0, nominal value is 1.0)
The formula is applied to the three color values for each pixel using the corresponding slope, offset, and power numbers for each color channel.
Some systems supporting ASC CDL

Assimilate Scratch color corrector
Autodesk finishing, VFX and colour grading systems
Avid editing systems
Blackmagic Design Resolve colorgrading system
Blender_(software)|Blender Color Balance node
Codex Digital File-based recording solutions
Colorfront On-Set Dailies, Express Dailies and Express Live
Digilab Services Colour and Exposure Management system
FilmLight Baselight color correction system
DFT, Digital Film Technology Weiterstadt Flexxity, BonesDailies
Gamma and Density 3cP on-set color correction system
HS-Art Digital DIAMANT Digital Film Restoration Software
Image Systems Nucoda Film Master color corrector
IRIDAS SpeedGrade color corrector
Light Illusion LightSpace CMS
Marquise Technologies M I S T, R A I N
MTI Film CORTEX Dailies, CORTEX Dailies Enterprise Edition
OpenColorIO Open Source color management framework for motion pictures
[http://www.pandora-int.com/products.php?pgid=37&subid;;=37/ Pandora PLUTO] Display Management and On-Set colour correction System
Pandora Revolution color corrector system
Pomfort LiveGrade Powerful On-Set Solution for Look and Color Management
SGO Mistika finishing, compositing, stereo 3D and colour grading system
Synthetic Aperture Color Finesse
The Pixel Farm PFClean Film Restoration Software and Systems
Thomson Grass Valley BONES Dailies
Workflowers WF_x plugins for color correctors
YoYotta YoYo

Current Release
Instructions for getting the current release of ASC CDL implementor-oriented documentation can be retrieved by sending an e-mail to asc-cdl at theasc dot com.
See also

Academy Color Encoding System
Color grading
Color Management
Colour look-up table
Telecine

References

Pines, Joshua and Reisner, David (2009). ASC Color Decision List (ASC CDL) Transfer Functions and Interchange Syntax, Version 1.2, American Society of Cinematographers Technology Committee, DI Subcommittee
Bankston, Douglas. "ASC Celebrates 90th Anniversary", Variety (magazine), October 29, 2008
Benjamin. "An Overview of the ASC CDL", American Cinematographer, October 2008
Kaufman, Debra. "Using the ASC CDL on State of Play", Studio Daily, July 10, 2008
Clark, Curtis and Reisner, David et al. "Progress Report: ASC Technology Committee", SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal, September 2007
"Color Code has ASC in the pink", The Hollywood Reporter, June 22, 2007
Bankston, Douglas. "ASC Technology Committee Update", American Cinematographer, December 2006
Giardina, Carolyn. "Manufacturers' Support Grows for ASC CDL", Shoot, October 6, 2006

External links

ASC Technology Committee

"
Category:Cinematography Category:Academy Award for Technical Achievement winners


