   G2-structure      G2-structure   In differential geometry , a G 2 -structure is an important type of G-structure that can be defined on a smooth manifold . If M is a smooth manifold of dimension seven, then a G 2 -structure is a reduction of structure group of the frame bundle of M to the compact , exceptional Lie group  G 2 .  Equivalent conditions  The condition of ''M '' admitting a G 2 structure is equivalent to any of the following conditions:   The first and second Stiefel–Whitney classes of M vanish.  M is orientable and admits a spin structure .   The last condition above correctly suggests that many manifolds admit G 2 -structures.  History  Manifolds with holonomy    G  2     subscript  G  2    G_{2}   were first introduced by Edmond Bonan in 1966, who constructed the parallel 3-form, the parallel 4-form and showed that these manifolds are Ricci-flat. The first complete, but noncompact 7-manifolds with holonomy    G  2     subscript  G  2    G_{2}   were constructed by Robert Bryant and Salamon in 1989. The first compact 7-manifolds with holonomy    G  2     subscript  G  2    G_{2}   were constructed by Dominic Joyce in 1994, and compact    G  2     subscript  G  2    G_{2}   manifolds are sometimes known as "Joyce manifolds", especially in the physics literature.  Remarks  The property of being a G 2 -manifold is much stronger than that of admitting a G 2 -structure. Indeed, a G 2 -manifold is a manifold with a G 2 -structure which is torsion-free .  The letter "G" occurring in the phrases "G-structure" and "G 2 -structure" refers to different things. In the first case, G-structures take their name from the fact that arbitrary Lie groups are typically denoted with the letter "G". On the other hand, the letter "G" in "G 2 " comes from the fact that the its Lie algebra is the seventh type ("G" being the seventh letter of the alphabet) in the classification of complex simple Lie algebras by Élie Cartan .  See also   G 2 -manifold , Spin(7) manifold   References    .   .   .   .   "  Category:Differential geometry  Category:Riemannian geometry  Category:Structures on manifolds   