


Dispersionless equation




Dispersionless equation

Dispersionless (or quasi-classical) limits of integrable partial differential equations (PDE) arise in various problems of mathematics and physics and have been intensively studied in recent literature (see, f.i., [1]-[5]). They typically arise when considering slowly modulated long waves of an integrable dispersive PDE system.
Examples
Dispersionless KP equation
The dispersionless Kadomtsev–Petviashvili equation (dKPE) has the form


 
  It arises from the commutation


 
  of the following pair of 1-parameter families of vector fields





 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a spectral parameter. The dKPE is the 
 
 
 
 -dispersionless limit of the celebrated Kadomtsev–Petviashvili equation, arising when considering long waves of that system.
The Benney Moment Equations
The dispersionless KP system is closely related to the Benney moment hierarchy, each of which is a dispersionless integrable system:


 
  These arise as the consistency condition between


 
  and the simplest two evolutions in the hierarchy are:






The dKP is recovered on setting


 
  and eliminating the other moments, as well as identifying 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
If one sets 
 
 
 
 , so that the countably many moments 
 
 
 
  are expressed in terms of just two functions, the classical shallow water equations result:





 
  These may also be derived from considering slowly modulated wave train solutions of the nonlinear Schrodinger equation. Such 'reductions', expressing the moments in terms of finitely many dependent variables, are described by the Gibbons-Tsarev equation.
Dispersionless Korteweg–de Vries equation
The dispersionless Korteweg–de Vries equation (dKdVE) reads as



It is the dispersionless or quasiclassical limit of the Korteweg–de Vries equation. It is satisfied by 
 
 
 
 -independent solutions of the dKP system. It is also obtainable from the 
 
 
 
 -flow of the Benney hierarchy on setting



Dispersionless Novikov–Veselov equation
The dispersionless Novikov-Veselov equation is most commonly written as the following equation for a real-valued function 
 
 
 
 :



where the following standard notation of complex analysis is used
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . The function 
 
 
 
  here is an auxiliary function, defined uniquely from 
 
 
 
  up to a holomorphic summand.
See also

Integrable systems
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation
Nonlinear systems
Davey–Stewartson equation
Dispersive partial differential equation
Kadomtsev–Petviashvili equation
Korteweg–de Vries equation

References

Kodama Y., Gibbons J. "Integrability of the dispersionless KP hierarchy", Nonlinear World 1, (1990).
Zakharov V.E. "Dispersionless limit of integrable systems in 2+1 dimensions", Singular Limits of Dispersive Waves, NATO ASI series, Volume 320, 165-174, (1994).
Takasaki K., Takebe T. Rev. Math. Phys., 7, 743 (1995)
Konopelchenko B.G. "Quasiclassical generalized Weierstrass representation and dispersionless DS equation", ArXiv: 0709.4148
Konopelchenko B.G., Moro A. "Integrable Equations in Nonlinear Geometrical Optics", Studies in Applied Mathematics, 113(4), pp. 325–352 (2004)
Dunajski M. "Interpolating integrable system". ArXiv: 0804.1234

External links

Ishimori_system at the dispersive equations wiki

"
Category:Partial differential equations


