


Ancestral relation




Ancestral relation

In mathematical logic, the ancestral relation (often shortened to ancestral) of a binary relation R is its transitive closure, however defined in a different way, see below.
Ancestral relations make their first appearance in Frege's Begriffsschrift. Frege later employed them in his Grundgesetze as part of his definition of the finite cardinals. Hence the ancestral was a key part of his search for a logicist foundation of arithmetic.
Definition
The numbered propositions below are taken from his Begriffsschrift and recast in contemporary notation.
A property P is called R-hereditary if, whenever x is P and xRy holds, then y is also P:



Frege defined b to be an R-ancestor of a, written aR*b, if b has every R-hereditary property that all objects x such that aRx have:



The ancestral is a transitive relation:



Let the notation I(R) denote that R is functional (Frege calls such relations "many-one"):



If R is functional, then the ancestral of R is what nowadays is called connected:



Relationship to transitive closure
The Ancestral relation 
 
 
 
  is equal to the transitive closure

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, 
 
 
 
  is transitive (see 98 above), 
 
 
 
  contains 
 
 
 
  (indeed, if aRb then, of course, b has every R-hereditary property that all objects x such that aRx have, because b is one of them), and finally, 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
  (indeed, assume 
 
 
 
 ; take the property 
 
 
 
  to be 
 
 
 
 ; then the two premises, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , are obviously satisfied; therefore, 
 
 
 
 , which means 
 
 
 
 , by our choice of 
 
 
 
 ). See also Boolos's book below, page 8.
Discussion
Principia Mathematica made repeated use of the ancestral, as does Quine's (1951) Mathematical Logic.
However, it is worth noting that the ancestral relation cannot be defined in first-order logic. It is controversial whether second-order logic is really "logic" at all. Quine famously claimed that it was not, despite his reliance upon it for his 1951 book (which largely retells Principia in abbreviated form, for which second-order logic is required to fit its theorems).
See also

Begriffsschrift
Gottlob Frege
Transitive closure

References

George Boolos, 1998. Logic, Logic, and Logic. Harvard Univ. Press.
Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. In Search of Mathematical Roots. Princeton Univ. Press.
Willard Van Orman Quine, 1951 (1940). Mathematical Logic. Harvard Univ. Press. ISBN 0-674-55451-5.

External links

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Frege's Logic, Theorem, and Foundations for Arithmetic" -- by Edward N. Zalta. Section 4.2.

ja:概念記法"
Category:Mathematical relations


