


Arithmetic derivative




Arithmetic derivative

In number theory, the Lagarias arithmetic derivative, or number derivative, is a function defined for integers, based on prime factorization, by analogy with the product rule for the derivative of a function that is used in mathematical analysis.
Remark: There are many versions of "Arithmetic Derivatives", there are the ones as in this article (Lagarias Arithmetic Derivative), Ihara's Arithmetic Derivative, and Buium's Arithmetic Derivatives.
Definition
For natural numbers the arithmetic derivative is defined as follows:



 
  for any prime 
 
 
 
 .


 
  for any 
 
 
 
  (Leibniz rule).

To coincide with the Leibniz rule 
 
 
 
  is defined to be 
 
 
 
 , as is 
 
 
 
 . Explicitly, assume that



where 
 
 
 
  are distinct primes and 
 
 
 
  are positive integers. Then



The arithmetic derivative also preserves the power rule (for primes):



where 
 
 
 
  is prime and 
 
 
 
  is a positive integer. For example,



The sequence of number derivatives for k = 0, 1, 2, ... begins :

0, 0, 1, 1, 4, 1, 5, 1, 12, 6, 7, 1, 16, 1, 9, ....
 

E. J. Barbeau was most likely the first person to formalize this definition. He also extended it to all integers by proving that 
 
 
 
  uniquely defines the derivative over the integers. Barbeau also further extended it to rational numbers,showing that the familiar quotient rule gives a well-defined derivative on Q:



Victor Ufnarovski and Bo Åhlander expanded it to certain irrationals. In these extensions, the formula above still applies, but the exponents 
 
 
 
  are allowed to be arbitrary rational numbers.
The logarithmic derivative

 
  is a totally additive function.
Average order
We have



and



for any δ>0, where



Inequalities and bounds
E. J. Barbeau examined bounds of the arithmetic derivative. He found that the arithmetic derivative of natural numbers is bounded by


 
  where k is the least prime in n and


 
  where s is the number of prime factors in n. In both bounds above, equality always occurs when n is a perfect power of 2, that is 
 
 
 
  for some m.
Alexander Loiko, Jonas Olsson and Niklas Dahl found that it is impossible to find similar bounds for the arithmetic derivative extended to rational numbers by proving that between any two rational numbers there are other rationals with arbitrary large or small derivatives.
Relevance to number theory
Victor Ufnarovski and Bo Åhlander have detailed the function's connection to famous number-theoretic conjectures like the twin prime conjecture, the prime triples conjecture, and Goldbach's conjecture. For example, Goldbach's conjecture would imply, for each k > 1 the existence of an n so that n' = 2k. The twin prime conjecture would imply that there are infinitely many k for which k'' = 1.
References



Arithmetic Derivative, Planet Math, accessed 04:15, 9 April 2008 (UTC)
L. Westrick. Investigations of the Number Derivative.
Peterson, I. Math Trek: Deriving the Structure of Numbers.

Dahl N., Olsson J., Loiko A., Investigation of the properties of the arithmetic derivative.

"
Category:Number theory Category:Generalizations of the derivative


