


Extremal length




Extremal length

In the mathematical theory of conformal and quasiconformal mappings, the extremal length of a collection of curves

 
  is a measure of the size of 
 
 
 
  that is invariant under conformal mappings. More specifically, suppose that 
 
 
 
  is an open set in the complex plane and 
 
 
 
  is a collection of paths in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a conformal mapping. Then the extremal length of 
 
 
 
  is equal to the extremal length of the image of 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 . One also works with the conformal modulus of 
 
 
 
 , the reciprocal of the extremal length. The fact that extremal length and conformal modulus are conformal invariants of 
 
 
 
  makes them useful tools in the study of conformal and quasi-conformal mappings. One also works with extremal length in dimensions greater than two and certain other metric spaces, but the following deals primarily with the two dimensional setting.
Definition of extremal length
To define extremal length, we need to first introduce several related quantities. Let 
 
 
 
  be an open set in the complex plane. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a collection of rectifiable curves in 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is Borel-measurable, then for any rectifiable curve 
 
 
 
  we let



denote the 

 
 -length of 
 
 
, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Euclidean element of length. (It is possible that 
 
 
 
 .) What does this really mean? If 
 
 
 
  is parameterized in some interval 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is the integral of the Borel-measurable function 
 
 
 
  with respect to the Borel measure on 
 
 
 
  for which the measure of every subinterval 
 
 
 
  is the length of the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . In other words, it is the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the length of the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Also set



The area of 
 
 
 
  is defined as


 
  and the extremal length of 
 
 
 
  is



where the supremum is over all Borel-measureable 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  contains some non-rectifiable curves and 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of rectifiable curves in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is defined to be 
 
 
 
 .
The term (conformal) modulus of 
 
 
 
  refers to 
 
 
 
 .
The extremal distance in 
 
 
 
  between two sets in 
 
 
 
  is the extremal length of the collection of curves in 
 
 
 
  with one endpoint in one set and the other endpoint in the other set.
Examples
In this section the extremal length is calculated in several examples. The first three of these examples are actually useful in applications of extremal length.
Extremal distance in rectangle
Fix some positive numbers 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be the rectangle 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of all finite length curves 
 
 
 
  that cross the rectangle left to right, in the sense that 
 
 
 
  is on the left edge 
 
 
 
  of the rectangle, and 
 
 
 
  is on the right edge 
 
 
 
 . (The limits necessarily exist, because we are assuming that 
 
 
 
  has finite length.) We will now prove that in this case



First, we may take 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
  gives 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The definition of 
 
 
 
  as a supremum then gives 
 
 
 
 .
The opposite inequality is not quite so easy. Consider an arbitrary Borel-measurable 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  (where we are identifying 
 
 
 
  with the complex plane). Then 
 
 
 
 , and hence 
 
 
 
 . The latter inequality may be written as


 
  Integrating this inequality over 
 
 
 
  implies


 
 . Now a change of variable 
 
 
 
  and an application of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality give


 
 . This gives 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, 
 
 
 
 , as required.
As the proof shows, the extremal length of 
 
 
 
  is the same as the extremal length of the much smaller collection of curves 
 
 
 
 .
It should be pointed out that the extremal length of the family of curves 
 
 
 
  that connect the bottom edge of 
 
 
 
  to the top edge of 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
 , by the same argument. Therefore, 
 
 
 
 . It is natural to refer to this as a duality property of extremal length, and a similar duality property occurs in the context of the next subsection. Observe that obtaining a lower bound on 
 
 
 
  is generally easier than obtaining an upper bound, since the lower bound involves choosing a reasonably good 
 
 
 
  and estimating 
 
 
 
 , while the upper bound involves proving a statement about all possible 
 
 
 
 . For this reason, duality is often useful when it can be established: when we know that 
 
 
 
 , a lower bound on 
 
 
 
  translates to an upper bound on 
 
 
 
 .
Extremal distance in annulus
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two radii satisfying 
 
 
 
  be the annulus 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the two boundary components of 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Consider the extremal distance in 
 
 
 
  between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ; which is the extremal length of the collection 
 
 
 
  of curves 
 
 
 
  connecting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
To obtain a lower bound on 
 
 
 
 , we take 
 
 
 
 . Then for 
 
 
 
  oriented from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 



 
  On the other hand,


 
  We conclude that



We now see that this inequality is really an equality by employing an argument similar to the one given above for the rectangle. Consider an arbitrary Borel-measurable 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
  let 
 
 
 
  denote the curve 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  We integrate over 
 
 
 
  and apply the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, to obtain:


 
  Squaring gives


 
  This implies the upper bound 
 
 
 
 . When combined with the lower bound, this yields the exact value of the extremal length:



Extremal length around an annulus
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be as above, but now let 
 
 
 
  be the collection of all curves that wind once around the annulus, separating 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 . Using the above methods, it is not hard to show that


 
  This illustrates another instance of extremal length duality.
Extremal length of topologically essential paths in projective plane
In the above examples, the extremal 
 
 
 
  which maximized the ratio 
 
 
 
  and gave the extremal length corresponded to a flat metric. In other words, when the Euclidean Riemannian metric of the corresponding planar domain is scaled by 
 
 
 
 , the resulting metric is flat. In the case of the rectangle, this was just the original metric, but for the annulus, the extremal metric identified is the metric of a cylinder. We now discuss an example where an extremal metric is not flat. The projective plane with the spherical metric is obtained by identifying antipodal points on the unit sphere in 
 
 
 
  with its Riemannian spherical metric. In other words, this is the quotient of the sphere by the map 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of closed curves in this projective plane that are not null-homotopic. (Each curve in 
 
 
 
  is obtained by projecting a curve on the sphere from a point to its antipode.) Then the spherical metric is extremal for this curve family.1 (The definition of extremal length readily extends to Riemannian surfaces.) Thus, the extremal length is 
 
 
 
 .
Extremal length of paths containing a point
If 
 
 
 
  is any collection of paths all of which have positive diameter and containing a point 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . This follows, for example, by taking


 
 
  which satisfies 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for every rectifiable 
 
 
 
 .
Elementary properties of extremal length
The extremal length satisfies a few simple monotonicity properties. First, it is clear that if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, the same conclusion holds if every curve 
 
 
 
  contains a curve 
 
 
 
  as a subcurve (that is, 
 
 
 
  is the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to a subinterval of its domain). Another sometimes useful inequality is


 
 
  This is clear if 
 
 
 
  or if 
 
 
 
 , in which case the right hand side is interpreted as 
 
 
 
 . So suppose that this is not the case and with no loss of generality assume that the curves in 
 
 
 
  are all rectifiable. Let 
 
 
 
 
  satisfy 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Set 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , which proves the inequality.
Conformal invariance of extremal length
Let 
 
 
 
  be a conformal homeomorphism (a bijective holomorphic map) between planar domains. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a collection of curves in 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  denote the image curves under 
 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 . This conformal invariance statement is the primary reason why the concept of extremal length is useful.
Here is a proof of conformal invariance. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of curves 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is rectifiable, and let 
 
 
 
 , which is the set of rectifiable curves in 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is Borel-measurable. Define


 
  A change of variables

 
  gives


 
  Now suppose that 
 
 
 
  is rectifiable, and set 
 
 
 
 . Formally, we may use a change of variables again:


 
  To justify this formal calculation, suppose that 
 
 
 
  is defined in some interval 
 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  denote the length of the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be similarly defined with 
 
 
 
 
  in place of 
 
 
 
 . Then it is easy to see that 
 
 
 
 , and this implies 
 
 
 
 , as required. The above equalities give,


 
  If we knew that each curve in 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  was rectifiable, this would prove 
 
 
 
  since we may also apply the above with 
 
 
 
  replaced by its inverse and 
 
 
 
  interchanged with 
 
 
 
 
 . It remains to handle the non-rectifiable curves.
Now let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of rectifiable curves 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is non-rectifiable. We claim that 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, take 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . Then a change of variable as above gives


 
  For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, suppose that 
 
 
 
  is such that 
 
 
 
  is unbounded. Set 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 
  is at least the length of the curve 
 
 
 
  (from an interval in 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ). Since 
 
 
 
 , it follows that 
 
 
 
 
 . Thus, indeed, 
 
 
 
 .
Using the results of the previous section, we have


 
 . We have already seen that 
 
 
 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
 . The reverse inequality holds by symmetry, and conformal invariance is therefore established.
Some applications of extremal length
By the calculation of the extremal distance in an annulus and the conformal invariance it follows that the annulus 
 
 
 
 
 .
Extremal length in higher dimensions
The notion of extremal length adapts to the study of various problems in dimensions 3 and higher, especially in relation to quasiconformal mappings.

Discrete extremal length
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is some graph and 
 
 
 
  is a collection of paths in 
 
 
 
 . There are two variants of extremal length in this setting. To define the edge extremal length, originally introduced by R. J. Duffin,2 consider a function 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
 
 
 -length of a path is defined as the sum of 
 
 
 
  over all edges in the path, counted with multiplicity. The "area" 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 
 
 . The extremal length of 
 
 
 
  is then defined as before. If 
 
 
 
  is interpreted as a resistor network, where each edge has unit resistance, then the effective resistance between two sets of veritces is precisely the edge extremal length of the collection of paths with one endpoint in one set and the other endpoint in the other set. Thus, discrete extremal length is useful for estimates in discrete potential theory.
Another notion of discrete extremal length that is appropriate in other contexts is vertex extremal length, where 
 
 
 
 , the area is 
 
 
 
 , and the length of a path is the sum of 
 
 
 
  over the vertices visited by the path, with multiplicity.
Notes
References





"
Category:Conformal mapping Category:Potential theory



Ahlfors (1973)
Duffin 1962




