


Hill yield criterion




Hill yield criterion

Rodney Hill has developed several yield criteria for anisotropic plastic deformations. The earliest version was a straightforward extension of the von Mises yield criterion and had a quadratic form. This model was later generalized by allowing for an exponent m. Variations of these criteria are in wide use for metals, polymers, and certain composites.
Quadratic Hill yield criterion
The quadratic Hill yield criterion1 has the form


 
  Here F, G, H, L, M, N are constants that have to be determined experimentally and 
 
 
 
  are the stresses. The quadratic Hill yield criterion depends only on the deviatoric stresses and is pressure independent. It predicts the same yield stress in tension and in compression.
Expressions for F, G, H, L, M, N
If the axes of material anisotropy are assumed to be orthogonal, we can write


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  are the normal yield stresses with respect to the axes of anisotropy. Therefore we have








 
  Similarly, if 
 
 
 
  are the yield stresses in shear (with respect to the axes of anisotropy), we have



Quadratic Hill yield criterion for plane stress
The quadratic Hill yield criterion for thin rolled plates (plane stress conditions) can be expressed as


 
  where the principal stresses 
 
 
 
  are assumed to be aligned with the axes of anisotropy with 
 
 
 
  in the rolling direction and 
 
 
 
  perpendicular to the rolling direction, 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the R-value in the rolling direction, and 
 
 
 
  is the R-value perpendicular to the rolling direction.
For the special case of transverse isotropy we have 
 
 
 
  and we get









Derivation of Hill's criterion for plane stress





For the situation where the principal stresses are aligned with the directions of anisotropy we have


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the principal stresses. If we assume an associated flow rule we have


 
  This implies that


 
 
  For plane stress 
 
 
 
 
 , which gives


 
 
  The R-value

 
  is defined as the ratio of the in-plane and out-of-plane plastic strains under uniaxial stress 
 
 
 
 . The quantity 
 
 
 
  is the plastic strain ratio under uniaxial stress 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, we have


 
  Then, using 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the yield condition can be written as


 
  which in turn may be expressed as


 
  This is of the same form as the required expression. All we have to do is to express 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 . Recall that,


 
 
  We can use these to obtain


 
 
  Solving for 
 
 
 
  gives us


 
  Plugging back into the expressions for 
 
 
 
  leads to


 
  which implies that


 
  Therefore the plane stress form of the quadratic Hill yield criterion can be expressed as








Generalized Hill yield criterion
The generalized Hill yield criterion2 has the form


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the principal stresses (which are aligned with the directions of anisotropy), 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress, and F, G, H, L, M, N are constants. The value of m is determined by the degree of anisotropy of the material and must be greater than 1 to ensure convexity of the yield surface.
Generalized Hill yield criterion for anisotropic material
For transversely isotropic materials with 
 
 
 
  being the plane of symmetry, the generalized Hill yield criterion reduces to (with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 )


 
 
  The R-value or Lankford coefficient can be determined by considering the situation where 
 
 
 
 . The R-value is then given by


 
  Under plane stress conditions and with some assumptions, the generalized Hill criterion can take several forms.3

Case 1:







Case 2:







Case 3:







Case 4:







Case 5:

 
 . This is the Hosford yield criterion.





Care must be exercised in using these forms of the generalized Hill yield criterion because the yield surfaces become concave (sometimes even unbounded) for certain combinations of

 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .4


Hill 1993 yield criterion
In 1993, Hill proposed another yield criterion 5 for plane stress problems with planar anisotropy. The Hill93 criterion has the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the uniaxial tensile yield stress in the rolling direction, 
 
 
 
  is the uniaxial tensile yield stress in the direction normal to the rolling direction, 
 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress under uniform biaxial tension, and 
 
 
 
  are parameters defined as


 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the R-value for uniaxial tension in the rolling direction, and 
 
 
 
  is the R-value for uniaxial tension in the in-plane direction perpendicular to the rolling direction.
Extensions of Hill's yield criteria
The original versions of Hill's yield criteria were designed for material that did not have pressure-dependent yield surfaces which are needed to model polymers and foams.
The Caddell-Raghava-Atkins yield criterion
An extension that allows for pressure dependence is Caddell-Raghava-Atkins (CRA) model 6 which has the form



The Deshpande-Fleck-Ashby yield criterion
Another pressure-dependent extension of Hill's quadratic yield criterion which has a form similar to the Bresler Pister yield criterion is the Deshpande, Fleck and Ashby (DFA) yield criterion 7 for honeycomb structures (used in sandwich composite construction). This yield criterion has the form



References


External links

[http://aluminium.matter.org.uk/content/html/eng/default.asp?catid=183&pageid;;=2144416653 Yield criteria for aluminum]

"
Category:Plasticity (physics) Category:Solid mechanics Category:Yield criteria



R. Hill. (1948). A theory of the yielding and plastic flow of anisotropic metals. Proc. Roy. Soc. London, 193:281–297
R. Hill. (1979). '' Theoretical plasticity of textured aggregates. '' Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 85(1):179–191.
Chu, E. (1995). Generalization of Hill's 1979 anisotropic yield criteria. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, vol. 50, pp. 207-215.
Zhu, Y., Dodd, B., Caddell, R. M. and Hosford, W. F. (1987). Limitations of Hill's 1979 anisotropic yield criterion. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, vol. 29, pp. 733.
Hill. R. (1993). User-friendly theory of orthotropic plasticity in sheet metals. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 19–25.
Caddell, R. M., Raghava, R. S. and Atkins, A. G., (1973), Yield criterion for anisotropic and pressure dependent solids such as oriented polymers. Journal of Materials Science, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 1641-1646.
Deshpande, V. S., Fleck, N. A. and Ashby, M. F. (2001). '' Effective properties of the octet-truss lattice material.'' Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1747-1769.




