


Invariant factorization of LPDOs




Invariant factorization of LPDOs

Introduction
The factorization of a linear partial differential operator (LPDO) is an important issue in the theory of integrability, due to the Laplace-Darboux transformations,1 which allow to construct integrable LPDEs. Laplace solved factorization problem for a bivariate hyperbolic operator of the second order (see Hyperbolic partial differential equation), constructing two Laplace invariants. Each Laplace invariant is an explicit polynomial condition of factorization; coefficients of this polynomial are explicit functions of the coefficients of the initial LPDO. The polynomial conditions of factorization are called invariants because they have the same form for equivalent (i.e. self-adjoint) operators.
Beals-Kartashova-factorization (also called BK-factorization) is a constructive procedure to factorize a bivariate operator of the arbitrary order and arbitrary form. Correspondingly, the factorization conditions in this case also have polynomial form, are invariants and coincide with Laplace invariants for bivariate hyperbolic operator of the second order. The factorization procedure is purely algebraic, the number of possible factirzations depends on the number of simple roots of the Characteristic polynomial (also called symbol) of the initial LPDO and reduced LPDOs appearing at each factorization step. Below the factorization procedure is described for a bivariate operator of the arbitrary form, of the order 2 and 3. Explicit factorization formulas for an operator of the order 
 
 
 
  can be found in2 General invariants are defined in3 and invariant formulation of the Beals-Kartashova factorization is given in4
Beals-Kartashova Factorization
Operator of order 2
Consider an operator



with smooth coefficients and look for a factorization



Let us write down the equations on 
 
 
 
  explicitly, keeping in mind the rule of left composition, i.e. that



Then in all cases


















where the notation 
 
 
 
  is used.
Without loss of generality, 
 
 
 
  i.e. 
 
 
 
  and it can be taken as 1, 
 
 
 
  Now solution of the system of 6 equations on the variables




 
  can be found in three steps.
At the first step, the roots of a quadratic polynomial have to be found.
At the second step, a linear system of two algebraic equations has to be solved.
At the third step, one algebraic condition has to be checked.
Step 1. Variables




 
  can be found from the first three equations,









The (possible) solutions are then the functions of the roots of a quadratic polynomial:



Let 
 
 
 
  be a root of the polynomial 
 
 
 
  then












Step 2. Substitution of the results obtained at the first step, into the next two equations






yields linear system of two algebraic equations:






In particularly, if the root 
 
 
 
  is simple, i.e.


 
  then these equations have the unique solution:






At this step, for each root of the polynomial 
 
 
 
  a corresponding set of coefficients 
 
 
 
  is computed.
Step 3. Check factorization condition (which is the last of the initial 6 equations)


 
  written in the known variables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ):



If



the operator 
 
 
 
  is factorizable and explicit form for the factorization coefficients 
 
 
 
  is given above.
Operator of order 3
Consider an operator



with smooth coefficients and look for a factorization



Similar to the case of the operator 
 
 
 
  the conditions of factorization are described by the following system:





























 
  with 
 
 
 
  and again 
 
 
 
  i.e. 
 
 
 
  and three-step procedure yields:
At the first step, the roots of a cubic polynomial



have to be found. Again 
 
 
 
  denotes a root and first four coefficients are















At the second step, a linear system of three algebraic equations has to be solved:









At the third step, two algebraic conditions have to be checked.
Operator of order 
 
 

Invariant Formulation
Definition The operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are called equivalent if there is a gauge transformation that takes one to the other:


 
  BK-factorization is then pure algebraic procedure which allows to construct explicitly a factorization of an arbitrary order LPDO 
 
 
 
  in the form


 
  with first-order operator 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary simple root of the characteristic polynomial


 
  Factorization is possible then for each simple root 
 
 
iff
for 
 
 

for 
 
 

for 
 
 

and so on. All functions 
 
 
 
  are known functions, for instance,









and so on.
Theorem All functions


 
  are invariants under gauge transformations.
Definition Invariants 
 
 
 
  are called generalized invariants of a bivariate operator of arbitrary order.
In particular case of the bivariate hyperbolic operator its generalized invariants coincide with Laplace invariants (see Laplace invariant).
Corollary If an operator 
 
 
 
  is factorizable, then all operators equivalent to it, are also factorizable.
Equivalent operators are easy to compute:





 
  and so on. Some example are given below:












Transpose
Factorization of an operator is the first step on the way of solving corresponding equation. But for solution we need right factors and BK-factorization constructs left factors which are easy to construct. On the other hand, the existence of a certain right factor of a LPDO is equivalent to the existence of a corresponding left factor of the transpose of that operator.
Definition The transpose 
 
 
 
  of an operator 
 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 
 
  and the identity 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 

Now the coefficients are




with a standard convention for binomial coefficients in several variables (see Binomial coefficient), e.g. in two variables


 
  In particular, for the operator 
 
 
 
  the coefficients are 
 
 



 
  For instance, the operator


 
  is factorizable as


 
  and its transpose 
 
 
 
  is factorizable then as 
 
 

See also

Partial derivative
Invariant (mathematics)
Invariant theory
Characteristic polynomial

Notes


References

J. Weiss. Bäcklund transformation and the Painlevé property. 1 J. Math. Phys. 27, 1293-1305 (1986).
R. Beals, E. Kartashova. Constructively factoring linear partial differential operators in two variables. Theor. Math. Phys. 145(2), pp. 1510-1523 (2005)
E. Kartashova. A Hierarchy of Generalized Invariants for Linear Partial Differential Operators. Theor. Math. Phys. 147(3), pp. 839-846 (2006)
E. Kartashova, O. Rudenko. Invariant Form of BK-factorization and its Applications. Proc. GIFT-2006, pp.225-241, Eds.: J. Calmet, R. W. Tucker, Karlsruhe University Press (2006); arXiv

"
Category:Multivariable calculus Category:Differential operators Category:Partial differential equations



Weiss (1986)↩
R. Beals, E. Kartashova. Constructively factoring linear partial differential operators in two variables. Theor. Math. Phys. 145(2), pp. 1510-1523 (2005)↩
E. Kartashova. A Hierarchy of Generalized Invariants for Linear Partial Differential Operators. Theor. Math. Phys. 147(3), pp. 839-846 (2006)↩
E. Kartashova, O. Rudenko. Invariant Form of BK-factorization and its Applications. Proc. GIFT-2006, pp.225-241, Eds.: J. Calmet, R. W. Tucker, Karlsruhe University Press (2006); arXiv↩




