


Lankford coefficient




Lankford coefficient

The Lankford coefficient (also called Lankford value, R-value, or plastic strain ratio)1 is a measure of the plastic anisotropy of a rolled sheet metal. This scalar quantity is used extensively as an indicator of the formability of recrystallized low-carbon steel sheets.2
Definition
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the coordinate directions in the plane of rolling and 
 
 
 
  is the thickness direction, then the R-value is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the plastic strain in-plane and 
 
 
 
  is the plastic strain through-the-thickness.
More recent studies have shown that the R-value of a material can depend strongly on the strain even at small strains  . In practice, the 
 
 
 
  value is usually measured at 20% elongation in a tensile test.
For sheet metals, the 
 
 
 
  values are usually determined for three different directions of loading in-plane (
 
 
 
  to the rolling direction) and the normal R-value is taken to be the average



The planar anisotropy coefficient or planar R-value is a measure of the variation of 
 
 
 
  with angle from the rolling direction. This quantity is defined as



Anisotropy of steel sheets
Generally, the Lankford value of cold rolled steel sheet acting for deep-drawability shows heavy orientation, and such deep-drawability is characterized by 
 
 
 
 . However, in the actual press-working, the deep-drawability of steel sheets cannot be determined only by the value of 
 
 
 
  and the measure of planar anisotropy, 
 
 
 
  is more appropriate.
In an ordinary cold rolled steel, 
 
 
 
  is the highest, and 
 
 
 
  is the lowest. Experience shows that even if 
 
 
 
  is close to 1, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be quite high leading to a high average value of 
 
 
 
 .3 In such cases, any press-forming process design on the basis of 
 
 
 
  does not lead to an improvement in deep-drawability.
See also

Yield surface

References
de:R-Wert (Werkstoffprüfung)"
Category:Plasticity (physics) Category:Solid mechanics Category:Metal forming



Lankford, W. T., Snyder, S. C., Bausher, J. A.: New criteria for predicting the press performance of deep drawing sheets. Trans. ASM, 42, 1197–1205 (1950).↩
Ken-ichiro Mori, Simulation of Materials Processing: Theory, Methods and Applications, (ISBN 9026518226), p. 436↩





