


Coupling from the past




Coupling from the past

Among Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, coupling from the past is a method for sampling from the stationary distribution of a Markov chain. Contrary to many MCMC algorithms, coupling from the past gives in principle a perfect sample from the stationary distribution . It was invented by James Propp and David Wilson in 1996.
The basic idea
Consider a finite state irreducible aperiodic Markov chain 
 
 
 
  with state space 
 
 
 
  and (unique) stationary distribution 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  is a probability vector). Suppose that we come up with a probability distribution 
 
 
 
  on the set of maps 
 
 
 
  with the property that for every fixed 
 
 
 
 , its image 
 
 
 
  is distributed according to the transition probability of 
 
 
 
  from state 
 
 
 
 . An example of such a probability distribution is the one where 
 
 
 
  is independent from 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
 , but it is often worthwhile to consider other distributions. Now let 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  be independent samples from 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is chosen randomly according to 
 
 
 
  and is independent from the sequence 
 
 
 
 . (We do not worry for now where this 
 
 
 
  is coming from.) Then 
 
 
 
  is also distributed according to 
 
 
 
 , because 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -stationary and our assumption on the law of 
 
 
 
 . Define


 
  Then it follows by induction that 
 
 
 
  is also distributed according to 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 . Now here is the main point. It may happen that for some 
 
 
 
  the image of the map 
 
 
 
  is a single element of 
 
 
 
 . In other words, 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, we do not need to have access to 
 
 
 
  in order to compute 
 
 
 
 . The algorithm then involves finding some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a singleton, and outputing the element of that singleton. The design of a good distribution 
 
 
 
  for which the task of finding such an 
 
 
 
  and computing 
 
 
 
  is not too costly is not always obvious, but has been accomplished successfully in several important instances.
The monotone case
There is a special class of Markov chains in which there are particularly good choices for 
 
 
 
  and a tool for determining if 
 
 
 
 . (Here 
 
 
 
  denotes cardinality.) Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a partially ordered set with order 
 
 
 
 , which has a unique minimal element 
 
 
 
  and a unique maximal element 
 
 
 
 ; that is, every 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
 . Also, suppose that 
 
 
 
  may be chosen to be supported on the set of monotone maps 
 
 
 
 . Then it is easy to see that 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 , since 
 
 
 
  is monotone. Thus, checking this becomes rather easy. The algorithm can proceed by choosing 
 
 
 
  for some constant 
 
 
 
 , sampling the maps 
 
 
 
 , and outputing 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  the algorithm proceeds by doubling 
 
 
 
  and repeating as necessary until an output is obtained. (But the algorithm does not resample the maps 
 
 
 
  which were already sampled; it uses the previously sampled maps when needed.)
References




"
Category:Monte Carlo methods Category:Markov chain Monte Carlo


