   Apostolico–Giancarlo algorithm      Apostolico–Giancarlo algorithm   In computer science , the Apostolico–Giancarlo algorithm is a variant of the Boyer–Moore string search algorithm , the basic application of which is searching for occurrences of a pattern   P   P   P   in a text   T   T   T   . As with other comparison-based string searches, this is done by aligning   P   P   P   to a certain index of   T   T   T   and checking whether a match occurs at that index.   P   P   P   is then shifted relative to   T   T   T   according to the rules of the Boyer-Moore algorithm, and the process repeats until the end of   T   T   T   has been reached. Application of the Boyer-Moore shift rules often results in large chunks of the text being skipped entirely.  With regard to the shift operation, Apostolico-Giancarlo is exactly equivalent in functionality to Boyer-Moore. The utility of Apostolico-Giancarlo is to speed up the match-checking operation at any index. With Boyer-Moore, finding an occurrence of   P   P   P   in   T   T   T   requires that all   n   n   n   characters of   P   P   P   be explicitly matched. For certain patterns and texts, this is very inefficient - a simple example is when both pattern and text consist of the same repeated character, in which case Boyer-Moore runs in    O   (   n  m   )       O    n  m     O(nm)   where   m   m   m   is the length in characters of   T   T   T   . Apostolico-Giancarlo speeds this up by recording the number of characters matched at the alignments of   T   T   T   in a table, which is combined with data gathered during the pre-processing of   P   P   P   to avoid redundant equality checking for sequences of characters that are known to match.  References   Apostolico A., Giancarlo R., 1986, The Boyer-Moore-Galil string searching strategies revisited, SIAM Journal on Computing 15(1):98-105.  Crochemore, M., Lecroq, T., 1997, Tight bounds on the complexity of the Apostolico–Giancarlo algorithm, Information Processing Letters 63(4):195-203.  Crochemore, M., Rytter, W. , 1994, Text Algorithms, Oxford University Press .  Gusfield, D., 1997, Algorithms on strings, trees, and sequences: Computer Science and Computational Biology, Cambridge University Press .  Lecroq, T., 1992, Recherches de mot, Ph. D. Thesis, University of Orléans , France.  Lecroq, T., 1995, Experimental results on string matching algorithms, Software - Practice & Experience 25(7):727-765.   "  Category:String matching algorithms   