


Generalized Verma module




Generalized Verma module

In mathematics, generalized Verma modules are a generalization of a (true) Verma module,1 and are objects in the representation theory of Lie algebras. They were studied originally by James Lepowsky in the nineteen seventies. The motivation for their study is that their homomorphisms correspond to invariant differential operators over generalized flag manifolds. The study of these operators is an important part of the theory of parabolic geometries.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a semisimple Lie algebra and 
 
 
 
  a parabolic subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 . For any irreducible finite-dimensional representation

 
  of 
 
 
 
  we define the generalized Verma module to be the relative tensor product


 
 .
The action of 
 
 
 
  is left multiplication in 
 
 
 
 .
If λ is the highest weight of V, we sometimes denote the Verma module by 
 
 
 
 .
Note that 
 
 
 
  makes sense only for 
 
 
 
 -dominant and 
 
 
 
 -integral weights (see weight) 
 
 
 
 .
It is well known that a parabolic subalgebra

 
  of 
 
 
 
  determines a unique grading

 
  so that 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 . It follows from the Poincaré–Birkhoff–Witt theorem that, as a vector space (and even as a 
 
 
 
 -module and as a 
 
 
 
 -module),


 
 .
In further text, we will denote a generalized Verma module simply by GVM.
Properties of GVMs
GVM's are highest weight modules and their highest weight λ is the highest weight of the representation V. If 
 
 
 
  is the highest weight vector in V, then 
 
 
 
  is the highest weight vector in 
 
 
 
 .
GVM's are weight modules, i.e. they are direct sum of its weight spaces and these weight spaces are finite-dimensional.
As all highest weight modules, GVM's are quotients of Verma modules. The kernel of the projection

 
  is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the set of those simple roots α such that the negative root spaces of root 
 
 
 
  are in 
 
 
 
  (the set S determines uniquely the subalgebra 
 
 
 
 ), 
 
 
 
  is the root reflection with respect to the root α and 
 
 
 
  is the affine action of 
 
 
 
  on λ. It follows from the theory of (true) Verma modules that 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to a unique submodule of 
 
 
 
 . In (1), we identified 
 
 
 
 . The sum in (1) is not direct.
In the special case when 
 
 
 
 , the parabolic subalgebra 
 
 
 
  is the Borel subalgebra and the GVM coincides with (true) Verma module. In the other extremal case when 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and the GVM is isomorphic to the inducing representation V.
The GVM 
 
 
 
  is called regular, if its highest weight λ is on the affine Weyl orbit of a dominant weight 
 
 
 
 . In other word, there exist an element w of the Weyl group W such that


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the affine action of the Weyl group.
The Verma module 
 
 
 
  is called singular, if there is no dominant weight on the affine orbit of λ. In this case, there exists a weight 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is on the wall of the fundamental Weyl chamber (δ is the sum of all fundamental weights).
Homomorphisms of GVMs
By a homomorphism of GVMs we mean 
 
 
 
 -homomorphism.
For any two weights 
 
 
 
  a homomorphism



may exist only if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are linked with an affine action of the Weyl group

 
  of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . This follows easily from the Harish-Chandra theorem on infinitesimal central characters.
Unlike in the case of (true) Verma modules, the homomorphisms of GVM's are in general not injective and the dimension



may be larger than one in some specific cases.
If 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphism of (true) Verma modules, 
 
 
 
  resp. 
 
 
 
  is the kernels of the projection 
 
 
 
 , resp. 
 
 
 
 , then there exists a homomorphism 
 
 
 
  and f factors to a homomorphism of generalized Verma modules 
 
 
 
 . Such a homomorphism (that is a factor of a homomorphism of Verma modules) is called standard. However, the standard homomorphism may be zero in some cases.
Standard
Let us suppose that there exists a nontrivial homomorphism of true Verma moduls 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of those simple roots α such that the negative root spaces of root 
 
 
 
  are in 
 
 
 
  (like in section Properties). The following theorem is proved by Lepowsky:2

The standard homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is zero if and only if there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to a submodule of 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  is the corresponding root reflection and 
 
 
 
  is the affine action).

The structure of GVMs on the affine orbit of a 
 
 
 
 -dominant and 
 
 
 
 -integral weight

 
  can be described explicitly. If W is the Weyl group of 
 
 
 
 , there exists a subset 
 
 
 
  of such elements, so that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -dominant. It can be shown that 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Weyl group of 
 
 
 
  (in particular, 
 
 
 
  does not depend on the choice of 
 
 
 
 ). The map 
 
 
 
  is a bijection between 
 
 
 
  and the set of GVM's with highest weights on the affine orbit of 
 
 
 
 . Let as suppose that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the Bruhat ordering (otherwise, there is no homomorphism of (true) Verma modules 
 
 
 
  and the standard homomorphism does not make sense, see Homomorphisms of Verma modules).
The following statements follow from the above theorem and the structure of 
 
 
 
 :

Theorem. If 
 
 
 
  for some positive root

 
  and the length (see Bruhat ordering) l(w')=l(w)+1, then there exists a nonzero standard homomorphism 
 
 
 
 .


Theorem. The standard homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is zero if and only if there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

However, if 
 
 
 
  is only dominant but not integral, there may still exist 
 
 
 
 -dominant and 
 
 
 
 -integral weights on its affine orbit.
The situation is even more complicated if the GVM's have singular character, i.e. there 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are on the affine orbit of some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is on the wall of the fundamental Weyl chamber.
Nonstandard
A homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is called nonstandard, if it is not standard. It may happen that the standard homomorphism of GVMs is zero but there still exists a nonstandard homomorphism.
Bernstein–Gelfand–Gelfand resolution
Examples
See also

Verma module
Parabolic geometry

References


"
Category:Representation theory of Lie algebras



Named after Daya-Nand Verma.
Lepowsky J., A generalization of the Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand resolution, J. Algebra, 49 (1977), 496-511.




