   Diphenylphosphine      Diphenylphosphine   Diphenylphosphine , also known as diphenylphosphane, is an organophosphorus compound with the formula (C 6 H 5 ) 2 PH. This foul-smelling, colorless liquid is easily oxidized in air. It is a precursor to organophosphorus ligands for use as catalysts .  Synthesis  Diphenylphosphine can be prepared cheaply from triphenylphosphine . 1   PPh 3 + 2 Li → LiPPh 2 + LiPh  LiPPh 2 + H 2 O → Ph 2 PH + LiOH   Uses and reactions  In the laboratory, diphenylphosphine is a common intermediate. It can be deprotonated to give diphenylphosphide derivatives: 2   Ph 2 PH + n BuLi → Ph 2 PLi + n BuH   The preparation of phosphine ligands , Wittig-Horner reagents , and phosphonium salts are commonly accomplished by alkylating diphenylphosphine. The hydrogen atom connected to phosphorus undergoes Michael-like addition to activated alkenes, providing products with which to produce phosphine ligands such as 1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane (Ph 2 PC 2 H 4 PPh 2 ). Diphenylphosphine and especially diphenylphosphide derivatives are nucleophiles, so they add to carbon – heteroatom double bonds. 3 For example, in the presence of concentrated hydrochloric acid at 100 °C, diphenylphosphine adds to the carbon atom in benzaldehyde to give (phenyl-(phenylmethyl)phosphoryl)benzene.   Ph 2 PH + PhCHO → Ph 2 P(O)CH 2 Ph   Compared to tertiary phosphines, diphenylphosphine is weakly basic. The pKa of the protonated derivative is 0.03: 4   Ph 2 PH 2 +     ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   Ph 2 PH + H +    Handling properties  During the handling of diphenylphosphine, care must be taken to avoid oxidation of diphenylphosphine. 5   Ph 2 PH + O 2 → Ph 2 P(O)OH   The use of the diphenylphosphine–borane complex, Ph 2 PH•BH 3 avoids the problem of phosphine oxidation by protecting the phosphine from oxidation and is available through chemical vendors. 6  References  "  Category:Aromatic compounds  Category:Phosphines     ↩  ↩   C. A. Streuli, "Determination of Basicity of Substituted Phosphines by Nonaqueous Titrimetry", Analytical Chemistry 1960, volume 32, pages 985-987. ↩  ↩      