


Hosford yield criterion




Hosford yield criterion

The Hosford yield criterion is a function that is used to determine whether a material has undergone plastic yielding under the action of stress.
Hosford yield criterion for isotropic plasticity
 The Hosford yield criterion for isotropic materials 1 is a generalization of the von Mises yield criterion. It has the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , i=1,2,3 are the principal stresses, 
 
 
 
  is a material-dependent exponent and 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial tension/compression.
Alternatively, the yield criterion may be written as


 
  This expression has the form of an Lp norm which is defined as


 
  When 
 
 
 
 , the we get the L∞ norm,


 
 . Comparing this with the Hosford criterion indicates that if n = ∞, we have


 
  This is identical to the Tresca yield criterion.
Therefore, when n = 1 or n goes to infinity the Hosford criterion reduces to the Tresca yield criterion. When n = 2 the Hosford criterion reduces to the von Mises yield criterion.
Note that the exponent n does not need to be an integer.
Hosford yield criterion for plane stress
For the practically important situation of plane stress, the Hosford yield criterion takes the form


 
  A plot of the yield locus in plane stress for various values of the exponent 
 
 
 
  is shown in the adjacent figure.
Logan-Hosford yield criterion for anisotropic plasticity
 The Logan-Hosford yield criterion for anisotropic plasticity 23 is similar to Hill's generalized yield criterion and has the form


 
  where F,G,H are constants, 
 
 
 
  are the principal stresses, and the exponent n depends on the type of crystal (bcc, fcc, hcp, etc.) and has a value much greater than 2.4 Accepted values of 
 
 
 
  are 6 for bcc materials and 8 for fcc materials.
Though the form is similar to Hill's generalized yield criterion, the exponent n is independent of the R-value unlike the Hill's criterion.
Logan-Hosford criterion in plane stress
Under plane stress conditions, the Logan-Hosford criterion can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the R-value and 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial tension/compression. For a derivation of this relation see Hill's yield criteria for plane stress. A plot of the yield locus for the anisotropic Hosford criterion is shown in the adjacent figure. For values of 
 
 
 
  that are less than 2, the yield locus exhibits corners and such values are not recommended.5
References


See also

Yield surface
Yield (engineering)
Plasticity (physics)
Stress (physics)

"
Category:Plasticity (physics) Category:Solid mechanics Category:Mechanics Category:Yield criteria



Hosford, W. F. (1972). A generalized isotropic yield criterion, Journal of Applied Mechanics, v. 39, n. 2, pp. 607-609.↩
Hosford, W. F., (1979), On yield loci of anisotropic cubic metals, Proc. 7th North American Metalworking Conf., SME, Dearborn, MI.↩
Logan, R. W. and Hosford, W. F., (1980), '' Upper-Bound Anisotropic Yield Locus Calculations Assuming-Pencil Glide'', International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, v. 22, n. 7, pp. 419-430.↩
Hosford, W. F., (2005), Mechanical Behavior of Materials, p. 92, Cambridge University Press.↩





