


Laplace invariant




Laplace invariant

In differential equations, the Laplace invariant of any of certain differential operators is a certain function of the coefficients and their derivatives. Consider a bivariate hyperbolic differential operator of the second order



whose coefficients



are smooth functions of two variables. Its Laplace invariants have the form



Their importance is due to the classical theorem:
Theorem: Two operators of the form are equivalent under gauge transformations if and only if their Laplace invariants coincide pairwise.
Here the operators



are called equivalent if there is a gauge transformation that takes one to the other:



Laplace invariants can be regarded as factorization "remainders" for the initial operator A:



If at least one of Laplace invariants is not equal to zero, i.e.



then this representation is a first step of the Laplace–Darboux transformations used for solving non-factorizable bivariate linear partial differential equations (LPDEs).
If both Laplace invariants are equal to zero, i.e.



then the differential operator A is factorizable and corresponding linear partial differential equation of second order is solvable.
Laplace invariants have been introduced for a bivariate linear partial differential operator (LPDO) of order 2 and of hyperbolic type. They are a particular case of generalized invariants which can be constructed for a bivariate LPDO of arbitrary order and arbitrary type; see Invariant factorization of LPDOs.
See also

Partial derivative
Invariant (mathematics)
Invariant theory

References

G. Darboux, "Leçons sur la théorie général des surfaces", Gauthier-Villars (1912) (Edition: Second)
G. Tzitzeica G., "Sur un theoreme de M. Darboux". Comptes Rendu de l'Academie des Aciences 150 (1910), pp. 955–956; 971–974
L. Bianchi, "Lezioni di geometria differenziale", Zanichelli, Bologna, (1924)
A. B. Shabat, "On the theory of Laplace–Darboux transformations". J. Theor. Math. Phys. Vol. 103, N.1,pp. 170–175 (1995) 1
A.N. Leznov, M.P. Saveliev. "Group-theoretical methods for integration on non-linear dynamical systems" (Russian), Moscow, Nauka (1985). English translation: Progress in Physics, 15. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel (1992)

"
Category:Multivariable calculus Category:Differential operators


