


Numerov's method




Numerov's method

Numerov's method is a numerical method to solve ordinary differential equations of second order in which the first-order term does not appear. It is a fourth-order linear multistep method. The method is implicit, but can be made explicit if the differential equation is linear.
Numerov's method was developed by the Russian astronomer Boris Vasil'evich Numerov.
The method
The Numerov method can be used to solve differential equations of the form



The function 
 
 
 
  is sampled in the interval [a..b] at equidistant positions 
 
 
 
 . Starting from function values at two consecutive samples 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the remaining function values can be calculated as



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the function values at the positions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the distance between two consecutive samples.
Nonlinear equations
For nonlinear equations of the form



the method is given by



This is an implicit linear multistep method, which reduces to the explicit method given above if f is linear in y by setting 
 
 
 
 . It achieves order 4 .
Application
In numerical physics the method is used to find solutions of the unidimensional Schrödinger equation for arbitrary potentials.



The above equation can be rewritten in the form



with 
 
 
 
 . If we compare this equation with the defining equation of the Numerov method we see



and thus can numerically solve the radial Schrödinger equation.
Derivation
Start with the Taylor expansion of 
 
 
 
  about a point 
 
 
 
 :



Denote the distance from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  and, noting that this means 
 
 
 
 , we can write the above equation as



Computationally, this amounts taking a step forward by an amount h. If we want to take a step backwards, replace every h with -h for the equation of 
 
 
 
 :



Note that only the odd powers of h experienced a sign change. On an evenly spaced grid, the nth site on a computational grid corresponds to position 
 
 
 
  if the step-size between grid points are of length 
 
 
 
  (hence h should be small for the computation to be accurate). This means we have sampling points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Taking the equations for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  from continuous space to discrete space, we see that






The sum of those two equations gives



We solve this equation for 
 
 
 
  and replace it by the expression 
 
 
 
  which we get from the defining differential equation.



We take the second derivative of our defining differential equation and get


 
  We replace the second derivative 
 
 
 
  with the second order difference quotient and insert this into our equation for 
 
 
 
  (note that we take the mixed forward and backward finite difference, not the double forward difference or the double backward difference)



We solve for 
 
 
 
  to get



This yields Numerov's method if we ignore the term of order 
 
 
 
 . It follows that the order of convergence (assuming stability) is 4.
References


.
  This book includes the following references:

.
.

External links
"
Category:Numerical differential equations


