


A¹ homotopy theory




A¹ homotopy theory

In algebraic geometry and algebraic topology, a branch of mathematics,  homotopy theory is a way to apply the techniques of algebraic topology, specifically homotopy, to algebraic varieties and, more generally, to schemes. The theory is due to Fabien Morel and Vladimir Voevodsky. The underlying idea is that it should be possible to develop a purely algebraic approach to homotopy theory by replacing the unit interval 
 
 
 
 , which is not an algebraic variety, with the affine line , which is. The theory requires a substantial amount of technique to set up, but has spectacular applications such as Voevodsky's construction of the derived category of mixed motives and the proof of the Milnor and Bloch-Kato conjectures.
Construction
 homotopy theory is founded on a category called the  homotopy category. This is the homotopy category for a certain closed model category whose construction requires two steps.
Step 1
Most of the construction works for any site

 
 . Assume that the site is subcanonical, and let 
 
 
 
  be the category of sheaves of sets on this site. This category is too restrictive, so we will need to enlarge it. Let 
 
 
 
  be the simplicial category, that is, the category whose objects are the sets




and whose morphisms are order-preserving functions. We let  denote the category of functors . That is,  is the category of simplicial objects on 
 
 
 
 . Such an object is also called a simplicial sheaf on 
 
 
 
 . The category of all simplicial sheaves on 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck topos.
A point of a site 
 
 
 
  is a geometric morphism , where 
 
 
 
  is the category of sets. We will define a closed model structure on  in terms of points. Let 
 
 
 
  be a morphism of simplicial sheaves. We say that:



 
  is a weak equivalence if, for any point 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the morphism of simplicial sets

 
  is a weak equivalence.


 
  is a cofibration if it is a monomorphism.


 
  is a fibration if it has the right lifting property with respect to any cofibration which is a weak equivalence.

The homotopy category of this model structure is denoted 
 
 
 
 .
Step 2
This model structure will not give the right homotopy category because it does not pay any attention to the unit interval object. Call this object 
 
 
 
 , and denote the final object of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . We assume that 
 
 
 
  comes with a map 
 
 
 
  and two maps  such that:

If 
 
 
 
  is the canonical morphism 
 
 
 
 , then



 μ(1I × i0) {{=}} i0p.}}

 μ(1I × i1) {{=}} 1I.}}





The morphism  is a monomorphism.

Now we localize the homotopy theory with respect to 
 
 
 
 . A simplicial sheaf 
 
 
 
  is called 
 
 
 
 -local if for any simplicial sheaf 
 
 
 
  the map



induced by  is a bijection. A morphism 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -weak equivalence if for any 
 
 
 
 -local 
 
 
 
 , the induced map



is a bijection. The homotopy theory of the site with interval 
 
 
 
  is the localization of  with respect to 
 
 
 
 -weak equivalences. This category is called 
 
 
 
 .
Formal Definition
Finally we may define the  homotopy category.

Definition. Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite-dimensional Noetherian scheme, and let  denote the category of smooth schemes over 
 
 
 
 . Equip  with the Nisnevich topology to get the site . We let the affine line  play the role of the interval. The above construction determines a closed model structure on , and the corresponding homotopy category is called the  homotopy category.
 

Note that by construction, for any 
 
 
 
  in , there is an isomorphism




in the homotopy category.
Properties of the theory
The setup, especially the Nisnevich topology, is chosen as to make algebraic K-theory representable by a spectrum, and in some aspects to make a proof of the Bloch-Kato conjecture possible.
After the Morel-Voevodsky construction there have been several different approaches to  homotopy theory by using other model category structures or by using other sheaves than Nisnevich sheaves (for example, Zariski sheaves or just all presheaves). Each of these constructions yield the same homotopy category.
There are two kinds of spheres in the theory: those coming from the multiplicative group playing the role of the 
 
 
 
 -sphere in topology, and those coming from the simplicial sphere (considered as constant simplicial sheaf). This leads to a theory of motivic spheres  with two indices. To compute the homotopy groups of motivic spheres would also yield the classical stable homotopy groups of the spheres, so in this respect  homotopy theory is at least as complicated as classical homotopy theory.
References




"
Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Homotopy theory


