


Modal matrix




Modal matrix

In linear algebra, the modal matrix is used in the diagonalization process involving eigenvalues and eigenvectors.1
Specifically the modal matrix 
 
 
 
  for the matrix 
 
 
 
  is the n × n matrix formed with the eigenvectors of 
 
 
 
  as columns in 
 
 
 
 . It is utilized in the similarity transformation



where 
 
 
 
  is an n × n diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  on the main diagonal of 
 
 
 
  and zeros elsewhere. The matrix 
 
 
 
  is called the spectral matrix for 
 
 
 
 . The eigenvalues must appear left to right, top to bottom in the same order as their corresponding eigenvectors are arranged left to right in 
 
 
 
 .2
Example
The matrix



has eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors









A diagonal matrix 
 
 
 
 , similar to 
 
 
 
  is



One possible choice for an invertible matrix

 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is


3
Note that since eigenvectors themselves are not unique, and since the columns of both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  may be interchanged, it follows that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not unique.4
Generalized modal matrix
Let 
 
 
 
  be an n × n matrix. A generalized modal matrix

 
  for 
 
 
 
  is an n × n matrix whose columns, considered as vectors, form a canonical basis for 
 
 
 
  and appear in 
 
 
 
  according to the following rules:

All Jordan chains consisting of one vector (that is, one vector in length) appear in the first columns of 
 
 
 
 .
All vectors of one chain appear together in adjacent columns of 
 
 
 
 .
Each chain appears in 
 
 
 
  in order of increasing rank (that is, the generalized eigenvector of rank 1 appears before the generalized eigenvector of rank 2 of the same chain, which appears before the generalized eigenvector of rank 3 of the same chain, etc.).5

One can show that







where 
 
 
 
  is a matrix in Jordan normal form. By premultiplying by 
 
 
 
 , we obtain







Note that when computing these matrices, equation () is the easiest of the two equations to verify, since it does not require inverting a matrix.6
Example
This example illustrates a generalized modal matrix with four Jordan chains. Unfortunately, it is a little difficult to construct an interesting example of low order.7 The matrix



has a single eigenvalue 
 
 
 
  with algebraic multiplicity

 
 . A canonical basis for 
 
 
 
  will consist of one linearly independent generalized eigenvector of rank 3 (generalized eigenvector rank; see generalized eigenvector), two of rank 2 and four of rank 1; or equivalently, one chain of three vectors 
 
 
 
 , one chain of two vectors 
 
 
 
 , and two chains of one vector 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
An "almost diagonal" matrix 
 
 
 
  in Jordan normal form, similar to 
 
 
 
  is obtained as follows:






where 
 
 
 
  is a generalized modal matrix for 
 
 
 
 , the columns of 
 
 
 
  are a canonical basis for 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .8 Note that since generalized eigenvectors themselves are not unique, and since some of the columns of both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  may be interchanged, it follows that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not unique.9
Notes


References





"
Category:Matrices
















