


Bresler Pister yield criterion




Bresler Pister yield criterion

The Bresler-Pister yield criterion1 is a function that was originally devised to predict the strength of concrete under multiaxial stress states. This yield criterion is an extension of the Drucker-Prager yield criterion and can be expressed on terms of the stress invariants as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the first invariant of the Cauchy stress, 
 
 
 
  is the second invariant of the deviatoric part of the Cauchy stress, and 
 
 
 
  are material constants.
Yield criteria of this form have also been used for polypropylene 2 and polymeric foams.3
The parameters 
 
 
 
  have to be chosen with care for reasonably shaped yield surfaces. If 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial compression, 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial tension, and 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in biaxial compression, the parameters can be expressed as









Derivation of expressions for parameters A, B, C





The Bresler-Pister yield criterion in terms of the principal stresses 
 
 
 
  is


 
  If 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial tension, then


 
  If 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial compression, then


 
  If 
 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in equibiaxial compression, then


 
  Solving these three equations for 
 
 
 
  (using Maple) gives us












(Figure)
Figure 1: View of the three-parameter Bresler-Pister yield surface in 3D space of principal stresses for 
 
 



(Figure)
Figure 2: The three-parameter Bresler-Pister yield surface in the 
 
 
 
 -plane for 
 
 



(Figure)
Figure 3: Trace of the three-parameter Bresler-Pister yield surface in the 
 
 
 
 -plane for 
 
 







Alternative forms of the Bresler-Pister yield criterion
In terms of the equivalent stress (
 
 
 
 ) and the mean stress (
 
 
 
 ), the Bresler-Pister yield criterion can be written as



The Etse-Willam4 form of the Bresler-Pister yield criterion for concrete can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial compression and 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial tension.
The GAZT yield criterion5 for plastic collapse of foams also has a form similar to the Bresler-Pister yield criterion and can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the density of the foam and 
 
 
 
  is the density of the matrix material.
References


See also

Yield surface
Yield (engineering)
Plasticity (physics)

"
Category:Plasticity (physics) Category:Solid mechanics Category:Yield criteria



Bresler, B. and Pister, K.S., (1985), Strength of concrete under combined stresses, ACI Journal, vol. 551, no. 9, pp. 321-345.↩
Pae, K. D., (1977), The macroscopic yield behavior of polymers in multiaxial stress fields, Journal of Materials Science, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1209-1214.↩
Kim, Y. and Kang, S., (2003), Development of experimental method to characterize pressure-dependent yield criteria for polymeric foams. Polymer Testing, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 197-202.↩
Etse, G. and Willam, K., (1994), Fracture energy formulation for inelastic behavior of plain concrete, Journal of Engineering Mechanics, vol. 120, no. 9, pp. 1983-2011.↩
Gibson, L. J., Ashby, M. F., Zhang, J., and Triantafillou, T. C. (1989). Failure surfaces for cellular materials under multiaxial loads. I. Modelling. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 635–663.↩




