


Open mapping theorem (functional analysis)




Open mapping theorem (functional analysis)

In functional analysis, the open mapping theorem, also known as the Banach–Schauder theorem (named after Stefan Banach and Juliusz Schauder), is a fundamental result which states that if a continuous linear operator between Banach spaces is surjective then it is an open map. More precisely, :

Open Mapping Theorem. If X and Y are Banach spaces and A : X → Y is a surjective continuous linear operator, then A is an open map (i.e. if U is an open set in X, then A(U) is open in Y).
 

The proof uses the Baire category theorem, and completeness of both X and Y is essential to the theorem. The statement of the theorem is no longer true if either space is just assumed to be a normed space, but is true if X and Y are taken to be Fréchet spaces.
Consequences
The open mapping theorem has several important consequences:

If A : X → Y is a bijective continuous linear operator between the Banach spaces X and Y, then the inverse operator A−1 : Y → X is continuous as well (this is called the bounded inverse theorem). 
If A : X → Y is a linear operator between the Banach spaces X and Y, and if for every sequence (xn) in X with xn → 0 and Axn → y it follows that y = 0, then A is continuous (the closed graph theorem). 

Proof
Suppose A : X → Y is a surjective continuous linear operator. In order to prove that A is an open map, it is sufficient to show that A maps the open unit ball in X to a neighborhood of the origin of Y.
Let 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
 .
Since A is surjective:



But Y is Banach so by Baire's category theorem



That is, we have c in Y and r > 0 such that



Let v ∈ V, then



By continuity of addition and linearity, the difference rv satisfies



and by linearity again,



where we have set L=2k/r. It follows that



Our next goal is to show that 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
 . By (1), there is some  with x1{{!!}}  and y − Ax1{{!!}} . Define a sequence {xn} inductively as follows. Assume:



Then by (1) we can pick  so that:



so (2) is satisfied for . Let



From the first inequality in (2), {sn} is a Cauchy sequence, and since X is complete, sn converges to some 
 
 
 
 . By (2), the sequence  tends to y, and so 
 
 
 
  by continuity of A. Also,



This shows that 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  as claimed. Thus the image A(U) of the unit ball in X contains the open ball 
 
 
 
  of Y. Hence, A(U) is a neighborhood of 0 in Y, and this concludes the proof.
Generalizations
Local convexity of X  or Y  is not essential to the proof, but completeness is: the theorem remains true in the case when X and Y are F-spaces. Furthermore, the theorem can be combined with the Baire category theorem in the following manner :

Let X be a F-space and Y a topological vector space. If 
 
 
 
  is a continuous linear operator, then either A(X) is a meager set in Y, or A(X) = Y. In the latter case, A is an open mapping and Y is also an F-space.

Furthermore, in this latter case if N is the kernel of A, then there is a canonical factorization of A in the form



where 
 
 
 
  is the quotient space (also an F-space) of X by the closed subspace N. The quotient mapping 
 
 
 
  is open, and the mapping α is an isomorphism of topological vector spaces .
The open mapping theorem can also be stated as1

Let X and Y be two F-spaces. Then every continuous linear map of X onto Y is a TVS homomorphism.
 

where a linear map 
 
 
 
  is a topological vector space (TVS) homomorphism if the induced map 
 
 
 
  is a TVS-isomorphism onto its image.
See also

Open mapping theorem (complex analysis)

References





"
Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in functional analysis



, p. 170↩




