


List of Banach spaces




List of Banach spaces

In the mathematical field of functional analysis, Banach spaces are among the most important objects of study. In other areas of mathematical analysis, most spaces which arise in practice turn out to be Banach spaces as well.
Classical Banach spaces
According to , the classical Banach spaces are those defined by , which is the source for the following table.
Here K denotes the field of real numbers or complex numbers and I is a closed and bounded interval [a,b]. The number p is a real number with , and q is its Hölder conjugate (also with ), so that the next equation holds:



and thus



The symbol Σ denotes a σ-algebra of sets, and Ξ denotes just an algebra of sets (for spaces only requiring finite additivity, such as the ba space). The symbol μ denotes a positive measure: that is, a real-valued positive set function defined on a σ-algebra which is countably additive.




style="border-bottom: 2px solid #303060" Classical Banach spaces






Kn



ℓnp



ℓn∞



ℓp



ℓ1



ℓ∞



c



c0



bv



bv0



bs



cs



B(X, Ξ)



C(X)



ba(Ξ)



ca(Σ)



rca(Σ)



Lp(μ)



L1(μ)



L∞(μ)



BV(I)



NBV(I)



AC(I)



Cn[a,b]



Banach spaces in other areas of analysis

The Asplund spaces
The Hardy spaces
The space BMO of functions of bounded mean oscillation
The space of functions of bounded variation
Sobolev spaces
The Birnbaum–Orlicz spaces LA(μ).
Hölder spaces Ck,α(Ω).
Lorentz space

Banach spaces serving as counterexamples

James' space, a Banach space that has a Schauder basis, but has no unconditional Schauder Basis. Also, James' space is isometrically isomorphic to its double dual, but fails to be reflexive.
Tsirelson space, a reflexive Banach space in which neither ℓp nor c0 can be embedded.
W.T. Gowers construction of a space X that is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  but not 
 
 
 
  serves as a counterexample for weakening the premises of the Schroeder–Bernstein theorem 1

Notes


References


.

.

"
Category:Banach spaces



W.T. Gowers, "A solution to the Schroeder–Bernstein problem for Banach spaces", Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, 28 (1996) pp. 297–304.




