


Tangential angle




Tangential angle

 In geometry, the tangential angle of a curve in the Cartesian plane, at a specific point, is the angle between the tangent line to the curve at the given point and the x-axis.1 (Note, some authors define the angle as the deviation from the direction of the curve at some fixed starting point. This is equivalent to the definition given here by the addition of a constant to the angle or by rotating the curve.2)
Equations
If a curve is given parametrically by 
 
 
 
 , then the tangential angle 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  is defined (up to a multiple of 
 
 
 
 ) by3



Here, the prime symbol denotes derivative. Thus, the tangential angle specifies the direction of the velocity vector 
 
 
 
 , while the speed specifies its magnitude. The vector 
 
 
 
  is called the unit tangent vector, so an equivalent definition is that the tangential angle at 
 
 
 
  is the angle 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is the unit tangent vector at 
 
 
 
 .
If the curve is parameterized by arc length

 
 , so 
 
 
 
 , then the definition simplifies to 
 
 
 
 . In this case, the curvature

 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is taken to be positive if the curve bends to the left and negative if the curve bends to the right.4
If the curve is given by 
 
 
 
 , then we may take 
 
 
 
  as the parameterization, and we may assume 
 
 
 
  is between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This produces the explicit expression 
 
 
 
 .
Polar tangential angle
In polar coordinates, define the polar tangential angle as the angle between the tangent line to the curve at the given point and ray from the origin to the point.5 If 
 
 
 
  denotes the polar tangential angle, then 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is as above and 
 
 
 
  is, as usual, the polar angle.
If the curve is defined in polar coordinates by 
 
 
 
 , then polar tangential angle 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  is defined (up to a multiple of 
 
 
 
 ) by


 
 .
If the curve is parameterized by arc length 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
 , then the definition becomes 
 
 
 
 .
The logarithmic spiral can be defined a curve whose polar tangential angle is constant.67
See also

Differential geometry of curves
Whewell equation
Subtangent

References



"Notations" at Encyclopédie des Formes Mathématiques Remarquables

"Angle between Tangent and Radius Vector" in An elementary treatise on the differential calculus By Benjamin Williamson p222 9th ed. (1899) [http://books.google.com/books?id=vYkAAAAAMAAJ&pg;;=PA222 online]

"
Category:Analytic geometry Category:Differential geometry



"Natural Equation" at MathWorld
For example W. Whewell "Of the Intrinsic Equation of a Curve, and its Application" Cambridge Philosophical Transactions Vol. VIII (1849) pp. 659-671. [http://books.google.com/books?id=2vsIAAAAIAAJ&pg;;=PA659 Google Books] uses φ to mean the angle between the tangent and tangent at the origin. This is the paper introducing the Whewell equation, an application of the tangential angle.
MathWorld "Tangential Angle"
MathWorld "Natural Equation" differentiating equation 1
"Logarithmic Spiral" at Planet Math

Williamson for section unless otherwise noted.




