


Valuation (logic)




Valuation (logic)

In logic and model theory, a valuation can be:

In propositional logic, an assignment of truth values to propositional variables, with a corresponding assignment of truth values to all propositional formulas with those variables.
In first-order logic and higher-order logics, a structure, (the interpretation) and the corresponding assignment of a truth value to each sentence in the language for that structure (the valuation proper). The interpretation must be a homomorphism, while valuation is simply a function.

Mathematical logic
In mathematical logic (especially model theory), a valuation is an assignment of truth values to formal sentences that follows a truth schema. Valuations are also called truth assignments.
In propositional logic, there are no quantifiers, and formulas are built from propositional variables using logical connectives. In this context, a valuation begins with an assignment of a truth value to each propositional variable. This assignment can be uniquely extended to an assignment of truth values to all propositional formulas.
In first-order logic, a language consists of a collection of constant symbols, a collection of function symbols, and a collection of relation symbols. Formulas are built out of atomic formulas using logical connectives and quantifiers. A structure consists of a set (domain of discourse) that determines the range of the quantifiers, along with interpretations of the constant, function, and relation symbols in the language. Corresponding to each structure is a unique truth assignment for all sentences (formulas with no free variables) in the language.
Notation
If 
 
 
 
  is a valuation, that is, a mapping from the atoms to the set 
 
 
 
 , then the double-bracket notation is commonly used to denote a valuation; that is, 
 
 
 
  for a proposition 
 
 
 
 .1
See also

Algebraic semantics

References


, chapter 6 Algebra of formalized languages.


"
Category:Semantic units Category:Model theory Category:Interpretation (philosophy)



Dirk van Dalen, (2004) Logic and Structure, Springer Universitext, (see section 1.2) ISBN 978-3-540-20879-2




