


Willam-Warnke yield criterion




Willam-Warnke yield criterion

 The Willam-Warnke yield criterion 1 is a function that is used to predict when failure will occur in concrete and other cohesive-frictional materials such as rock, soil, and ceramics. This yield criterion has the functional form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the first invariant of the Cauchy stress tensor, and 
 
 
 
  are the second and third invariants of the deviatoric part of the Cauchy stress tensor. There are three material parameters (
 
 
 
  - the uniaxial compressive strength, 
 
 
 
  - the uniaxial tensile strength, 
 
 
 
  - the equibiaxial compressive strength) that have to be determined before the Willam-Warnke yield criterion may be applied to predict failure.
In terms of 
 
 
 
 , the Willam-Warnke yield criterion can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a function that depends on 
 
 
 
  and the three material parameters and 
 
 
 
  depends only on the material parameters. The function 
 
 
 
  can be interpreted as the friction angle which depends on the Lode angle (
 
 
 
 ). The quantity 
 
 
 
  is interpreted as a cohesion pressure. The Willam-Warnke yield criterion may therefore be viewed as a combination of the Mohr-Coulomb and the Drucker-Prager yield criteria.
Willam-Warnke yield function
  In the original paper, the three-parameter Willam-Warnke yield function was expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the first invariant of the stress tensor, 
 
 
 
  is the second invariant of the deviatoric part of the stress tensor, 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial compression, and 
 
 
 
  is the Lode angle given by


 
  The locus of the boundary of the stress surface in the deviatoric stress plane is expressed in polar coordinates by the quantity 
 
 
 
  which is given by


 
  where



The quantities 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  describe the position vectors at the locations 
 
 
 
  and can be expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
  as


 
  The parameter 
 
 
 
  in the model is given by



The Haigh-Westergaard representation of the Willam-Warnke yield condition can be written as


 
  where



Modified forms of the Willam-Warnke yield criterion
 An alternative form of the Willam-Warnke yield criterion in Haigh-Westergaard coordinates is the Ulm-Coussy-Bazant form:2


 
  where


 
  and


 
 
  The quantities 
 
 
 
  are interpreted as friction coefficients. For the yield surface to be convex, the Willam-Warnke yield criterion requires that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .




(Figure)
View of Ulm-Coussy-Bazant version of the three-parameter Willam-Warnke yield surface in 3D space of principal stresses for 
 
 



(Figure)
Trace of the Ulm-Coussy-Bazant version of the three-parameter Willam-Warnke yield surface in the 
 
 
 
 -plane for 
 
 







See also

Yield (engineering)
Yield surface
Plasticity (physics)

References



Chen, W. F. (1982). Plasticity in Reinforced Concrete. McGraw Hill. New York.

External links

Kaspar Willam and E.P. Warnke (1974). Constitutive model for the triaxial behavior of concrete
Palko, J. L. (1993). Interactive reliability model for whisker-toughened ceramics
The ‘‘Chunnel’’ Fire. I: Chemoplastic softening in rapidly heated concrete by Franz-Josef Ulm, Olivier Coussy, and Zdeneˇk P. Bazˇant.

"
Category:Plasticity (physics) Category:Solid mechanics Category:Yield criteria



Willam, K. J. and Warnke, E. P. (1975). Constitutive models for the triaxial behavior of concrete. Proceedings of the International Assoc. for Bridge and Structural Engineering , vol 19, pp. 1- 30.
Ulm, F-J., Coussy, O., Bazant, Z. (1999) The ‘‘Chunnel’’ Fire. I: Chemoplastic softening in rapidly heated concrete. ASCE Journal of Engineering Mechanics, vol. 125, no. 3, pp. 272-282.




