


Drucker–Prager yield criterion




Drucker–Prager yield criterion

(Figure)
Figure 1: View of Drucker–Prager yield surface in 3D space of principal stresses for 
 
 


The Drucker–Prager yield criterion1 is a pressure-dependent model for determining whether a material has failed or undergone plastic yielding. The criterion was introduced to deal with the plastic deformation of soils. It and its many variants have been applied to rock, concrete, polymers, foams, and other pressure-dependent materials.
The Drucker–Prager yield criterion has the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the first invariant of the Cauchy stress and 
 
 
 
  is the second invariant of the deviatoric part of the Cauchy stress. The constants 
 
 
 
  are determined from experiments.
In terms of the equivalent stress (or von Mises stress) and the hydrostatic (or mean) stress, the Drucker–Prager criterion can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the equivalent stress, 
 
 
 
  is the hydrostatic stress, and 
 
 
 
  are material constants. The Drucker–Prager yield criterion expressed in Haigh–Westergaard coordinates is



The Drucker–Prager yield surface is a smooth version of the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface.
Expressions for A and B
The Drucker–Prager model can be written in terms of the principal stresses as


 
  If 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial tension, the Drucker–Prager criterion implies


 
  If 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial compression, the Drucker–Prager criterion implies


 
  Solving these two equations gives



Uniaxial asymmetry ratio
Different uniaxial yield stresses in tension and in compression are predicted by the Drucker–Prager model. The uniaxial asymmetry ratio for the Drucker–Prager model is



Expressions in terms of cohesion and friction angle
Since the Drucker–Prager yield surface is a smooth version of the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface, it is often expressed in terms of the cohesion (
 
 
 
 ) and the angle of internal friction (
 
 
 
 ) that are used to describe the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface.2 If we assume that the Drucker–Prager yield surface circumscribes the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface then the expressions for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are


 
  If the Drucker–Prager yield surface middle circumscribes the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface then


 
  If the Drucker–Prager yield surface inscribes the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface then









Derivation of expressions for 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 






The expression for the Mohr–Coulomb yield criterion in Haigh–Westergaard space is


 
  If we assume that the Drucker–Prager yield surface circumscribes the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface such that the two surfaces coincide at 
 
 
 
 , then at those points the Mohr–Coulomb yield surface can be expressed as


 
  or,


 
  The Drucker–Prager yield criterion expressed in Haigh–Westergaard coordinates is


 
  Comparing equations (1.1) and (1.2), we have


 
  These are the expressions for 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand if the Drucker–Prager surface inscribes the Mohr–Coulomb surface, then matching the two surfaces at 
 
 
 
  gives












(Figure)
Figure 2: Drucker–Prager yield surface in the 
 
 
 
 -plane for 
 
 





(Figure)
Figure 3: Trace of the Drucker–Prager and Mohr–Coulomb yield surfaces in the 
 
 
 
 -plane for 
 
 
 
 . Yellow = Mohr–Coulomb, Cyan = Drucker–Prager.






Drucker–Prager model for polymers
The Drucker–Prager model has been used to model polymers such as polyoxymethylene and polypropylene.3 For polyoxymethylene the yield stress is a linear function of the pressure. However, polypropylene shows a quadratic pressure-dependence of the yield stress.
Drucker–Prager model for foams
For foams, the GAZT model 4 uses


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a critical stress for failure in tension or compression, 
 
 
 
  is the density of the foam, and 
 
 
 
  is the density of the base material.
Extensions of the isotropic Drucker–Prager model
The Drucker–Prager criterion can also be expressed in the alternative form



Deshpande–Fleck yield criterion or isotropic foam yield criterion
The Deshpande–Fleck yield criterion5 for foams has the form given in above equation. The parameters 
 
 
 
  for the Deshpande–Fleck criterion are


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a parameter6 that determines the shape of the yield surface, and 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in tension or compression.
Anisotropic Drucker–Prager yield criterion
An anisotropic form of the Drucker–Prager yield criterion is the Liu–Huang–Stout yield criterion.7 This yield criterion is an extension of the generalized Hill yield criterion and has the form



The coefficients 
 
 
 
  are


 
 
  where


 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the uniaxial yield stresses in compression in the three principal directions of anisotropy, 
 
 
 
  are the uniaxial yield stresses in tension, and 
 
 
 
 
  are the yield stresses in pure shear. It has been assumed in the above that the quantities 
 
 
 
  are positive and 
 
 
 
  are negative.
The Drucker yield criterion
The Drucker–Prager criterion should not be confused with the earlier Drucker criterion 8 which is independent of the pressure (
 
 
 
 ). The Drucker yield criterion has the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the second invariant of the deviatoric stress, 
 
 
 
  is the third invariant of the deviatoric stress, 
 
 
 
  is a constant that lies between -27/8 and 9/4 (for the yield surface to be convex), 
 
 
 
  is a constant that varies with the value of 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the yield stress in uniaxial tension.
Anisotropic Drucker Criterion
An anisotropic version of the Drucker yield criterion is the Cazacu–Barlat (CZ) yield criterion 9 which has the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are generalized forms of the deviatoric stress and are defined as



Cazacu–Barlat yield criterion for plane stress
For thin sheet metals, the state of stress can be approximated as plane stress. In that case the Cazacu–Barlat yield criterion reduces to its two-dimensional version with



For thin sheets of metals and alloys, the parameters of the Cazacu–Barlat yield criterion are




Table 1. Cazacu–Barlat yield criterion parameters for sheet metals and alloys

Material















































6016-T4 Aluminum Alloy

0.815

0.815

0.334

0.42

0.04

-1.205

-0.958

0.306

0.153

-0.02

1.4



2090-T3 Aluminum Alloy

1.05

0.823

0.586

0.96

1.44

0.061

-1.302

-0.281

-0.375

0.445

1.285



See also

Yield surface
Yield (engineering)
Plasticity (physics)
Material failure theory
Daniel C. Drucker
William Prager

References


"
Category:Plasticity (physics) Category:Soil mechanics Category:Solid mechanics Category:Yield criteria



Drucker, D. C. and Prager, W. (1952). Soil mechanics and plastic analysis for limit design. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 157–165.↩
https://www.onepetro.org/conference-paper/SPE-20405-MS↩
Abrate, S. (2008). Criteria for yielding or failure of cellular materials. Journal of Sandwich Structures and Materials, vol. 10. pp. 5–51.↩
Gibson, L.J., Ashby, M.F., Zhang, J. and Triantafilliou, T.C. (1989). Failure surfaces for cellular materials under multi-axial loads. I. Modeling. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 635–665.↩
V. S. Deshpande, and Fleck, N. A. (2001). Multi-axial yield behaviour of polymer foams. Acta Materialia, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1859–1866.↩


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the quantity used by Deshpande–Fleck↩
Liu, C., Huang, Y., and Stout, M. G. (1997). On the asymmetric yield surface of plastically orthotropic materials: A phenomenological study. Acta Materialia, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2397–2406↩
Drucker, D. C. (1949) '' Relations of experiments to mathematical theories of plasticity'', Journal of Applied Mechanics, vol. 16, pp. 349–357.↩
.↩




