


Coulomb wave function




Coulomb wave function

In mathematics, a Coulomb wave function is a solution of the Coulomb wave equation, named after Charles-Augustin de Coulomb. They are used to describe the behavior of charged particles in a Coulomb potential and can be written in terms of confluent hypergeometric functions or Whittaker functions of imaginary argument.
Coulomb wave equation
The Coulomb wave equation for a single charged particle is the Schrödinger equation with Coulomb potential1


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the product of the charges of the particle and of the field source (in units of the elementary charge, 
 
 
 
  for hydrogen atom) and 
 
 
 
 
  is proportional to the asymptotic energy of the particle. The solution – Coulomb wave function – can be found by solving this equation in parabolic coordinates


 
  Depending on the boundary conditions chosen the solution has different forms. Two of the solutions are2


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the confluent hypergeometric function, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  is the gamma function. The two boundary conditions used here are


 
  which correspond to 
 
 
 
 -oriented plane-wave asymptotic state before or after its approach of the field source at the origin, respectively. The functions 
 
 
 
  are related to each other by the formula



Partial wave expansion
The wave function 
 
 
 
 
  can be expanded into partial waves (i.e. with respect to the angular basis) to obtain angle-independent radial functions 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
 .


 
  A single term of the expansion can be isolated by the scalar product with a specific angular state


 
  The equation for single partial wave 
 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by rewriting the laplacian in the Coulomb wave equation in spherical coordinates and projecting the equation on a specific spherical harmonic




 
  The solutions are also called Coulomb (partial) wave functions. Putting 
 
 
 
  changes the Coulomb wave equation into the Whittaker equation, so Coulomb wave functions can be expressed in terms of Whittaker functions with imaginary arguments. Two special solutions called the regular and irregular Coulomb wave functions are denoted by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , and defined in terms of the confluent hypergeometric function by34


 
  The two possible sets of signs are related to each other by the Kummer transform.
Properties of the Coulomb function
The radial parts for a given angular momentum are orthonormal,5


 
  and for 
 
 
 
  they are also orthogonal to all hydrogen bound states6


 
  due to being eigenstates of the same hermitian operator (the hamiltonian) with different eigenvalues.
Further reading


.


.

References
"
Category:Special hypergeometric functions













