


Circular-arc graph




Circular-arc graph

 In graph theory, a circular-arc graph is the intersection graph of a set of arcs on the circle. It has one vertex for each arc in the set, and an edge between every pair of vertices corresponding to arcs that intersect.
Formally, let


 
  be a set of arcs. Then the corresponding circular-arc graph is G = (V, E) where


 
  and



A family of arcs that corresponds to G is called an arc model.
Recognition
demonstrated the first polynomial recognition algorithm for circular-arc graphs, which runs in 
 
 
 
 
  time. More recently,  gave the first linear 
 
 
 
  time recognition algorithm.
Relation to other graph classes
Circular-arc graphs are a natural generalization of interval graphs. If a circular-arc graph G has an arc model that leaves some point of the circle uncovered, the circle can be cut at that point and stretched to a line, which results in an interval representation. Unlike interval graphs, however, circular-arc graphs are not always perfect, as the odd chordless cycles C5, C7, etc., are circular-arc graphs.
Some subclasses
In the following, let 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary graph.
Unit circular-arc graphs


 
  is a unit circular-arc graph if there exists a corresponding arc model such that each arc is of equal length.
Proper circular-arc graphs


 
  is a proper circular-arc graph (also known as a circular interval graph 1) if there exists a corresponding arc model such that no arc properly contains another. Recognizing these graphs and constructing a proper arc model can both be performed in linear 
 
 
 
 
  time.2
Helly circular-arc graphs


 
  is a Helly circular-arc graph if there exists a corresponding arc model such that the arcs constitute a Helly family.  gives a characterization of this class that implies an 
 
 
 
  recognition algorithm.
give other characterizations (including one by forbidden induced subgraphs) of this class, which imply a recognition algorithm that runs in O(n+m) time when the input is a graph. If the input graph is not a Helly circular-arc graph, then the algorithm returns a certificate of this fact in the form of a forbidden induced subgraph. They also gave an O(n) time algorithm for determining whether a given circular-arc model has the Helly property.
Applications
Circular-arc graphs are useful in modeling periodic resource allocation problems in operations research. Each interval represents a request for a resource for a specific period repeated in time.
Notes
References


.

.


Second edition, Annals of Discrete Mathematics 57, Elsevier, 2004.

.


External links



"
Category:Intersection classes of graphs Category:Geometric graphs



 pg. ?
 pg. ?




