


Discrete Morse theory




Discrete Morse theory
'''Discrete Morse theory''' is a [[comb
 inatorial]] adaptation of Morse theory developed by Robin Forman. The theory has various practical applications in diverse fields of applied mathematics and computer science, such as configuration spaces,1 homology computation,2 denoising,3 and mesh compression.4
Notation regarding CW complexes
Let 
 
 
 
  be a CW complex. Define the incidence function

 
  in the following way: given two cells 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the degree of the attaching map from the boundary of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The boundary operator

 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is defined by



It is a defining property of boundary operators that 
 
 
 
 . In more axiomatic definitions5 one can find the requirement that 
 
 




which is a corollary of the above definition of the boundary operator and the requirement that 
 
 
 
 .
Discrete Morse functions
A real-valued function 
 
 
 
  is a discrete Morse function if it satisfies the following two properties:

For any cell 
 
 
 
 , the number of cells 
 
 
 
  in the boundary of 
 
 
 
 
  which satisfy 
 
 
 
  is at most one.
For any cell 
 
 
 
 , the number of cells 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
  in their boundary which satisfy 
 
 
 
 
  is at most one.

It can be shown6 that the cardinalities in the two conditions cannot both be one simultaneously for a fixed cell 
 
 
 
 , provided that 
 
 
 
  is a regular CW complex. In this case, each cell 
 
 
 
  can be paired with at most one exceptional cell 
 
 
 
 : either a boundary cell with larger 
 
 
 
 
  value, or a co-boundary cell with smaller 
 
 
 
  value. The cells which have no pairs, i.e., their function values are strictly higher than their boundary cells and strictly lower than their co-boundary cells are called critical cells. Thus, a discrete Morse function partitions the CW complex into three distinct cell collections
 
 
 
 , where:



 
  denotes the critical cells which are unpaired,


 
  denotes cells which are paired with boundary cells, and


 
 
  denotes cells which are paired with co-boundary cells.

By construction, there is a bijection of sets between 
 
 
 
 -dimensional cells in 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional cells in 
 
 
 
 , which can be denoted by 
 
 
 
 
  for each natural number

 
 . It is an additional technical requirement that for each 
 
 
 
 , the degree of the attaching map from the boundary of 
 
 
 
  to its paired cell 
 
 
 
  is a unit in the underlying ring of 
 
 
 
 
 . For instance, over the integers

 
 , the only allowed values are 
 
 
 
 . This technical requirement is guaranteed when one assumes that 
 
 
 
  is a regular CW complex over 
 
 
 
 .
The fundamental result of discrete Morse theory establishes that the CW complex 
 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic on the level of homology to a new complex 
 
 
 
  consisting of only the critical cells. The paired cells in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  describe gradient paths between adjacent critical cells which can be used to obtain the boundary operator on 
 
 
 
 . Some details of this construction are provided in the next section.
The Morse complex
A gradient path is a sequence of paired cells



satisfying 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The index of this gradient path is defined to be the integer


 
 .
The division here makes sense because the incidence between paired cells must be 
 
 
 
 . Note that by construction, the values of the discrete Morse function 
 
 
 
 
  must decrease across 
 
 
 
 . The path 
 
 
 
  is said to connect two critical cells 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . This relationship may be expressed as 
 
 
 
 
 . The multiplicity of this connection is defined to be the integer 
 
 
 
 . Finally, the Morse boundary operator on the critical cells 
 
 
 
  is defined by



where the sum is taken over all gradient path connections from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
 .
Basic Results
Many of the familiar results from continuous Morse theory apply in the discrete setting.
The Morse Inequalities
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Morse complex associated to the CW complex 
 
 
 
 . The number 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 -cells in 
 
 
 
 
  is called the 
 
 
Morse number. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the 
 
 
Betti number of 
 
 
 
 . Then, for any 
 
 
 
 
 , the following inequalities7 hold


 
 , and



Moreover, the Euler characteristic

 
  of 
 
 
 
  satisfies



Discrete Morse Homology and Homotopy Type
Let 
 
 
 
  be a regular CW complex with boundary operator 
 
 
 
  and a discrete Morse function 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the associated Morse complex with Morse boundary operator 
 
 
 
 
 . Then, there is an isomorphism8 of Homology groups as well as homotopy groups.



See also

Digital Morse theory
Stratified Morse theory
Piece-wise linear Morse theory
Shape analysis
Topological combinatorics
Discrete differential geometry

References

Robin Forman (2002) A User's Guide to Discrete Morse Theory, Séminare Lotharinen de Combinatore 48



nLab Article 1

"
Category:Combinatorics Category:Morse theory Category:Computational topology



F. Mori and M. Salvetti: (Discrete) Morse theory for Configuration spaces
Perseus: the Persistent Homology software.
U. Bauer, C. Lange, and M. Wardetzky: Optimal Topological Simplification of Discrete Functions on Surfaces
T Lewiner, H Lopez and G Tavares: Applications of Forman's discrete Morse theory to topological visualization and mesh compression

Forman, Robin: Morse Theory for Cell Complexes, Lemma 2.5
Forman, Robin: Morse Theory for Cell Complexes, Corollaries 3.5 and 3.6
Forman, Robin: Morse Theory for Cell Complexes, Theorem 7.3




