


Equal incircles theorem




Equal incircles theorem

 In geometry, the equal incircles theorem derives from a Japanese Sangaku, and pertains to the following construction: a series of rays are drawn from a given point to a given line such that the inscribed circles of the triangles formed by adjacent rays and the base line are equal. In the illustration the equal blue circles define the spacing between the rays, as described.
The theorem states that the incircles of the triangles formed (starting from any given ray) by every other ray, every third ray, etc. and the base line are also equal. The case of every other ray is illustrated above by the green circles, which are all equal.
From the fact that the theorem doesn't depend on the angle of the initial ray, it can be seen that the theorem properly belongs to analysis, rather than geometry, and must relate to a continuous scaling function which defines the spacing of the rays. In fact, this function is the hyperbolic sine.
The theorem is a direct corollary of the following lemma:
Suppose that the nth ray makes an angle 
 
 
 
  with the normal to the baseline. If 
 
 
 
  is parameterized according to the equation, 
 
 
 
 , then values of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real constants, define a sequence of rays that satisfy the condition of equal incircles, and furthermore any sequence of rays satisfying the condition can be produced by suitable choice of the constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . {{-}}
Proof of the lemma
 In the diagram, lines PS and PT are adjacent rays making angles 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with line PR, which is perpendicular to the baseline, RST.
Line QXOY is parallel to the baseline and passes through O, the center of the incircle of 
 
 
 
  PST, which is tangent to the rays at W and Z. Also, line PQ has length 
 
 
 
 , and line QR has length 
 
 
 
 , the radius of the incircle.
Then 
 
 
 
  OWX is similar to 
 
 
 
  PQX and 
 
 
 
  OZY is similar to 
 
 
 
  PQY, and from XY = XO + OY we get



This relation on a set of angles, 
 
 
 
 , expresses the condition of equal incircles.
To prove the lemma, we set 
 
 
 
 , which gives 
 
 
 
 .
Using 
 
 
 
 , we apply the addition rules for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and verify that the equal incircles relation is satisfied by setting



This gives an expression for the parameter 
 
 
 
  in terms of the geometric measures, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . With this definition of 
 
 
 
  we then obtain an expression for the radii, 
 
 
 
 , of the incircles formed by taking every Nth ray as the sides of the triangles



See also

Hyperbolic function
Japanese theorem for cyclic polygons
Japanese theorem for cyclic quadrilaterals
Tangent lines to circles

References

Equal Incircles Theorem at cut-the-knot
J. Tabov. A note on the five-circle theorem. Mathematics Magazine 63 (1989), 2, 92–94.

"
Category:Euclidean geometry Category:Japanese mathematics Category:Recreational mathematics Category:Elementary special functions Category:Theorems in plane geometry


