


Topological data analysis




Topological data analysis

Topological data analysis (TDA) is a new area of study aimed at having applications in areas such as data mining and computer vision. The main problems are:

how one infers high-dimensional structure from low-dimensional representations; and
how one assembles discrete points into global structure.

The human brain can easily extract global structure from representations in a strictly lower dimension, e.g. we infer a 3D environment from a 2D image from each eye. The inference of global structure also occurs when converting discrete data into continuous images, e.g. dot-matrix printers and televisions communicate images via arrays of discrete points.
The main method used by topological data analysis is:

Replace a set of data points with a family of simplicial complexes, indexed by a proximity parameter.
Analyse these topological complexes via algebraic topology — specifically, via the theory of persistent homology.1
Encode the persistent homology of a data set in the form of a parameterized version of a Betti number which is called a persistence diagram or barcode.2

Point cloud data
Data is often represented as points in a Euclidean n-dimensional space En. The global shape of the data may provide information about the phenomena that the data represent.
One type of data set for which global features are certainly present is the so-called point cloud data coming from physical objects in 3D. E.g. a laser can scan an object at a set of discrete points and the cloud of such points can be used in a computer representation of the object. Point cloud data is any collection of points in En or a (perhaps noisy) sample of points on a lower-dimensional subset.
For point clouds in low-dimensional spaces there are numerous approaches for inferring features based on planar projections in the fields of computer graphics and statistics. Topological data analysis is needed when the spaces are high-dimensional or too twisted to allow planar projections to faithfully represent the features of the point cloud.
To convert a point cloud in a metric space into a global object, use the point cloud as the vertices of a graph whose edges are determined by proximity, then turn the graph into a simplicial complex and use algebraic topology to study it. An alternative approach is the minimum spanning tree-based method in the geometric data clustering.3 If a group of data points forms a cluster, then the geometry of this point cloud can be determined.
Background

Topology
Simplicial complex
Nerve and cover

Topological data analysis includes different methods and representations whose purpose is to cluster variegated data via a point cloud stated above. The following are various methods to do so.
Combinatorial representations

Cech complex. The Cech complex

 
  is the nerve of the cover of balls of radius 
 
 
 
  around each point in a set. Since balls are convex and convex sets are contractible, its nerve captures the topology of the cover. The Cech complex is not computed in practice due to its computational complexity. The uniform ball radii imply an assumption of uniform sampling on the input, which is not valid in a real world dataset. Non-uniform radii methods can also be used, such as in the case of the alpha simplex.
Alpha complex. The Voronoi diagram is the set of all Voronoi regions for the points in 
 
 
 
 . This diagram is considered a closed cover for 
 
 
 
 . The Delaunay complex is the nerve of the Voronoi diagram. The Voronoi cover and its nerve are fundamental geometric objects and have been extensively studied within computational geometry. Alpha complexes are constructed by first building the Delaunay complex. For each simplex of the Delaunay complex, we compute the minimum scale at which each simplex enters the alpha complex. Then the simplices are sorted by their minimum scale to get a partial order of simplices. The alpha complex is not formed with any scale 
 
 
 
  using this ordering. Efficient algorithms and software exist for computing Delaunay complexes, and in turn, alpha complexes in 2 and 3 dimensions. However, the construction of the Delaunay complex is difficult in higher dimensions.
Vietoris–Rips complex

Topological invariants

Definition. Topological invariants
Euler characteristic
Simplicial homology

Multiscale invariants

Multifiltration model. Morse theory enables one to analyze the topology of a manifold by studying differentiable functions on that manifold. According to the basic insights of Marston Morse, a typical differentiable function on a manifold will reflect the topology quite directly. Morse theory allows one to find CW structures and handle decompositions on manifolds and to obtain substantial information about their homology.
Persistent homology. See homology for an introduction to the notation.

Persistent homology essentially calculates homology groups at different spatial resolutions to see which features persist over a wide range of length scales. It is assumed that important features and structures are the ones that persist. We define persistent homology as follows: Let 
 
 
 
  be a filtration. The p-persistent kth homology group of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a nonbounding 
 
 
 
 -cycle created at time 
 
 
 
  by simplex 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be a homologous 
 
 
 
 -cycle that becomes a boundary cycle at time 
 
 
 
  by simplex 
 
 
 
 . Then we can define the persistence interval associated to 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . We call 
 
 
 
  the creator of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the destroyer of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  does not have a destroyer, its persistence is 
 
 
 
 . Instead of using an index-based filtration, we can use a time-based filtration. Let 
 
 
 
  be a simplicial complex and 
 
 
 
  be a filtration defined for an associated map 
 
 
 
  that maps simplices in the final complex to real numbers. Then for all real numbers 
 
 
 
 , the 

 
 -persistent kth homology group of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . The persistence of a 
 
 
 
 -cycle created at time 
 
 
 
  and destroyed at 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . 4
There are various software packages for computing persistence intervals of a finite filtration, such as javaPlex, Dionysus, Perseus (which uses discrete Morse theory to simplify the matrix algebra), PHAT, and Gudhi.
See also

Dimensionality reduction
Data mining
Computer vision
Computational topology
Digital topology
Digital Morse theory
Shape analysis
Size theory
Structured data analysis (statistics)
Self-organizing map

References


Further reading

Robert Ghrist, Elementary Applied Topology (2014).
Topological Methods in Scientific Computing, Statistics and Computer Science Stanford group
BARCODES: THE PERSISTENT TOPOLOGY OF DATA
Topological Data Analysis: the algebraic topology of point data clouds?

Applied algebraic topology research network at the Institute for Mathematics and its Applications.
TOPOLOGY AND DATA, GUNNAR CARLSSON, BULLETIN (New Series) OF THE AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY, Volume 46, Number 2, April 2009, Pages 255–308, Article electronically published on January 29, 2009
Computational Topology: An Introduction, Herbert Edelsbrunner, John L. Harer, AMS Bookstore, 2010, ISBN 978-0-8218-4925-5
Simplicial Models and Topological Inference in Biological Systems Vidit Nanda and Radmila Sazdanovic, Discrete and Topological Models in Molecular Biology, pp 109-141, 2014
Topological Methods in Data Analysis and Visualization: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications, Editors Valerio Pascucci, Hans Hagen, Xavier Tricoche, Julien Tierny, Springer, 2010, ISBN 978-3-642-15013-5

.
Ayasdi Resources on Topological Data Analysis for Big Data
Software packages for computing persistent homology: javaplex and Perseus.
Seminar on applied topology and TDA at UPenn.

"
Category:Computational topology Category:Data analysis Category:Homology theory





C. T. Zahn (1971): "Graph-theoretical methods for detecting and describing gestalt clusters", IEEE Transactions on Computers, pp. 68–86, Vol. 20, No. 1
Afra J. Zomorodian (2005): Topology for Computing. Cambridge Monographs on Applied and Computational Mathematics.




