


Strain energy release rate




Strain energy release rate

The strain energy release rate (or simply energy release rate) is the energy dissipated during fracture per unit of newly created fracture surface area. This quantity is central to fracture mechanics because the energy that must be supplied to a crack tip for it to grow must be balanced by the amount of energy dissipated due to the formation of new surfaces and other dissipative processes such as plasticity.
For the purposes of calculation, the energy release rate is defined as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the potential energy available for crack growth, 
 
 
 
  is the work associated with any external forces acting, and 
 
 
 
 
  is the crack area (crack length for two-dimensional problems). The units of 
 
 
 
  are J/m2.
The energy release rate failure criterion states that a crack will grow when the available energy release rate 
 
 
 
  is greater than or equal to a critical value 
 
 



 
  The quantity 
 
 
 
 
  is the fracture energy and is considered to be a material property which is independent of the applied loads and the geometry of the body.
Relation to fracture toughness
For two-dimensional problems (plane stress, plane strain, antiplane shear) involving cracks that move in a straight path, the mode I stress intensity factor (
 
 
 
 ) is related to the energy release rate (
 
 
 
 ) by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Young's modulus and 
 
 
 
 
  for plane stress and 
 
 
 
  for plane strain.
Therefore the energy release rate failure criterion may also be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the mode I fracture toughness.
See also

Fracture
Fracture mechanics
Fracture toughness
J integral
Stress intensity factor
Tearing energy
Configurational force
Crack driving force

References



Rivlin, R. S., & Thomas, A. G. (1953). Rupture of rubber. I. Characteristic energy for tearing. Journal of Polymer Science, 10(3), 291-318.
Chapter 10 – Strength of Elastomers, A.N. Gent, W.V. Mars, In: James E. Mark, Burak Erman and Mike Roland, Editor(s), The Science and Technology of Rubber (Fourth Edition), Academic Press, Boston, 2013, Pages 473-516, ISBN 9780123945846, 10.1016/B978-0-12-394584-6.00010-8

"
Category:Mechanical failure Category:Fracture mechanics Category:Solid mechanics Category:Mechanics Category:Rubber properties Category:Rates


