


Vibrations of a circular membrane




Vibrations of a circular membrane

(Figure)
One of the possible modes of vibration of an idealized circular drum head (mode 
 
 
 
  with the notation below). Other possible modes are shown at the bottom of the article.

A two-dimensional elastic membrane under tension can support transverse vibrations. The properties of an idealized drumhead can be modeled by the vibrations of a circular membrane of uniform thickness, attached to a rigid frame. Due to the phenomenon of resonance, at certain vibration frequencies, its resonant frequencies, the membrane can store vibrational energy, the surface moving in a characteristic pattern of standing waves. This is called a normal mode. A membrane has an infinite number of these normal modes, starting with a lowest frequency one called the fundamental mode.
There exist infinitely many ways in which a membrane can vibrate, each depending on the shape of the membrane at some initial time, and the transverse velocity of each point on the membrane at that time. The vibrations of the membrane are given by the solutions of the two-dimensional wave equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions which represent the constraint of the frame. It can be shown that any arbitrarily complex vibration of the membrane can be decomposed into a possibly infinite series of the membrane's normal modes. This is analogous to the decomposition of a time signal into a Fourier series.
Motivation
Analyzing the vibrating drum head problem explains percussion instruments such as drums and timpani. However, there is also a biological application in the working of the eardrum. From an educational point of view the modes of a two-dimensional object are a convenient way to visually demonstrate the meaning of modes, nodes, antinodes and even quantum numbers. These concepts are important to the understanding of the structure of the atom.
The problem
Consider an open disk

 
  of radius 
 
 
 
  centered at the origin, which will represent the "still" drum head shape. At any time 
 
 
 
  the height of the drum head shape at a point 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  measured from the "still" drum head shape will be denoted by 
 
 
 
  which can take both positive and negative values. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the boundary of 
 
 
 
  that is, the circle of radius 
 
 
 
  centered at the origin, which represents the rigid frame to which the drum head is attached.
The mathematical equation that governs the vibration of the drum head is the wave equation with zero boundary conditions,






Due to the circular geometry of 
 
 
 
 , it will be convenient to use cylindrical coordinates, 
 
 
 
  Then, the above equations are written as






Here, 
 
 
 
  is a positive constant, which gives the speed at which transverse vibration waves propagate in the membrane. In terms of the physical parameters, the wave speed, c, is given by



where 
 
 
 
 , is the radial membrane resultant at the membrane boundary (
 
 
 
 ), 
 
 
 
 , is the membrane thickness, and 
 
 
 
  is the membrane density. If the membrane has uniform tension, the uniform tension force at a given radius, 
 
 
 
  may be written



where 
 
 
 
  is the membrane resultant in the azimuthal direction.
The radially symmetric case
We will first study the possible modes of vibration of a circular drum head that are radially symmetric. Then, the function 
 
 
 
  does not depend on the angle 
 
 
 
  and the wave equation simplifies to



We will look for solutions in separated variables, 
 
 
 
  Substituting this in the equation above and dividing both sides by 
 
 
 
  yields



The left-hand side of this equality does not depend on 
 
 
 
  and the right-hand side does not depend on 
 
 
 
  it follows that both sides must equal to some constant 
 
 
 
  We get separate equations for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :






The equation for 
 
 
 
  has solutions which exponentially grow or decay for 
 
 
 
  are linear or constant for 
 
 
 
  and are periodic for 
 
 
 
  Physically it is expected that a solution to the problem of a vibrating drum head will be oscillatory in time, and this leaves only the third case, 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  Then, 
 
 
 
  is a linear combination of sine and cosine functions,



Turning to the equation for 
 
 
 
  with the observation that 
 
 
 
  all solutions of this second-order differential equation are a linear combination of Bessel functions of order 0, since this is a special case of Bessel's differential equation:



The Bessel function 
 
 
 
  is unbounded for 
 
 
 
  which results in an unphysical solution to the vibrating drum head problem, so the constant 
 
 
 
  must be null. We will also assume 
 
 
 
  as otherwise this constant can be absorbed later into the constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  coming from 
 
 
 
  It follows that



The requirement that height 
 
 
 
  be zero on the boundary of the drum head results in the condition



The Bessel function 
 
 
 
  has an infinite number of positive roots,



We get that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  so



Therefore, the radially symmetric solutions 
 
 
 
  of the vibrating drum head problem that can be represented in separated variables are



where 
 
 

The general case
The general case, when 
 
 
 
  can also depend on the angle 
 
 
 
  is treated similarly. We assume a solution in separated variables,



Substituting this into the wave equation and separating the variables, gives



where 
 
 
 
  is a constant. As before, from the equation for 
 
 
 
  it follows that 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and



From the equation



we obtain, by multiplying both sides by 
 
 
 
  and separating variables, that



and



for some constant 
 
 
 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is periodic, with period 
 
 

 
  being an angular variable, it follows that



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are some constants. This also implies 
 
 

Going back to the equation for 
 
 
 
  its solution is a linear combination of Bessel functions

 
  and 
 
 
 
  With a similar argument as in the previous section, we arrive at





where 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  the 
 
 
 
 -th positive root of 
 
 

We showed that all solutions in separated variables of the vibrating drum head problem are of the form



for 
 
 

Animations of several vibration modes
A number of modes are shown below together with their quantum numbers. The analogous wave functions of the hydrogen atom are also indicated as well as the associated angular frequency 
 
 
 
 .

Image:Drum vibration mode01.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (1s) with 
 
 
 
  Image:Drum vibration mode02.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (2s) with 
 
 
 
  Image:Drum vibration mode03.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (3s) with 
 
 

Image:Drum vibration mode11.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (2p) with 
 
 
 
  Image:Drum vibration mode12.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (3p) with 
 
 
 
  Image:Drum vibration mode13.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (4p) with 
 
 

Image:Drum vibration mode21.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (3d) with 
 
 
 
  Image:Drum vibration mode22.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (4d) with 
 
 
 
  Image:Drum vibration mode23.gif|Mode 
 
 
 
  (5d) with 
 
 


See also

Chladni patterns
Hearing the shape of a drum
Vibrating string

References



External links

A Java applet that illustrates this

"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Mechanical vibrations Category:Drumming


