


Fluorine perchlorate




Fluorine perchlorate

Fluorine perchlorate is the rarely encountered chemical compound of fluorine, chlorine, and oxygen with the chemical formula  or . It is an extremely unstable gas that explodes spontaneously1 and has a penetrating odor.2
Synthesis
One synthesis uses fluorine and perchloric acid,3 though the action of ClF5 on water is another method.



Another method of synthesis involves the thermal decomposition of tetrafluoroammonium perchlorate, , which yields very pure  that may be manipulated and frozen without explosions.4



Structure
Fluorine perchlorate is not analogous to perchloric acid because the fluorine atom does not exist as a positive ion. It contains an oxygen atom in a rare oxidation state of 0, due to the electronegativity of oxygen, which is higher than that of chlorine but lower than that of fluorine.
Safety
FClO4 has a very dangerous and unpredictable series of reactions associated with it, as a covalent perchlorate (chlorine in the +7 oxidation state) and a compound featuring a very sensitive O-F single bond. Small amounts of reducing agent, such as organic compounds, can trigger explosive detonation. Products of these decomposition reactions could include oxygen halides, interhalogen compounds, and other hazardous substances.
Accidental synthesis is possible if precursors are carelessly mixed. Like similar covalent fluorides and perchlorates, it needs to be handled with extreme caution.
Reaction
FClO4 is a strong oxidant and it reacts with iodide ion:

FOClO3 + 2I− → ClO4− + F− + I2


FClO4 can also react with tetrafluoroethylene:5

CF2=CF2 + FOClO3 → CF3CF2OClO3


It may be a radical addition reaction. 6
References
External links

Chemist Derek Lowe's experiences with perchlorates

"
Category:Explosive chemicals Category:Perchlorates Category:Oxidizing agents



Pradyot Patnaik. A comprehensive guide to the hazardous properties of chemical substances, 3rd ed., Wiley-Interscience, 2007. ISBN 0-471-71458-5
Robert Alan Lewis. Lewis' dictionary of toxicology, CRC Press, 1998, p. 508. ISBN 1-56670-223-2








