


Michell solution




Michell solution

The Michell solution is a general solution to the elasticity equations in polar coordinates (
 
 
 
 ). The solution is such that the stress components are in the form of a Fourier series in 
 
 
 
 .
Michell1 showed that the general solution can be expressed in terms of an Airy stress function of the form



The terms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  define a trivial null state of stress and are ignored.
Stress components
The stress components can be obtained by substituting the Michell solution into the equations for stress in terms of the Airy stress function (in cylindrical coordinates). A table of stress components is shown below [from J. R. Barber (2002) 2].








































































































































































































































































































































































































Displacement components
Displacements

 
  can be obtained from the Michell solution by using the stress-strain and strain-displacement relations. A table of displacement components corresponding the terms in the Airy stress function for the Michell solution is given below. In this table


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Poisson's ratio, and 
 
 
 
  is the shear modulus.




















































































































































































































































































































Note that you can superpose a rigid body displacement on the Michell solution of the form


 
 
  to obtain an admissible displacement field.
References
See also

Linear elasticity
Flamant solution
John Henry Michell

"
Category:Elasticity (physics)



↩
J. R. Barber, 2002, Elasticity: 2nd Edition, Kluwer Academic Publishers.↩




