


Arrowhead matrix




Arrowhead matrix

In the mathematical field of linear algebra, an arrowhead matrix is a square matrix containing zeros in all entries except for the first row, first column, and main diagonal.1 2 In other words, the matrix has the form


 
  Any symmetric permutation of the arrowhead matrix, 
 
 
 
 
 , where P is a permutation matrix, is a (permuted) arrowhead matrix. Real symmetric arrowhead matrices are used in some algorithms for finding of eigenvalues and eigenvectors.3
Real symmetric arrowhead matrices
Let A be a real symmetric (permuted) arrowhead matrix of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is diagonal matrix of order n-1, 
 
 
 
  is a vector and 
 
 
 
  is a scalar. Let


 
  be the eigenvalue decomposition of A, where 
 
 
 
  is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are the eigenvalues of A, and 
 
 
 
  is an orthonormal matrix whose columns are the corresponding eigenvectors. The following holds:

If 
 
 
 
  for some i, then the pair 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the i-th standard basis vector, is an eigenpair of A. Thus, all such rows and columns can be deleted, leaving the matrix with all 
 
 
 
 .
The Cauchy interlacing theorem implies that the sorted eigenvalues of A interlace the sorted elements 
 
 
 
 : if 
 
 
 
  (this can be attained by symmetric permutation of rows and columns without loss of generality), and if 
 
 
 
 s are sorted accordingly, then 

\lambda_1\geq d_1\geq \lambda_2\geq d_2\geq \cdots \geq \lambda_{n-1} \geq d_{n-1} \geq \lambda_n .

If 
 
 
 
 , for some 
 
 
 
 , the above inequality implies that 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of A. The size of the problem can be reduced by annihilating 
 
 
 
  with a Givens rotation in the 
 
 
 
 -plane and proceeding as above.

Eigenvalues and eigenvectors
Symmetric arrowhead matrix is irreducible if 
 
 
 
  for all i and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . The eigenvalues of an irreducible real symmetric arrowhead matrix are the zeros of the secular equation


 
  which can be, for example, computed by the bisection method. The corresponding eigenvectors are equal to


 
  Direct application of the above formula may yield eigenvectors which are not numerically sufficiently orthogonal.4 The forward stable algorithm which computes each eigenvalue and each component of the corresponding eigenvector to almost full accuracy is described in.5 The Julia version of the software is available.6
Inverses
Let A be an irreducible real symmetric arrowhead matrix. If 
 
 
 
  for some i, the inverse is a permuted irreducible real symmetric arrowhead matrix:


 
  where



 If 
 
 
 
  for all i, the inverse is a rank-one modification of a diagonal matrix (diagonal-plus-rank-one matrix or DPR1):


 
  where



References
"
Category:Matrices



↩
↩
↩


"Arrowhead.jl"↩




