


Arithmetic combinatorics




Arithmetic combinatorics

In mathematics, arithmetic combinatorics is a field in the intersection of number theory, combinatorics, ergodic theory and harmonic analysis.
Scope
Arithmetic combinatorics is about combinatorial estimates associated with arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division). Additive combinatorics is the special case when only the operations of addition and subtraction are involved.
Arithmetic combinatorics is explained in Green's review of "Additive Combinatorics" by Tao and Vu.
Important results
Szemerédi's theorem
Szemerédi's theorem is a result in arithmetic combinatorics concerning arithmetic progressions in subsets of the integers. In 1936, Erdős and Turán conjectured1 that every set of integers A with positive natural density contains a k term arithmetic progression for every k. This conjecture, which became Szemerédi's theorem, generalizes the statement of van der Waerden's theorem.
Green-Tao theorem and extensions
The Green–Tao theorem, proved by Ben Green and Terence Tao in 2004,2 states that the sequence of prime numbers contains arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions. In other words there exist arithmetic progressions of primes, with k terms, where k can be any natural number. The proof is an extension of Szemerédi's theorem.
In 2006, Terence Tao and Tamar Ziegler extended the result to cover polynomial progressions.3 More precisely, given any integer-valued polynomials P1,..., Pk in one unknown m all with constant term 0, there are infinitely many integers x, m such that x + P1(m), ..., x + Pk(m) are simultaneously prime. The special case when the polynomials are m, 2m, ..., km implies the previous result that there are length k arithmetic progressions of primes.
Example
If A is a set of N integers, how large or small can the sumset



the difference set



and the product set



be, and how are the sizes of these sets related? (Not to be confused: the terms difference set and product set can have other meanings.)
Extensions
The sets being studied may also be subsets of algebraic structures other than the integers, for example, groups, rings and fields.4
See also

Additive number theory
Corners theorem
Ergodic Ramsey theory
Problems involving arithmetic progressions


Schnirelmann density
Shapley–Folkman lemma
Sidon set
Sum-free set

Notes
References


Additive Combinatorics and Theoretical Computer Science, Luca Trevisan, SIGACT News, June 2009

Open problems in additive combinatorics, E Croot, V Lev
From Rotating Needles to Stability of Waves: Emerging Connections between Combinatorics, Analysis, and PDE, Terence Tao, AMS Notices March 2001






Further reading

Some Highlights of Arithmetic Combinatorics, resources by Terence Tao
Additive Combinatorics: Winter 2007, K Soundararajan
Earliest Connections of Additive Combinatorics and Computer Science, Luca Trevisan

"
Category:Additive number theory Category:Sumsets Category:Harmonic analysis Category:Ergodic theory Category:Additive combinatorics



.↩
.↩
.↩
↩




