


Ergodic process




Ergodic process

In econometrics and signal processing, a stochastic process is said to be ergodic if its statistical properties (such as its mean and variance) can be deduced from a single, sufficiently long sample (realization) of the process. The reasoning behind this is that any sample from the process must represent the average statistical properties of the entire process, so that regardless what sample you choose, it represents the whole process, and not just that section of the process. A process that changes erratically at an inconsistent rate is not said to be ergodic.1
Specific definitions
One can discuss the ergodicity of various statistics of a stochastic process. For example, a wide-sense stationary process 
 
 
 
  has constant mean


 
 ,
and autocovariance


 
 ,
that depends only on the lag 
 
 
 
 
  and not on time 
 
 
 
 . The properties 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are ensemble averages not time averages.
The process 
 
 
 
  is said to be mean-ergodic2 or mean-square ergodic in the first moment3 if the time average estimate



converges in squared mean to the ensemble average 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 .
Likewise, the process is said to be autocovariance-ergodic or mean-square ergodic in the second moment4 if the time average estimate



converges in squared mean to the ensemble average 
 
 
 
 , as 
 
 
 
 
 . A process which is ergodic in the mean and autocovariance is sometimes called ergodic in the wide sense.5
An important example of an ergodic processes is the stationary Gaussian process with continuous spectrum.
Discrete-time random processes
The notion of ergodicity also applies to discrete-time random processes 
 
 
 
  for integer 
 
 
 
 .
A discrete-time random process 
 
 
 
  is erdogic in mean if



converges in squared mean to the ensemble average 
 
 
 
 
 , as 
 
 
 
 .
Example of a non-ergodic random process
Suppose that we have two coins: one coin is fair and the other has two heads. We choose (at random) one of the coins, and then perform a sequence of independent tosses of our selected coin. Let X[n] denote the outcome of the nth toss, with 1 for heads and 0 for tails. Then the ensemble average is ½ · ½ + ½ · 1 = ¾; yet the long-term average is ½ for the fair coin and 1 for the two-headed coin. Hence, this random process is not ergodic in mean.
See also

Ergodic hypothesis
Ergodicity
Ergodic theory, a branch of mathematics concerned with a more general formulation of ergodicity
Loschmidt's paradox
Poincaré recurrence theorem

Notes
References




"
Category:Ergodic theory Category:Signal processing



Originally due to L. Boltzmann. See part 2 of  ('Ergoden' on p.89 in the 1923 reprint.) It was used to prove equipartition of energy in the kinetic theory of gases↩
Papoulis, p.428↩
Porat, p.14↩






