


Flamant solution




Flamant solution

 The Flamant solution provides expressions for the stresses and displacements in a linear elastic wedge loaded by point forces at its sharp end. This solution was developed by A. Flamant 1 in 1892 by modifying the three-dimensional solution of Boussinesq.
The stresses predicted by the Flamant solution are (in polar coordinates)


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are constants that are determined from the boundary conditions and the geometry of the wedge (i.e., the angles 
 
 
 
 ) and satisfy


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the applied forces.
The wedge problem is self-similar and has no inherent length scale. Also, all quantities can be expressed in the separated-variable form 
 
 
 
 . The stresses vary as 
 
 
 
 .
Forces acting on a half-plane
 For the special case where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , the wedge is converted into a half-plane with a normal force and a tangential force. In that case


 
  Therefore the stresses are


 
 
  and the displacements are (using Michell's solution)


 
 
  The 
 
 
 
  dependence of the displacements implies that the displacement grows the further one moves from the point of application of the force (and is unbounded at infinity). This feature of the Flamant solution is confusing and appears unphysical. For a discussion of the issue see http://imechanica.org/node/319.
Displacements at the surface of the half-plane
The displacements in the 
 
 
 
  directions at the surface of the half-plane are given by


 
 
  where



 
  is the Poisson's ratio, 
 
 
 
  is the shear modulus, and



Derivation of Flamant solution
If we assume the stresses to vary as 
 
 
 
 , we can pick terms containing 
 
 
 
  in the stresses from Michell's solution. Then the Airy stress function can be expressed as


 
  Therefore, from the tables in Michell's solution, we have


 
 
  The constants 
 
 
 
  can then, in principle, be determined from the wedge geometry and the applied boundary conditions.
However, the concentrated loads at the vertex are difficult to express in terms of traction boundary conditions because

the unit outward normal at the vertex is undefined
the forces are applied at a point (which has zero area) and hence the traction at that point is infinite.

 To get around this problem, we consider a bounded region of the wedge and consider equilibrium of the bounded wedge.23 Let the bounded wedge have two traction free surfaces and a third surface in the form of an arc of a circle with radius 
 
 
 
 . Along the arc of the circle, the unit outward normal is 
 
 
 
  where the basis vectors are 
 
 
 
 . The tractions on the arc are



Next, we examine the force and moment equilibrium in the bounded wedge and get


 
 
  We require that these equations be satisfied for all values of 
 
 
 
  and thereby satisfy the boundary conditions.
The traction-free boundary conditions on the edges 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  also imply that


 
  except at the point 
 
 
 
 .
If we assume that 
 
 
 
  everywhere, then the traction-free conditions and the moment equilibrium equation are satisfied and we are left with


 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  along 
 
 
 
  except at the point 
 
 
 
 . But the field 
 
 
 
  everywhere also satisfies the force equilibrium equations. Hence this must be the solution. Also, the assumption 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
 .
Therefore,



To find a particular solution for 
 
 
 
  we have to plug in the expression for 
 
 
 
  into the force equilibrium equations to get a system of two equations which have to be solved for 
 
 
 
 :



Forces acting on a half-plane
If we take 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the problem is converted into one where a normal force 
 
 
 
  and a tangential force 
 
 
 
  act on a half-plane. In that case, the force equilibrium equations take the form


 
 
  Therefore


 
  The stresses for this situation are


 
  Using the displacement tables from the Michell solution, the displacements for this case are given by



Displacements at the surface of the half-plane
To find expressions for the displacements at the surface of the half plane, we first find the displacements for positive 
 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) and negative 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) keeping in mind that 
 
 
 
  along these locations.
For 
 
 
 
 
  we have


 
 
  For 
 
 
 
  we have


 
 
  We can make the displacements symmetric around the point of application of the force by adding rigid body displacements (which does not affect the stresses)


 
  and removing the redundant rigid body displacements


 
  Then the displacements at the surface can be combined and take the form


 
 
  where



References


See also

Michell solution
Linear elasticity
Stress (physics)

"
Category:Elasticity (physics)



A. Flamant. (1892). Sur la répartition des pressions dans un solide rectangulaire chargé transversalement. Compte. Rendu. Acad. Sci. Paris, vol. 114, p. 1465.↩
Slaughter, W. S. (2002). The Linearized Theory of Elasticity. Birkhauser, Boston, p. 294.↩
J. R. Barber, 2002, Elasticity: 2nd Edition, Kluwer Academic Publishers.↩




