


Newton–Cartan theory




Newton–Cartan theory

Newton–Cartan theory is a geometrical re-formulation, as well as a generalization, of Newtonian gravity developed by Élie Cartan. In this re-formulation, the structural similarities between Newton's theory and Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity are readily seen, and it has been used by Cartan and Kurt Friedrichs to give a rigorous formulation of the way in which Newtonian gravity can be seen as a specific limit of general relativity, and by Jürgen Ehlers to extend this correspondence to specific solutions of general relativity.
Geometric formulation of Poisson's equation
In Newton's theory of gravitation, Poisson's equation reads


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the gravitational potential, 
 
 
 
  is the gravitational constant and 
 
 
 
  is the mass density. The weak equivalence principle motivates a geometric version of the equation of motion for a point particle in the potential 
 
 



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the inertial mass and 
 
 
 
  the gravitational mass. Since, according to the weak equivalence principle 
 
 
 
 , the according equation of motion


 
  doesn't contain anymore a reference to the mass of the particle. Following the idea that the solution of the equation then is a property of the curvature of space, a connection is constructed so that the geodesic equation


 
  represents the equation of motion of a point particle in the potential 
 
 
 
 . The resulting connection is


 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ). The connection has been constructed in one inertial system but can be shown to be valid in any inertial system by showing the invariance of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  under Galilei-transformations. The Riemann curvature tensor in inertial system coordinates of this connection is then given by


 
  where the brackets 
 
 
 
  mean the antisymmetric combination of the tensor 
 
 
 
 . The Ricci tensor is given by


 
  which leads to following geometric formulation of Poisson's equation



Bargmann lift
It was shown that four-dimensional Newton–Cartan theory of gravitation can be reformulated as Kaluza–Klein reduction of five-dimensional Einstein gravity along a null-like direction.1 This lifting is considered to be useful for non-relativistic holographic models.2
References
Bibliography





Chapter 1 of 

"
Category:Theories of gravitation



C. Duval, G. Burdet, H. P. Künzle, and M. Perrin, Bargmann structures and Newton-Cartan theory, Phys. Rev. D 31, 1841–1853 (1985)↩
Walter D. Goldberger, AdS/CFT duality for non-relativistic field theory, JHEP03(2009)069 1↩




