


Morphological skeleton




Morphological skeleton

In digital image processing, morphological skeleton is a skeleton (or medial axis) representation of a shape or binary image, computed by means of morphological operators.
Morphological skeletons are of two kinds:

Those defined by means of morphological openings, from which the original shape can be reconstructed,
Those computed by means of the hit-or-miss transform, which preserve the shape's topology.

Skeleton by openings
Lantuéjoul's formula
Continuous images
In (Lantuéjoul 1977),1 Lantuéjoul derived the following morphological formula for the skeleton of a continuous binary image 
 
 
 
 :


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are the morphological erosion and opening, respectively, 
 
 
 
  is an open ball of radius

 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the closure of 
 
 
 
 .
Discrete images
Let 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , be a family of shapes, where B is a structuring element,


 
 , and


 
 , where o denotes the origin.
The variable n is called the size of the structuring element.
Lantuéjoul's formula has been discretized as follows. For a discrete binary image 
 
 
 
 , the skeleton S(X) is the union of the skeleton subsets

 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , where:


 
 .
Reconstruction from the skeleton
The original shape X can be reconstructed from the set of skeleton subsets 
 
 
 
  as follows:


 
 .
Partial reconstructions can also be performed, leading to opened versions of the original shape:


 
 .
The skeleton as the centers of the maximal disks
Let 
 
 
 
  be the translated version of 
 
 
 
  to the point z, that is, 
 
 
 
 .
A shape 
 
 
 
  centered at z is called a maximal disk in a set A when:



 
 
 , and
if, for some integer m and some point y, 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .

Each skeleton subset 
 
 
 
  consists of the centers of all maximal disks of size n.
Notes
References

Image Analysis and Mathematical Morphology by Jean Serra, ISBN 0-12-637240-3 (1982)
Image Analysis and Mathematical Morphology, Volume 2: Theoretical Advances by Jean Serra, ISBN 0-12-637241-1 (1988)
An Introduction to Morphological Image Processing by Edward R. Dougherty, ISBN 0-8194-0845-X (1992)
Ch. Lantuéjoul, "Sur le modèle de Johnson-Mehl généralisé", Internal report of the Centre de Morph. Math., Fontainebleau, France, 1977.

"
Category:Mathematical morphology Category:Digital geometry



See also (Serra's 1982 book)




