


Eigenvector slew




Eigenvector slew

In aerospace engineering, especially those areas dealing with spacecraft, the eigenvector slew is a method to calculate a steering correction (called a slew) by rotating the spacecraft around one fixed axis. This corresponds in general to the fastest and most efficient way to reach the desired target orientation as there is only one acceleration phase and one braking phase for the angular rate. If this fixed axis is not a principal axis a time varying torque must be applied to force the spacecraft to rotate as desired, though. Also the gyroscopic effect of momentum wheels must be compensated for.
That such a rotation exists corresponds precisely to a main result of the mathematical theory of rotation operators, the (only real) eigenvector of the rotation operator corresponding to the desired re-orientation is this axis.
Given the current orientation of the craft, and the desired orientation of the craft in cartesian coordinates, the required axis of rotation and corresponding rotation angle to achieve the new orientation is determined by computing the eigenvector of the rotation operator.
Problem
Let



be a body fixed reference system for a 3 axis stabilized spacecraft. The initial attitude is given by









One wants to find an axis relative the spacecraft body



and a rotation angle 
 
 
 
  such that after the rotation with the angle 
 
 
 
  one has that









where



are the new target directions.
In vector form this means that









Solution
In terms of linear algebra this means that one wants to find an eigenvector with the eigenvalue = 1 for the linear mapping defined by









which relative to the



coordinate system has the matrix



Because this is the matrix of the rotation operator relative the base vector system 
 
 
 
  the eigenvalue can be determined with the algorithm described in "Rotation operator (vector space)".
With the notations used here this is:


















The rotation angle 
 
 
 
  is



where "
 
 
 
 " is the polar argument of the vector 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the function ATAN2(y,x) (or in double precision DATAN2(y,x)) available in for example the programming language FORTRAN.
The resulting 
 
 
 
  will be in the interval 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  and the uniquely defined rotation (unit) vector is:



Note that



is the trace of the matrix defined by the orthogonal linear mapping and that the components of the "eigenvector" are fixed and constant during the rotation, i.e.


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are moving with time 
 
 
 
  during the slew.
See also

Rotation operator (vector space)
Slew (spacecraft)

References
"
Category:Spaceflight concepts Category:Aerospace engineering


