


Essential range




Essential range

In mathematics, particularly measure theory, the essential range of a function is intuitively the 'non-negligible' range of the function: It does not change between two functions that are equal almost everywhere. One way of thinking of the essential range of a function is the set on which the range of the function is most 'concentrated'. The essential range can be defined for measurable real or complex-valued functions on a measure space.
Formal definition
Let f be a Borel-measurable, complex-valued function defined on a measure space

 
 . Then the essential range of f is defined to be the set:



In other words: The essential range of a complex-valued function is the set of all complex numbers z such that the inverse image of each ε-neighbourhood of z under f has positive measure.
Properties

The essential range of a measurable function is always closed.
The essential range ess.im(f) of a measurable function is always a subset of 
 
 
 
 .
The essential image cannot be used to distinguished functions that are almost everywhere equal: If 
 
 
 
  holds 
 
 
 
 -almost everywhere, then 
 
 
 
 .
These two facts characterise the essential image: It is the biggest set contained in the closures of 
 
 
 
  for all g that are a.e. equal to f:





 
 .
 




The essential range satisfies 
 
 
 
 .
This fact characterises the essential image: It is the smallest closed subset of 
 
 
 
  with this property.
The essential supremum of a real valued function equals the supremum of its essential image and the essential infimum equals the infimum of its essential range. Consequently a function is essentially bounded if and only if its essential range is bounded.
The essential range of an essentially bounded function f is equal to the spectrum

 
  where f is considered as an element of the C*-algebra

 
 .

Examples

If 
 
 
 
  is the zero measure, then the essential image of all measurable functions is empty.
This also illustrates that even though the essential range of a function is a subset of the closure of the range of that function, equality of the two sets need not hold.
If 
 
 
 
  is open, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the Lebesgue measure, then 
 
 
 
  holds. This holds more generally for all Borel measures that assign non-zero measure to every non-empty open set.

See also

Essential supremum and essential infimum
measure
Lp space

References



"
Category:Real analysis Category:Measure theory


