


Fourier transform on finite groups




Fourier transform on finite groups

In mathematics, the Fourier transform on finite groups is a generalization of the discrete Fourier transform from cyclic to arbitrary finite groups.
Definitions
The Fourier transform of a function 
 
 
 
  at a representation

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is



For each representation 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  matrix, where 
 
 
 
  is the degree of 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a complete set of inequivalent irreducible representations of 
 
 
 
 . Then the matrix entries of the 
 
 
 
  are mutually orthogonal functions on 
 
 
 
 .1 Since the dimension of the transform space is equal to 
 
 
 
 , it follows that 
 
 
 
 .
The inverse Fourier transform at an element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is given by



Properties
Transform of a convolution
The convolution of two functions 
 
 
 
  is defined as



The Fourier transform of a convolution at any representation 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is given by



Plancherel formula
For functions 
 
 
 
 , the Plancherel formula states



where 
 
 
 
  are the irreducible representations of 
 
 

Fourier transform on finite abelian groups
Since the irreducible representations of finite abelian groups are all of degree 1 and hence equal to the irreducible characters of the group, Fourier analysis on finite abelian groups is significantly simplified. For instance, the Fourier transform yields a scalar- and not matrix-valued function.
Furthermore, the irreducible characters of a group may be put in one-to-one correspondence with the elements of the group.
Therefore, we may define the Fourier transform for finite abelian groups as



Note that the right-hand side is simply 
 
 
 
  for the inner product on the vector space of functions from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  defined by



The inverse Fourier transform is then given by



A property that is often useful in probability is that the Fourier transform of the uniform distribution is simply 
 
 
 
  where 0 is the group identity and 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta.
Applications
This generalization of the discrete Fourier transform is used in numerical analysis. A circulant matrix is a matrix where every column is a cyclic shift of the previous one. Circulant matrices can be diagonalized quickly using the fast Fourier transform, and this yields a fast method for solving systems of linear equations with circulant matrices. Similarly, the Fourier transform on arbitrary groups can be used to give fast algorithms for matrices with other symmetries . These algorithms can be used for the construction of numerical methods for solving partial differential equations that preserve the symmetries of the equations .
See also

Fourier transform
Representation theory of finite groups
Character theory

References


.

.

.

.

.

"
Category:Fourier analysis Category:Finite groups



↩




