


Commutation theorem




Commutation theorem

In mathematics, a commutation theorem explicitly identifies the commutant of a specific von Neumann algebra acting on a Hilbert space in the presence of a trace. The first such result was proved by F.J. Murray and John von Neumann in the 1930s and applies to the von Neumann algebra generated by a discrete group or by the dynamical system associated with a measurable transformation preserving a probability measure. Another important application is in the theory of unitary representations of unimodular locally compact groups, where the theory has been applied to the regular representation and other closely related representations. In particular this framework led to an abstract version of the Plancherel theorem for unimodular locally compact groups due to Irving Segal and Forrest Stinespring and an abstract Plancherel theorem for spherical functions associated with a Gelfand pair due to Roger Godement. Their work was put in final form in the 1950s by Jacques Dixmier as part of the theory of Hilbert algebras. It was not until the late 1960s, prompted partly by results in algebraic quantum field theory and quantum statistical mechanics due to the school of Rudolf Haag, that the more general non-tracial Tomita–Takesaki theory was developed, heralding a new era in the theory of von Neumann algebras.
Commutation theorem for finite traces
Let H be a Hilbert space and M a von Neumann algebra on H with a unit vector Ω such that

M Ω is dense in H
M ' Ω is dense in H, where M ' denotes the commutant of M
(abΩ, Ω) = (baΩ, Ω) for all a, b in M.

The vector Ω is called a cyclic-separating trace vector. It is called a trace vector because the last condition means that the matrix coefficient corresponding to Ω defines a tracial state on M. It is called cyclic since Ω generates H as a topological M-module. It is called separating because if aΩ = 0 for a in M, then aM'Ω= (0), and hence a = 0.
It follows that the map



for a in M defines a conjugate-linear isometry of H with square the identity J2 = I. The operator J is usually called the modular conjugation operator.
It is immediately verified that JMJ and M commute on the subspace M Ω, so that



The commutation theorem of Murray and von Neumann states that














One of the easiest ways to see this1 is to introduce K, the closure of the real subspace Msa Ω, where Msa denotes the self-adjoint elements in M. It follows that



an orthogonal direct sum for the real part of inner product. This is just the real orthogonal decomposition for the ±1 eigenspaces of J. On the other hand for a in Msa and b in M'sa, the inner product (abΩ, Ω) is real, because ab is self-adjoint. Hence K is unaltered if M is replaced by M '.
In particular Ω is a trace vector for M' and J is unaltered if M is replaced by M '. So the opposite inclusion



follows by reversing the roles of M and M'.
Examples

One of the simplest cases of the commutation theorem, where it can easily be seen directly, is that of a finite group Γ acting on the finite-dimensional inner product space

 
  by the left and right regular representations λ and ρ. These unitary representations are given by the formulas










for f in 
 
 
 
  and the commutation theorem implies that
 










The operator J is given by the formula
 










Exactly the same results remain true if Γ is allowed to be any countable discrete group.2 The von Neumann algebra λ(Γ)' ' is usually called the group von Neumann algebra of Γ.
 


Another important example is provided by a probability space (X, μ). The Abelian von Neumann algebra A = L∞(X, μ) acts by multiplication operators on H = L2(X, μ) and the constant function 1 is a cyclic-separating trace vector. It follows that










so that A is a maximal Abelian subalgebra of B(H), the von Neumann algebra of all bounded operators on H.
 


The third class of examples combines the above two. Coming from ergodic theory, it was one of von Neumann's original motivations for studying von Neumann algebras. Let (X, μ) be a probability space and let Γ be a countable discrete group of measure-preserving transformations of (X, μ). The group therefore acts unitarily on the Hilbert space H = L2(X, μ) according to the formula










for f in H and normalises the Abelian von Neumann algebra A = L∞(X, μ). Let
 










a tensor product of Hilbert spaces.3 The group–measure space construction or crossed product von Neumann algebra
 










is defined to be the von Neumann algebra on H1 generated by the algebra 
 
 
 
  and the normalising operators 
 
 
 
 .4



The vector 
 
 
 
  is a cyclic-separating trace vector. Moreover the modular conjugation operator J and commutant M ' can be explicitly identified.
 

One of the most important cases of the group–measure space construction is when Γ is the group of integers Z, i.e. the case of a single invertible measurable transformation T. Here T must preserve the probability measure μ. Semifinite traces are required to handle the case when T (or more generally Γ) only preserves an infinite equivalent measure; and the full force of the Tomita–Takesaki theory is required when there is no invariant measure in the equivalence class, even though the equivalence class of the measure is preserved by T (or Γ).56
Commutation theorem for semifinite traces
Let M be a von Neumann algebra and M+ the set of positive operators in M. By definition,7 a semifinite trace (or sometimes just trace) on M is a functional τ from M+ into [0,∞] such that



 
  for a, b in M+ and λ, μ ≥ 0 ();


 
  for a in M+ and u a unitary operator in M (unitary invariance);
τ is completely additive on orthogonal families of projections in M (normality);
each projection in M is as orthogonal direct sum of projections with finite trace (semifiniteness).

If in addition τ is non-zero on every non-zero projection, then τ is called a faithful trace.
If τ is a faithul trace on M, let H = L2(M, τ) be the Hilbert space completion of the inner product space



with respect to the inner product



The von Neumann algebra M acts by left multiplication on H and can be identified with its image. Let



for a in M0. The operator J is again called the modular conjugation operator and extends to a conjugate-linear isometry of H satisfying J2 = I. The commutation theorem of Murray and von Neumann














is again valid in this case. This result can be proved directly by a variety of methods,8 but follows immediately from the result for finite traces, by repeated use of the following elementary fact:

If M1

M2 are two von Neumann algebras such that pn M1 = pn M2 for a family of projections pn in the commutant of M1 increasing to I in the strong operator topology, then M1 = M2.
 

Hilbert algebras
The theory of Hilbert algebras was introduced by Godement (under the name "unitary algebras"), Segal and Dixmier to formalize the classical method of defining the trace for trace class operators starting from Hilbert–Schmidt operators.9 Applications in the representation theory of groups naturally lead to examples of Hilbert algebras. Every von Neumann algebra endowed with a semifinite trace has a canonical "completed"10 or "full" Hilbert algebra associated with it; and conversely a completed Hilbert algebra of exactly this form can be canonically associated with every Hilbert algebra. The theory of Hilbert algebras can be used to deduce the commutation theorems of Murray and von Neumann; equally well the main results on Hilbert algebras can also be deduced directly from the commutation theorems for traces. The theory of Hilbert algebras was generalised by Takesaki11 as a tool for proving commutation theorems for semifinite weights in Tomita–Takesaki theory; they can be dispensed with when dealing with states.121314
Definition
A Hilbert algebra151617 is an algebra 
 
 
 
  with involution x→x* and an inner product (,) such that

(a,b)=(b*,a*) for a, b in 
 
 
 
 ;
left multiplication by a fixed a in 
 
 
 
  is a bounded operator;

is the adjoint, in other words (xy,z) = (y, x*z);

the linear span of all products xy is dense in 
 
 
 
 .

Examples

The Hilbert–Schmidt operators on an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space form a Hilbert algebra with inner product (a,b) = Tr (b*a).
If (X, μ) is an infinite measure space, the algebra L∞ (X) 
 
 
L2(X) is a Hilbert algebra with the usual inner product from L2(X).
If M is a von Neumann algebra with faithful semifinite trace τ, then the *-subalgebra M0 defined above is a Hilbert algebra with inner product (a, '' b) = τ(b*a'').
If G is a unimodular locally compact group, the convolution algebra L1(G)
 
 
L2(G) is a Hilbert algebra with the usual inner product from L2(G).
If (G, K) is a Gelfand pair, the convolution algebra L1(K\G/K)
 
 
L2(K\G/K) is a Hilbert algebra with the usual inner product from L2(G); here Lp(K\G/K) denotes the closed subspace of K-biinvariant functions in Lp(G).
Any dense *-subalgebra of a Hilbert algebra is also a Hilbert algebra.

Properties
Let H be the Hilbert space completion of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the inner product and let J denote the extension of the involution to a conjugate-linear involution of H. Define a representation λ and an anti-representation ρ of 
 
 
 
  on itself by left and right multiplication:



These actions extend continuously to actions on H. In this case the commutation theorem for Hilbert algebras states that














Moreover if



the von Neumann algebra generated by the operators λ(a), then














These results were proved independently by  and .
The proof relies on the notion of "bounded elements" in the Hilbert space completion H.
An element of x in H is said to be bounded (relative to 
 
 
 
 ) if the map a → xa of 
 
 
 
  into H extends to a bounded operator on H, denoted by λ(x). In this case it is straightforward to prove that:18

Jx is also a bounded element, denoted x*, and λ(x*) = λ(x)*;
a → ax is given by the bounded operator ρ(x) = Jλ(x*)J on H;
M ' is generated by the ρ(x)'s with x bounded;
λ(x) and ρ(y) commute for x, y bounded.

The commutation theorem follows immediately from the last assertion. In particular

M = λ(
 
 
 
 )".

The space of all bounded elements 
 
 
 
  forms a Hilbert algebra containing 
 
 
 
  as a dense *-subalgebra. It is said to be completed or full because any element in H bounded relative to 
 
 
 
 must actually already lie in 
 
 
 
 . The functional τ on M+ defined by



if x =λ(a)*λ(a) and ∞ otherwise, yields a faithful semifinite trace on M with



Thus:






There is a one-one correspondence between von Neumann algebras on H with faithful semifinite trace and full Hilbert algebras with Hilbert space completion H.





See also

von Neumann algebra
Affiliated operator
Tomita–Takesaki theory

Notes
References






(English translation)


(English translation)








(Section 5)



"
Category:Von Neumann algebras Category:Representation theory of groups Category:Ergodic theory Category:Theorems in functional analysis Category:Theorems in representation theory



↩
↩
H1 can be identified with the space of square integrable functions on X x Γ with respect to the product measure.↩
It should not be confused with the von Neumann algebra on H generated by A and the operators Ug.↩
↩
↩


↩
Dixmier uses the adjectives achevée or maximale.↩


↩
↩

, Appendix A54–A61.↩
↩
↩




