


Three-dimensional rotation operator




Three-dimensional rotation operator

This article derives the main properties of rotations in 3-dimensional space.
The three Euler rotations are one way to bring a rigid body to any desired orientation by sequentially making rotations about axis' fixed relative to the object. However, this can also be achieved with one single rotation (Euler's rotation theorem). Using the concepts of linear algebra it is shown how this single rotation can be performed.
Mathematical formulation
Let



be a coordinate system fixed in the body that through a change in orientation is brought to the new directions



Any vector



rotating with the body is then brought to the new direction



i.e. this is a linear operator
The matrix of this operator relative to the coordinate system



is



As



or equivalently in matrix notation


 
  the matrix is orthogonal and as a "right hand" base vector system is re-orientated into another "right hand" system the determinant of this matrix has the value 1.
Rotation around an axis
Let



be an orthogonal positively oriented base vector system in 
 
 
 
 .
The linear operator
"Rotation with the angle 
 
 
 
  around the axis defined by 
 
 
 
 "
has the matrix representation



relative to this basevector system.
This then means that a vector



is rotated to the vector



by the linear operator.
The determinant of this matrix is



and the characteristic polynomial is



The matrix is symmetric if and only if 
 
 
 
 , i.e. for 
 
 
 
  and for 
 
 
 
 .
The case 
 
 
 
  is the trivial case of an identity operator.
For the case 
 
 
 
  the characteristic polynomial is



i.e. the rotation operator has the eigenvalues



The eigenspace corresponding to 
 
 
 
  is all vectors on the rotation axis, i.e. all vectors



The eigenspace corresponding to 
 
 
 
  consists of all vectors orthogonal to the rotation axis, i.e. all vectors



For all other values of 
 
 
 
  the matrix is un-symmetric and as 
 
 
 
  there is only the eigenvalue 
 
 
 
  with the one-dimensional eigenspace of the vectors on the rotation axis:



The rotation matrix by angle 
 
 
 
  around a general axis of rotation 
 
 
 
  is given by Rodrigues' rotation formula.


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix and 
 
 
 
  is the dual 2-form of 
 
 
 
  or  cross product matrix,


 
 .
Note that 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
The general case
The operator
"Rotation with the angle 
 
 
 
  around a specified axis"
discussed above is an orthogonal mapping and its matrix relative to any base vector system is therefore an orthogonal matrix . Furthermore its determinant has the value 1. A non-trivial fact is the opposite, i.e. that for any orthogonal linear mapping in 
 
 
 
  having determinant = 1 there exist base vectors



such that the matrix takes the "canonical form"



for some value of 
 
 
 
 .
In fact, if a linear operator has the orthogonal matrix



relative some base vector system



and this matrix is symmetric, the "Symmetric operator theorem" valid in 
 
 
 
  (any dimension) applies saying
that it has n orthogonal eigenvectors. This means for the 3-dimensional case that there exists a coordinate system



such that the matrix takes the form



As it is an orthogonal matrix these diagonal elements 
 
 
 
  are either 1 or −1. As the determinant is 1 these elements are either all 1 or one of the elements is 1 and the other two are −1.
In the first case it is the trivial identity operator corresponding to 
 
 
 
 .
In the second case it has the form



if the basevectors are numbered such that the one with eigenvalue 1 has index 3. This matrix is then of the desired form for 
 
 
 
 .
If the matrix is un-symmetric, the vector



where









is non-zero. This vector is an eigenvector with eigenvalue



Setting



and selecting any two orthogonal unit vectors in the plane orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 :



such that



form a positively oriented triple, the operator takes the desired form with






The expressions above are in fact valid also for the case of a symmetric rotation operator corresponding to a rotation with 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . But the difference is that for 
 
 
 
  the vector



is zero and of no use for finding the eigenspace of eigenvalue 1, i.e. the rotation axis.
Defining 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  the matrix for the rotation operator is



provided that



i.e. except for the cases 
 
 
 
  (the identity operator) and 
 
 

Quaternions
Quaternions are defined similar to 
 
 
 
  with the difference that the half angle 
 
 
 
  is used instead of the full angle 
 
 
 
 .
This means that the first 3 components 
 
 
 
  are components of a vector defined from


 
  and that the fourth component is the scalar



As the angle 
 
 
 
  defined from the canonical form is in the interval



one would normally have that 
 
 
 
 . But a "dual" representation of a rotation with quaternions is used, i.e.



and



are two alternative representations of one and the same rotation.
The entities 
 
 
 
  are defined from the quaternions by












Using quaternions the matrix of the rotation operator is



Numerical example
Consider the reorientation corresponding to the Euler angles

 
  relative a given base vector system



Corresponding matrix relative to this base vector system is (see Euler angles#Matrix orientation)



and the quaternion is



The canonical form of this operator


 
  with 
 
 
 
  is obtained with



The quaternion relative to this new system is then



Instead of making the three Euler rotations



the same orientation can be reached with one single rotation of size 
 
 
 
  around 
 
 

References


.

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Kinematics Operator


