


Orthogonality principle




Orthogonality principle

In statistics and signal processing, the orthogonality principle is a necessary and sufficient condition for the optimality of a Bayesian estimator. Loosely stated, the orthogonality principle says that the error vector of the optimal estimator (in a mean square error sense) is orthogonal to any possible estimator. The orthogonality principle is most commonly stated for linear estimators, but more general formulations are possible. Since the principle is a necessary and sufficient condition for optimality, it can be used to find the minimum mean square error estimator.
Orthogonality principle for linear estimators
The orthogonality principle is most commonly used in the setting of linear estimation.1 In this context, let x be an unknown random vector which is to be estimated based on the observation vector y. One wishes to construct a linear estimator 
 
 
 
  for some matrix H and vector c. Then, the orthogonality principle states that an estimator 
 
 
 
  achieves minimum mean square error if and only if



 
  and




If x and y have zero mean, then it suffices to require the first condition.
Example
Suppose x is a Gaussian random variable with mean m and variance 
 
 
 
  Also suppose we observe a value 
 
 
 
  where w is Gaussian noise which is independent of x and has mean 0 and variance 
 
 
 
  We wish to find a linear estimator 
 
 
 
  minimizing the MSE. Substituting the expression 
 
 
 
  into the two requirements of the orthogonality principle, we obtain








 
  and








 
  Solving these two linear equations for h and c results in


 
  so that the linear minimum mean square error estimator is given by



This estimator can be interpreted as a weighted average between the noisy measurements y and the prior expected value m. If the noise variance 
 
 
 
  is low compared with the variance of the prior minus the squared mean 
 
 
 
  (corresponding to a high SNR), then most of the weight is given to the measurements y, which are deemed more reliable than the prior information. Conversely, if the noise variance is relatively higher, then the estimate will be close to m, as the measurements are not reliable enough to outweigh the prior information.
Finally, note that because the variables x and y are jointly Gaussian, the minimum MSE estimator is linear.2 Therefore, in this case, the estimator above minimizes the MSE among all estimators, not only linear estimators.
General formulation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hilbert space of random variables with an inner product defined by 
 
 
 
 . Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a closed subspace of 
 
 
 
 , representing the space of all possible estimators. One wishes to find a vector 
 
 
 
  which will approximate a vector 
 
 
 
 . More accurately, one would like to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) 
 
 
 
  between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In the special case of linear estimators described above, the space 
 
 
 
  is the set of all functions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , while 
 
 
 
  is the set of linear estimators, i.e., linear functions of 
 
 
 
  only. Other settings which can be formulated in this way include the subspace of causal linear filters and the subspace of all (possibly nonlinear) estimators.
Geometrically, we can see this problem by the following simple case where 
 
 
 
  is a one-dimensional subspace:
(Figure)
Orthogonality principle.png

We want to find the closest approximation to the vector 
 
 
 
  by a vector 
 
 
 
  in the space 
 
 
 
 . From the geometric interpretation, it is intuitive that the best approximation, or smallest error, occurs when the error vector, 
 
 
 
 , is orthogonal to vectors in the space 
 
 
 
 .
More accurately, the general orthogonality principle states the following: Given a closed subspace 
 
 
 
  of estimators within a Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  and an element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , an element 
 
 
 
  achieves minimum MSE among all elements in 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

Stated in such a manner, this principle is simply a statement of the Hilbert projection theorem. Nevertheless, the extensive use of this result in signal processing has resulted in the name "orthogonality principle."
A solution to error minimization problems
The following is one way to find the minimum mean square error estimator by using the orthogonality principle.
We want to be able to approximate a vector 
 
 
 
  by



where



is the approximation of 
 
 
 
  as a linear combination of vectors in the subspace 
 
 
 
  spanned by 
 
 
 
  Therefore, we want to be able to solve for the coefficients, 
 
 
 
 , so that we may write our approximation in known terms.
By the orthogonality theorem, the square norm of the error vector, 
 
 
 
 , is minimized when, for all j,



Developing this equation, we obtain



If there is a finite number 
 
 
 
  of vectors 
 
 
 
 , one can write this equation in matrix form as



Assuming the 
 
 
 
  are linearly independent, the Gramian matrix can be inverted to obtain



thus providing an expression for the coefficients 
 
 
 
  of the minimum mean square error estimator.
See also

Minimum mean square error
Hilbert projection theorem

Notes
References




"
Category:Estimation theory Category:Statistical principles



Kay, p.386↩
See the article minimum mean square error.↩




