


Husimi Q representation




Husimi Q representation

The Husimi Q representation, introduced by  in 1940,1 is a quasiprobability distribution commonly used in quantum mechanics2 to represent the phase space distribution of a quantum state such as light in the phase space formulation.3 It is used in the field of quantum optics4 and particularly for tomographic purposes. It is also applied in the study of quantum effects in superconductors.5
 
Definition and properties
The Husimi Q distribution (called Q-function in the context of quantum optics) is one of the simplest distributions of quasiprobability in phase space. It is constructed in such a way that observables written in anti-normal order follow the optical equivalence theorem. This means that it is essentially the density matrix put into normal order. This makes it relatively easy to calculate compared to other quasiprobability distributions through the formula



which is effectively a trace of the density matrix over the basis of coherent states

 
 . It produces a pictorial representation of the state ρ to illustrate several of its mathematical properties.6 Its relative ease of calculation is related to its smoothness compared to other quasiprobability distributions. In fact, it can be understood as a smoothing of the Wigner quasiprobability distribution by a Gaussian filter:


 
  Such Gauss transforms being essentially invertible in the Fourier domain via the convolution theorem, Q provides an equivalent description of quantum mechanics in phase space to that furnished by the Wigner distribution. Alternatively, one can compute the Husimi Q distribution by taking the Segal–Bargmann transform of the wave function and then computing the associated probability density.
Q is normalized to unity,



and is non-negative definite7 and bounded:



Despite the fact that 
 
 
 
  is non-negative definite and bounded like a standard joint probability distribution, this similarity is misleading because different coherent states are not orthogonal. Two different points 
 
 
 
  do not represent disjoint physical contingencies; thus, Q(α) does not represent the probability of mutually exclusive states, as needed in the third axiom of probability theory.
See also

Nonclassical light
Glauber–Sudarshan P-representation
Wehrl entropy

References


"
Category:Quantum optics Category:Particle statistics



Kôdi Husimi (1940). "Some Formal Properties of the Density Matrix", Proc. Phys. Math. Soc. Jpn. 22: 264-314 .↩
↩
Ulf Leonhardt (1997). Measuring the Quantum State of Light, Cambridge Studies in Modern Optics. ISBN 0521497302 , ISBN 978-0521497305.↩
H. J. Carmichael (2002). Statistical Methods in Quantum Optics I: Master Equations and Fokker-Planck Equations, Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-540-54882-9↩
↩
Cosmas K. Zachos, David B. Fairlie, and Thomas L. Curtright (2005). Quantum Mechanics in Phase Space, (World Scientific, Singapore) ISBN 978-981-238-384-6 1.↩
↩




