


Ordinal analysis




Ordinal analysis

In proof theory, ordinal analysis assigns ordinals (often large countable ordinals) to mathematical theories as a measure of their strength. The field was formed when Gerhard Gentzen in 1934 used cut elimination to prove, in modern terms, that the proof theoretic ordinal of Peano arithmetic is ε0.
Definition
Ordinal analysis concerns true, effective (recursive) theories that can interpret a sufficient portion of arithmetic to make statements about ordinal notations. The proof theoretic ordinal of such a theory 
 
 
 
  is the smallest recursive ordinal that the theory cannot prove is well founded — the supremum of all ordinals 
 
 
 
  for which there exists a notation 
 
 
 
  in Kleene's sense such that 
 
 
 
  proves that 
 
 
 
  is an ordinal notation. Equivalently, it is the supremum of all ordinals 
 
 
 
  such that there exists a recursive relation

 
  on 
 
 
 
  (the set of natural numbers) that well-orders it with ordinal 
 
 
 
  and such that 
 
 
 
  proves transfinite induction of arithmetical statements for 
 
 
 
 .
The existence of any recursive ordinal that the theory fails to prove is well ordered follows from the 
 
 
 
  bounding theorem, as the set of natural numbers that an effective theory proves to be ordinal notations is a 
 
 
 
  set (see Hyperarithmetical theory). Thus the proof theoretic ordinal of a theory will always be a countable ordinal less than the Church-Kleene ordinal

 
 .
In practice, the proof theoretic ordinal of a theory is a good measure of the strength of a theory. If theories have the same proof theoretic ordinal they are often equiconsistent, and if one theory has a larger proof theoretic ordinal than another it can often prove the consistency of the second theory.
Examples
Theories with proof theoretic ordinal ω2

RFA, rudimentary function arithmetic.1
IΔ0, arithmetic with induction on Δ0-predicates without any axiom asserting that exponentiation is total.

Theories with proof theoretic ordinal ω3
Friedman's grand conjecture suggests that much "ordinary" mathematics can be proved in weak systems having this as their proof-theoretic ordinal.

EFA, elementary function arithmetic.
IΔ0 + exp, arithmetic with induction on Δ0-predicates augmented by an axiom asserting that exponentiation is total.
RCA, a second order form of EFA sometimes used in reverse mathematics.
WKL, a second order form of EFA sometimes used in reverse mathematics.

Theories with proof theoretic ordinal ωn

IΔ0 or EFA augmented by an axiom ensuring that each element of the n-th level 
 
 
 
  of the Grzegorczyk hierarchy is total.

Theories with proof theoretic ordinal ωω

RCA0, recursive comprehension.
WKL0, weak König's lemma.
PRA, primitive recursive arithmetic.
IΣ1, arithmetic with induction on Σ1-predicates.

Theories with proof theoretic ordinal ε0

PA, Peano arithmetic (shown by Gentzen using cut elimination).
ACA0, arithmetical comprehension.

Theories with proof theoretic ordinal the Feferman-Schütte ordinal Γ0
This ordinal is sometimes considered to be the upper limit for "predicative" theories.

ATR0, arithmetical transfinite recursion.
Martin-Löf type theory with arbitrarily many finite level universes.

Theories with proof theoretic ordinal the Bachmann-Howard ordinal

ID1, the theory of inductive definitions.
KP, Kripke-Platek set theory with the axiom of infinity.
CZF, Aczel's constructive Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory.
MLW, Martin-Löf Type Theory with indexed W-Types
EON, a weak variant of the Feferman's explicit mathematics system T0.

Theories with larger proof theoretic ordinals



 
 , Π11 comprehension has a rather large proof theoretic ordinal, which was described by Takeuti in terms of "ordinal diagrams", and which is bounded by ψ0(Ωω) in Buchholz's notation. It is also the ordinal of 
 
 
 
 , the theory of finitely iterated inductive definitions.
T0, Feferman's constructive system of explicit mathematics has a larger proof-theoretic ordinal, which is also the proof-theoretic ordinal of the KPi, Kripke-Platek Set theory with iterated admissibles and 
 
 
 
 .
KPM, an extension of Kripke-Platek set theory based on a Mahlo cardinal, has a very large proof theoretic ordinal ϑ, which was described by .
MLM, an extension of Martin-Löf type theory by one Mahlo-universe, has an even larger proof theoretic ordinal ψΩ1(ΩM + ω).

Most theories capable of describing the power set of the natural numbers have proof theoretic ordinals that are so large that no explicit combinatorial description has yet () been given. This includes second order arithmetic and set theories with powersets. (The CZF and Kripke-Platek set theories mentioned above are weak set theories without powersets.)
See also

Equiconsistency
Large cardinal property
Feferman–Schütte ordinal
Bachmann–Howard ordinal

References












"
Category:Proof theory Category:Ordinal numbers



 defines the rudimentary sets and rudimentary functions, and proves them equivalent to the Δ0-predicates on the naturals. An ordinal analysis of the system can be found in 




