


GGH encryption scheme




GGH encryption scheme

The Goldreich–Goldwasser–Halevi (GGH) lattice-based cryptosystem is an asymmetric cryptosystem based on lattices. There is also a GGH signature scheme.
The Goldreich–Goldwasser–Halevi (GGH) cryptosystem makes use of the fact that the closest vector problem can be a hard problem. It was published in 1997 and uses a trapdoor one-way function that is relying on the difficulty of lattice reduction. The idea included in this trapdoor function is that, given any basis for a lattice, it is easy to generate a vector which is close to a lattice point, for example taking a lattice point and adding a small error vector. But to return from this erroneous vector to the original lattice point a special basis is needed.
The GGH encryption scheme was cryptanalyzed in 1999 by Phong Q. Nguyen.
Operation
GGH involves a private key and a public key.
The private key is a basis 
 
 
 
  of a lattice 
 
 
 
  with good properties (such as short nearly orthogonal vectors) and a unimodular matrix

 
 .
The public key is another basis of the lattice 
 
 
 
 
  of the form 
 
 
 
 .
For some chosen M, the message space consists of the vector 
 
 
 
  in the range 
 
 
 
 .
Encryption
Given a message 
 
 
 
 , error 
 
 
 
 
 , and a public key 
 
 
 
  compute



In matrix notation this is


 
 .
Remember 
 
 
 
  consists of integer values, and 
 
 
 
 
  is a lattice point, so v is also a lattice point. The ciphertext is then



Decryption
To decrypt the cyphertext one computes



The Babai rounding technique will be used to remove the term 
 
 
 
  as long as it is small enough. Finally compute



to get the messagetext.
Example
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a lattice with the basis 
 
 
 
  and its inverse 
 
 



 
  and 
 
 

With


 
  and



this gives



Let the message be 
 
 
 
 
  and the error vector 
 
 
 
 . Then the ciphertext is



To decrypt one must compute



This is rounded to 
 
 
 
  and the message is recovered with



Security of the scheme
1999 Nguyen showed at the Crypto conference that the GGH encryption scheme has a flaw in the design of the schemes. He showed that every ciphertext reveals information about the plaintext and that the problem of decryption could be turned into a special closest vector problem much easier to solve than the general CVP.
Bibliography

Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Shai Halevi. Public-key cryptosystems from lattice reduction problems. In CRYPTO ’97: Proceedings of the 17th Annual International Cryptology Conference on Advances in Cryptology, pages 112–131, London, UK, 1997. Springer-Verlag.
Phong Q. Nguyen. Cryptanalysis of the Goldreich–Goldwasser–Halevi Cryptosystem from Crypto ’97. In CRYPTO ’99: Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Cryptology Conference on Advances in Cryptology, pages 288–304, London, UK, 1999. Springer-Verlag.

"
Category:Public-key encryption schemes Category:Lattice-based cryptography


