


Ultralimit




Ultralimit


For the direct limit of a sequence of ultrapowers, see Ultraproduct.


In mathematics, an ultralimit is a geometric construction that assigns to a sequence of metric spaces Xn a limiting metric space. The notion of an ultralimit captures the limiting behavior of finite configurations in the spaces Xn and uses an ultrafilter to avoid the process of repeatedly passing to subsequences to ensure convergence. An ultralimit is a generalization of the notion of Gromov-Hausdorff convergence of metric spaces.
Ultrafilters
Recall that an ultrafilter ω on the set of natural numbers 
 
 
 
  is a finite-additive set function (which can be thought of as a measure) 
 
 
 
  from the power set

 
  (that is, the set of all subsets of 
 
 
 
 ) to the set {0,1} such that 
 
 
 
 . An ultrafilter ω on 
 
 
 
  is non-principal if for every finite subset 
 
 
 
  we have ω(F)=0.
Limit of a sequence of points with respect to an ultrafilter
Let ω be a non-principal ultrafilter on 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of points in a metric space (X,d) and x∈ X, the point x is called the ω -limit of xn, denoted 
 
 
 
 , if for every 
 
 
 
  we have:



It is not hard to see the following:

If an ω -limit of a sequence of points exists, it is unique.
If 
 
 
 
  in the standard sense, 
 
 
 
 . (For this property to hold it is crucial that the ultrafilter be non-principal.)

An important basic fact1 states that, if (X,d) is compact and ω is a non-principal ultrafilter on 
 
 
 
 , the ω-limit of any sequence of points in X exists (and is necessarily unique).
In particular, any bounded sequence of real numbers has a well-defined ω-limit in 
 
 
 
  (as closed intervals are compact).
Ultralimit of metric spaces with specified base-points
Let ω be a non-principal ultrafilter on 
 
 
 
 . Let (Xn,dn) be a sequence of metric spaces with specified base-points pn∈Xn.
Let us say that a sequence 
 
 
 
 , where xn∈Xn, is admissible, if the sequence of real numbers (dn(xn,pn))n is bounded, that is, if there exists a positive real number C such that 
 
 
 
 . Let us denote the set of all admissible sequences by 
 
 
 
 .
It is easy to see from the triangle inequality that for any two admissible sequences 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the sequence (dn(xn,yn))n is bounded and hence there exists an ω-limit 
 
 
 
 . Let us define a relation 
 
 
 
  on the set 
 
 
 
  of all admissible sequences as follows. For 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
  It is easy to show that 
 
 
 
  is an equivalence relation on 
 
 

The ultralimit with respect to ω of the sequence (Xn,dn, pn) is a metric space 
 
 
 
  defined as follows.2
As a set, we have 
 
 
 
  .
For two 
 
 
 
 -equivalence classes 
 
 
 
  of admissible sequences 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 

It is not hard to see that 
 
 
 
  is well-defined and that it is a metric on the set 
 
 
 
 .
Denote 
 
 
 
  .
On basepoints in the case of uniformly bounded spaces
Suppose that (Xn,dn) is a sequence of metric spaces of uniformly bounded diameter, that is, there exists a real number C>0 such that diam(Xn)≤C for every 
 
 
 
 . Then for any choice pn of base-points in Xn every sequence 
 
 
 
  is admissible. Therefore in this situation the choice of base-points does not have to be specified when defining an ultralimit, and the ultralimit 
 
 
 
  depends only on (Xn,dn) and on ω but does not depend on the choice of a base-point sequence 
 
 
 
 . In this case one writes 
 
 
 
 .
Basic properties of ultralimits

If (Xn,dn) are geodesic metric spaces then 
 
 
 
  is also a geodesic metric space.3
If (Xn,dn) are complete metric spaces then 
 
 
 
  is also a complete metric space.45

Actually, by construction, the limit space is always complete, even when (Xn,dn) is a repeating sequence of a space (X,d) which is not complete.6

If (Xn,dn) are compact metric spaces that converge to a compact metric space (X,d) in the Gromov–Hausdorff sense (this automatically implies that the spaces (Xn,dn) have uniformly bounded diameter), then the ultralimit 
 
 
 
  is isometric to (X,d).
Suppose that (Xn,dn) are proper metric spaces and that 
 
 
 
  are base-points such that the pointed sequence (Xn,dn,pn) converges to a proper metric space (X,d) in the Gromov–Hausdorff sense. Then the ultralimit 
 
 
 
  is isometric to (X,d).7
Let κ≤0 and let (Xn,dn) be a sequence of CAT(κ)-metric spaces. Then the ultralimit 
 
 
 
  is also a CAT(κ)-space.8
Let (Xn,dn) be a sequence of CAT(κn)-metric spaces where 
 
 
 
  Then the ultralimit 
 
 
 
  is real tree.9

Asymptotic cones
An important class of ultralimits are the so-called asymptotic cones of metric spaces. Let (X,d) be a metric space, let ω be a non-principal ultrafilter on 
 
 
 
  and let pn ∈ X be a sequence of base-points. Then the ω–ultralimit of the sequence 
 
 
 
  is called the asymptotic cone of X with respect to ω and 
 
 
 
  and is denoted 
 
 
 
 . One often takes the base-point sequence to be constant, pn = p for some p ∈ X; in this case the asymptotic cone does not depend on the choice of p ∈ X and is denoted by 
 
 
 
  or just 
 
 
 
 .
The notion of an asymptotic cone plays an important role in geometric group theory since asymptotic cones (or, more precisely, their topological types and bi-Lipschitz types) provide quasi-isometry invariants of metric spaces in general and of finitely generated groups in particular.10 Asymptotic cones also turn out to be a useful tool in the study of relatively hyperbolic groups and their generalizations.11
Examples

Let (X,d) be a compact metric space and put (Xn,dn)=(X,d) for every 
 
 
 
 . Then the ultralimit 
 
 
 
  is isometric to (X,d).
Let (X,dX) and (Y,dY) be two distinct compact metric spaces and let (Xn,dn) be a sequence of metric spaces such that for each n either (Xn,dn)=(X,dX) or (Xn,dn)=(Y,dY). Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus A1, A2 are disjoint and 
 
 
 
  Therefore one of A1, A2 has ω-measure 1 and the other has ω-measure 0. Hence 
 
 
 
  is isometric to (X,dX) if ω(A1)=1 and 
 
 
 
  is isometric to (Y,dY) if ω(A2)=1. This shows that the ultralimit can depend on the choice of an ultrafilter ω.
Let (M,g) be a compact connected Riemannian manifold of dimension m, where g is a Riemannian metric on M. Let d be the metric on M corresponding to g, so that (M,d) is a geodesic metric space. Choose a basepoint p∈M. Then the ultralimit (and even the ordinary Gromov-Hausdorff limit) 
 
 
 
  is isometric to the tangent space TpM of M at p with the distance function on TpM given by the inner product g(p). Therefore the ultralimit 
 
 
 
  is isometric to the Euclidean space

 
  with the standard Euclidean metric.12
Let 
 
 
 
  be the standard m-dimensional Euclidean space with the standard Euclidean metric. Then the asymptotic cone 
 
 
 
  is isometric to 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be the 2-dimensional integer lattice where the distance between two lattice points is given by the length of the shortest edge-path between them in the grid. Then the asymptotic cone 
 
 
 
  is isometric to 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Taxicab metric (or L1-metric) on 
 
 
 
 .
Let (X,d) be a δ-hyperbolic geodesic metric space for some δ≥0. Then the asymptotic cone 
 
 
 
  is a real tree.1314
Let (X,d) be a metric space of finite diameter. Then the asymptotic cone 
 
 
 
  is a single point.
Let (X,d) be a CAT(0)-metric space. Then the asymptotic cone 
 
 
 
  is also a CAT(0)-space.15

Footnotes
Basic References

John Roe. Lectures on Coarse Geometry. American Mathematical Society, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8218-3332-2; Ch. 7.
L.Van den Dries, A.J.Wilkie, On Gromov's theorem concerning groups of polynomial growth and elementary logic. Journal of Algebra, Vol. 89(1984), pp. 349–374.
M. Kapovich B. Leeb. On asymptotic cones and quasi-isometry classes of fundamental groups of 3-manifolds, Geometric and Functional Analysis, Vol. 5 (1995), no. 3, pp. 582–603
M. Kapovich. Hyperbolic Manifolds and Discrete Groups. Birkhäuser, 2000. ISBN 978-0-8176-3904-4; Ch. 9.
Cornelia Druţu and Mark Sapir (with an Appendix by Denis Osin and Mark Sapir), Tree-graded spaces and asymptotic cones of groups. Topology, Volume 44 (2005), no. 5, pp. 959–1058.
M. Gromov. Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces. Progress in Mathematics vol. 152, Birkhäuser, 1999. ISBN 0-8176-3898-9; Ch. 3.
B. Kleiner and B. Leeb, Rigidity of quasi-isometries for symmetric spaces and Euclidean buildings. Publications Mathématiques de L'IHÉS. Volume 86, Number 1, December 1997, pp. 115–197.

See also

Ultrafilter
Geometric group theory
Gromov-Hausdorff convergence

"
Category:Geometric group theory Category:Metric geometry




John Roe. Lectures on Coarse Geometry. American Mathematical Society, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8218-3332-2; Definition 7.19, p. 107.↩

L.Van den Dries, A.J.Wilkie, On Gromov's theorem concerning groups of polynomial growth and elementary logic. Journal of Algebra, Vol. 89(1984), pp. 349–374.↩
John Roe. Lectures on Coarse Geometry. American Mathematical Society, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8218-3332-2; Proposition 7.20, p. 108.↩
Bridson, Haefliger "Metric Spaces of Non-positive curvature" Lemma 5.53↩

M. Kapovich B. Leeb. On asymptotic cones and quasi-isometry classes of fundamental groups of 3-manifolds, Geometric and Functional Analysis, Vol. 5 (1995), no. 3, pp. 582–603↩

John Roe. Lectures on Coarse Geometry. American Mathematical Society, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8218-3332-2↩
Cornelia Druţu and Mark Sapir (with an Appendix by Denis Osin and Mark Sapir), Tree-graded spaces and asymptotic cones of groups. Topology, Volume 44 (2005), no. 5, pp. 959–1058.↩
Yu. Burago, M. Gromov, and G. Perel'man. A. D. Aleksandrov spaces with curvatures bounded below (in Russian), Uspekhi Matematicheskih Nauk vol. 47 (1992), pp. 3–51; translated in: Russian Math. Surveys vol. 47, no. 2 (1992), pp. 1–58↩

John Roe. Lectures on Coarse Geometry. American Mathematical Society, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8218-3332-2; Example 7.30, p. 118.↩





