


Supernatural number




Supernatural number

In mathematics, the supernatural numbers (sometimes called generalized natural numbers or Steinitz numbers) are a generalization of the natural numbers. They were used by Ernst Steinitz1 in 1910 as a part of his work on field theory.
A supernatural number 
 
 
 
  is a formal product:



where 
 
 
 
  runs over all prime numbers, and each 
 
 
 
  is zero, a natural number or infinity. Sometimes 
 
 
 
  is used instead of 
 
 
 
 . If no 
 
 
 
  and there are only a finite number of non-zero 
 
 
 
  then we recover the positive integers. Slightly less intuitively, if all 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 , we get zero. Supernatural numbers extend beyond natural numbers by allowing the possibility of infinitely many prime factors, and by allowing any given prime to divide 
 
 
 
  "infinitely often," by taking that prime's corresponding exponent to be the symbol 
 
 
 
 .
There is no natural way to add supernatural numbers, but they can be multiplied, with 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, the notion of divisibility extends to the supernaturals with 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . The notion of the least common multiple and greatest common divisor can also be generalized for supernatural numbers, by defining






With these definitions, the gcd or lcm of infinitely many natural numbers (or supernatural numbers) is a supernatural number. We can also extend the usual 

 
 -adic order functions to supernatural numbers by defining 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 

Supernatural numbers are used to define orders and indices of profinite groups and subgroups, in which case many of the theorems from finite group theory carry over exactly. They are used to encode the algebraic extensions of a finite field.2 They are also used implicitly in many number-theoretical proofs, such as the density of the square-free integers and bounds for odd perfect numbers.
See also

profinite integer

References





External links

Planet Math: Supernatural number

"
Category:Number theory




Brawley & Schnibben (1989) pp.25-26




