


Föppl–von Kármán equations




Föppl–von Kármán equations

The Föppl–von Kármán equations, named after August Föppl1 and Theodore von Kármán,2 are a set of nonlinear partial differential equations describing the large deflections of thin flat plates.3 With applications ranging from the design of submarine hulls to the mechanical properties of cell wall,4 the equations are notoriously difficult to solve, and take the following form: 5



where 
 
 
 
  is the Young's modulus of the plate material (assumed homogeneous and isotropic), 
 
 
 
  is the Poisson's ratio, 
 
 
 
  is the thickness of the plate, 
 
 
 
  is the out–of–plane deflection of the plate, 
 
 
 
  is the external normal force per unit area of the plate,  is the Cauchy stress tensor, and 
 
 
 
  are indices that take values of 1 or 2. The 2-dimensional biharmonic operator is defined as6


 
  Equation (1) above can be derived from kinematic assumptions and the constitutive relations for the plate. Equations (2) are the two equations for the conservation of linear momentum in two dimensions where it is assumed that the out–of–plane stresses () are zero.
Validity of the Föppl–von Kármán equations
While the Föppl–von Kármán equations are of interest from a purely mathematical point of view, the physical validity of these equations is questionable.7 Ciarlet8 states: The two-dimensional von Karman equations for plates, originally proposed by von Karman [1910], play a mythical role in applied mathematics. While they have been abundantly, and satisfactorily, studied from the mathematical standpoint, as regards notably various questions of existence, regularity, and bifurcation, of their solutions, their physical soundness has been often seriously questioned. Reasons include the facts that

the theory depends on an approximate geometry which is not clearly defined
a given variation of stress over a cross-section is assumed arbitrarily
a linear constitutive relation is used that does not correspond to a known relation between well defined measures of stress and strain
some components of strain are arbitrarily ignored
there is a confusion between reference and deformed configurations which makes the theory inapplicable to the large deformations for which it was apparently devised.

Conditions under which these equations are actually applicable and will give reasonable results when solved are discussed in Ciarlet.910
Equations in terms of Airy stress function
The three Föppl–von Kármán equations can be reduced to two by introducing the Airy stress function

 
  where


 
  Then the above equations become11






Pure bending
For the pure bending of thin plates the equation of equilibrium is 
 
 
 
 , where


 
  is called flexural or cylindrical rigidity of the plate.12
Kinematic assumptions (Kirchhoff hypothesis)
In the derivation of the Föppl–von Kármán equations the main kinematic assumption (also known as the Kirchhoff hypothesis) is that surface normals to the plane of the plate remain perpendicular to the plate after deformation. It is also assumed that the in-plane (membrane) displacements and the change in thickness of the plate are negligible. These assumptions imply that the displacement field 
 
 
 
  in the plate can be expressed as


 
  This form of the displacement field implicitly assumes that the amount of rotation of the plate is small.
Strain-displacement relations (von Kármán strains)
The components of the three-dimensional Lagrangian Green strain tensor are defined as


 
  Substitution of the expressions for the displacement field into the above gives


 
 
  For small strains but moderate rotations, the higher order terms that cannot be neglected are


 
  Neglecting all other higher order terms, and enforcing the requirement that the plate does not change its thickness, the strain tensor components reduce to the von Kármán strains



Stress-strain relations
If we assume that the Cauchy stress tensor components are linearly related to the von Kármán strains by Hooke's law, the plate is isotropic and homogeneous, and that the plate in under a plane stress condition,13 we have  =  =  = 0 and


 
  Expanding the terms, the three non-zero stresses are



Stress resultants
The stress resultants in the plate are defined as


 
  Therefore,


 
 
  and


 
 
  Solutions are easier to find when the governing equations are expressed in terms of stress resultants rather than the in-plane stresses.
Föppl–von_Kármán equations in terms of stress resultants
The Föppl–von_Kármán equations are typically derived with an energy approach by considering variations of internal energy and the work done by external forces. A similar approach can be used to write these equations in terms of stress resultants. The resulting governing equations are



References


See also

Plate theory

"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Continuum mechanics



Föppl, A., "Vorlesungen über technische Mechanik", B.G. Teubner, Bd. 5., p. 132, Leipzig, Germany (1907)↩
von Kármán, T., "Festigkeitsproblem im Maschinenbau," Encyk. D. Math. Wiss. IV, 311–385 (1910)↩
E. Cerda and L. Mahadevan, 2003, "Geometry and Physics of Wrinkling" Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 074302 (2003)↩
http://focus.aps.org/story/v27/st6↩
"Theory of Elasticity". L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, (3rd ed. ISBN 0-7506-2633-X)↩
The 2-dimensional Laplacian, 
 
 
 
 , is defined as 
 
 
↩
von Karman plate equations http://imechanica.org/node/6618 Accessed Tue July 30 2013 14:20.↩
↩

↩


Typically, an assumption of zero out-of-plane stress is made at this point.↩




