


Alpha algorithm




Alpha algorithm

The α-algorithm is an algorithm used in process mining, aimed at reconstructing causality from a set of sequences of events. It was first put forward by van der Aalst, Weijters and Măruşter.1 Several extensions or modifications of it have since been presented, which will be listed below.
It constructs P/T nets with special properties (workflow nets) from event logs (as might be collected by an ERP system). Each transition in the net corresponds to an observed task.
Short description
The algorithm takes a workflow log 
 
 
 
  as input and results in a workflow net being constructed.
It does so by examining causal relationships observed between tasks. For example, one specific task might always precede another specific task in every execution trace, which would be useful information.
Definitions used

A workflow trace or execution trace is a string over an alphabet

 
  of tasks.
A workflow log is a set of workflow traces.

Description
Declaratively, the algorithm can be presented as follows. Three sets of tasks are determined:



 
  is the set of all tasks which occur in at least one trace


 
  is the set of all tasks which occur trace-initially


 
  is the set of all tasks which occur trace-terminally

Basic ordering relations are determined (
 
 
 
  first, the latter three can be constructed therefrom)



 
  iff 
 
 
 
  directly precedes 
 
 
 
  in some trace


 
  iff 
 
 



 
  iff 
 
 



 
  iff 
 
 


Places are discovered. Each place is identified with a pair of sets of tasks, in order to keep the number of places low.



 
  is the set of all pairs 
 
 
 
  of maximal sets of tasks such that
 
Neither 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  contain any members of 
 
 
 
  and


 
  is a subset of 
 
 




 
  contains one place 
 
 
 
  for every member of 
 
 
 
 , plus the input place 
 
 
 
  and the output place 
 
 


The flow relation 
 
 
 
  is the union of the following:














The result is

a petri net structure 
 
 

with one input place 
 
 
 
  and one output place 
 
 

because every transition of 
 
 
 
  is on a 
 
 
 
 -path from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , it is indeed a workflow net.

Properties
It can be shown 2 that in the case of a complete workflow log generated by a sound SWF net, the net generating it can be reconstructed. Complete means that its 
 
 
 
  relation is maximal. It is not required that all possible traces be present (which would be countably infinite for a net with a loop).
Limitations
General workflow nets may contain several types of constructs 3 which the α-algorithm cannot rediscover.
Constructing 
 
 
 
  takes exponential time in the number of tasks, since 
 
 
 
  is not constrained and arbitrary subsets of 
 
 
 
  must be considered.
Extensions
for example 4 5
References
"
Category:Process mining Category:Data mining algorithms



van der Aalst, W M P and Weijters, A J M M and Maruster, L (2003). "Workflow Mining: Discovering process models from event logs", IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol 16↩
van der Aalst et al. 2003↩
A. de Medeiros, A K and van der Aalst, W M P and Weijters, A J M M (2003). "Workflow Mining: Current Status and Future Directions". in: "volume 2888 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science", Springer-Verlag↩
A. de Medeiros, A K and van Dongen, B F and van der Aalst, W M P and Weijters, A J M M (2004). "Process mining: extending the α-algorithm to mine short loops"↩
Wen, L and van der Aalst, W M P and Wang, J and Sun, J (2007). "Mining process models with non-free-choice constructs", "Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery" vol 15, p. 145--180, Springer-Verlag↩




