


Free independence




Free independence

In the mathematical theory of free probability, the notion of free independence was introduced by Dan Voiculescu.1 The definition of free independence is parallel to the classical definition of independence, except that the role of Cartesian products of measure spaces (corresponding to tensor products of their function algebras) is played by the notion of a free product of (non-commutative) probability spaces.
In the context of Voiculescu's free probability theory, many classical-probability theorems or phenomena have free probability analogs: the same theorem or phenomenon holds (perhaps with slight modifications) if the classical notion of independence is replaced by free independence. Examples of this include: the free central limit theorem; notions of free convolution; existence of free stochastic calculus and so on.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-commutative probability space, i.e. a unital algebra

 
  over 
 
 
 
  equipped with a unital linear functional

 
 . As an example, one could take, for a probability measure 
 
 
 
 ,



Another example may be 
 
 
 
 , the algebra of 
 
 
 
  matrices with the functional given by the normalized trace 
 
 
 
 . Even more generally, 
 
 
 
  could be a von Neumann algebra and 
 
 
 
  a state on 
 
 
 
 . A final example is the group algebra

 
  of a (discrete) group

 
  with the functional 
 
 
 
  given by the group trace 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a family of unital subalgebras of 
 
 
 
 .
Definition. The family 
 
 
 
  is called freely independent if 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a family of elements of 
 
 
 
  (these can be thought of as random variables in 
 
 
 
 ), they are called
freely independent if the algebras 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are freely independent.
Examples of free independence

Let 
 
 
 
  be the free product of groups 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the group algebra, 
 
 
 
  be the group trace, and set 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  are freely independent.


Let 
 
 
 
  be 
 
 
 
  unitary random matrices, taken independently at random from the 
 
 
unitary group (with respect to the Haar measure). Then 
 
 
 
  become asymptotically freely independent as 
 
 
 
 . (Asymptotic freeness means that the definition of freeness holds in the limit as 
 
 
 
 ).


More generally, independent random matrices tend to be asymptotically freely independent, under certain conditions.

References
"
Category:Functional analysis Category:Free probability theory Category:Free algebraic structures



D. Voiculescu, K. Dykema, A. Nica, "Free Random Variables", CIRM Monograph Series, AMS, Providence, RI, 1992↩




