


Modal depth




Modal depth

In modal logic, the modal depth of a formula is the deepest nesting of modal operators (commonly 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ). Modal formulas without modal operators have a modal depth of zero.
Definition
Modal depth can be defined as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  be a function that computes the modal depth for a modal formula 
 
 
 
 :


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an atomic formula.
























Example
The following computation gives the modal depth of 
 
 
 
 :



















2
 

Modal depth and semantics
The modal depth of a formula indicates 'how far' one needs to look in a Kripke model when checking the validity of the formula. For each modal operator, one needs to transition from a world in the model to a world that is accessible through the accessibility relation. The modal depth indicates the longest 'chain' of transitions from a world to the next that is needed to verify the validity of a formula.
For example, to check whether 
 
 
 
 , one needs to check whether there exists an accessible world 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
 . If that is the case, one needs to check whether there is also a world 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is accessible from 
 
 
 
 . We have made two steps from the world 
 
 
 
  (from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ) in the model to determine whether the formula holds; this is, by definition, the modal depth of that formula.
The modal depth is an upper bound (inclusive) on the number of transitions as for boxes, a modal formula is also true whenever a world has no accessible worlds (i.e., 
 
 
 
  holds for all 
 
 
 
  in a world 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the set of worlds and 
 
 
 
  is the accessibility relation). To check whether 
 
 
 
 , it may be needed to take two steps in the model but it could be less, depending on the structure of the model. Suppose no worlds are accessible in 
 
 
 
 ; the formula now trivially holds by the previous observation about the validity of formulas with a box as outer operator.
"
Category:Modal logic


