


Dirichlet form




Dirichlet form

In the branch of mathematics known as potential theory, a Dirichlet form is a generalization of the Laplacian that can be defined on any measure space, without the need for mentioning partial derivatives. This allows mathematicians to study the Laplace equation and heat equation on spaces that are not manifolds: for example, fractals. To accomplish this generalization, one focuses not on the Laplacian itself but on the quantity



that is minimized when the Laplacian vanishes.
Technically, a Dirichlet form is a Markovian closed symmetric form on an L2-space.1 Such objects are studied in abstract potential theory, based on the classical Dirichlet's principle. The theory of Dirichlet forms originated in the work of  on Dirichlet spaces.
A Dirichlet form on a measure space

 
  is a bilinear function



such that
1) The domain 
 
 
 
  is a dense subset of 
 
 

2) 
 
 
 
  is symmetric, that is 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .
3) 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .
4) The set 
 
 
 
  equipped with the inner product defined by 
 
 
 
  is a real Hilbert space.
5) For any 
 
 
 
  we have that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

In other words, a Dirichlet form is nothing but a positive symmetric bilinear form defined on a dense subset of 
 
 
 
  such that 4) and 5) hold. Alternatively, the quadratic form 
 
 
 
  itself is known as the Dirichlet form and it is still denoted by 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
 .
The best known Dirichlet form is the Dirichlet energy of functions on 
 
 




which gives rise to the space 
 
 
 
 . Another example of a Dirichlet form is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is some non-negative symmetric integral kernel.
If the kernel 
 
 
 
  satisfies the bound 
 
 
 
 , then the quadratic form is bounded in 
 
 
 
 . If moreover, 
 
 
 
 , then the form is comparable to the norm in 
 
 
 
  squared and in that case the set 
 
 
 
  defined above is given by 
 
 
 
 . Thus Dirichlet forms are natural generalizations of the Dirichlet integrals



where 
 
 
 
  is a positive symmetric matrix. The Euler-Lagrange equation of a Dirichlet form is a non-local analogue of an elliptic equations in divergence form. Equations of this type are studied using variational methods and they are expected to satisfy similar properties.234
References





.


"
Category:Markov processes



Fukushima, M, Oshima, Y., & Takeda, M. (1994). Dirichlet forms and symmetric Markov processes. Walter de Gruyter & Co , ISBN 3-11-011626-X↩







