


Method of steepest descent




Method of steepest descent

In mathematics, the method of steepest descent or stationary phase method or saddle-point method is an extension of Laplace's method for approximating an integral, where one deforms a contour integral in the complex plane to pass near a stationary point (saddle point), in roughly the direction of steepest descent or stationary phase. The saddle-point approximation is used with integrals in the complex plane, whereas Laplace’s method is used with real integrals.
The integral to be estimated is often of the form


 
  where C is a contour and λ is large. One version of the method of steepest descent deforms the contour of integration so that it passes through a zero of the derivative g′(z) in such a way that on the contour g is (approximately) real and has a maximum at the zero.
The method of steepest descent was first published by , who used it to estimate Bessel functions and pointed out that it occurred in the unpublished note  about hypergeometric functions. The contour of steepest descent has a minimax property, see .  described some other unpublished notes of Riemann, where he used this method to derive the Riemann-Siegel formula.
A simple estimate1
Let  and . If



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the real part, and there exists a positive real number  such that



then the following estimate holds:





Proof of the simple estimate







The case of a single non-degenerate saddle point
Basic notions and notation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a complex 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector, and



denote the Hessian matrix for a function 
 
 
 
 . If



is a vector function, then its Jacobian matrix is defined as



A non-degenerate saddle point, , of a holomorphic function 
 
 
 
  is a point where the function reaches an extremum (i.e.,  0}}) and has a non-vanishing determinant of the Hessian (i.e., 
 
 
 
 ).
The following is the main tool for constructing the asymptotics of integrals in the case of a non-degenerate saddle point:
Complex Morse Lemma
The Morse lemma for real-valued functions generalizes as follows2 for holomorphic functions: near a non-degenerate saddle point  of a holomorphic function 
 
 
 
 , there exist coordinates in terms of which  is exactly quadratic. To make this precise, let 
 
 
 
  be a holomorphic function with domain , and let  in 
 
 
 
  be a non-degenerate saddle point of 
 
 
 
 , that is,  0}} and 
 
 
 
 . Then there exist neighborhoods 
 
 
 
  of  and  of 
 
 
 
 , and a bijective holomorphic function 
 
 
 
  with  z0}} such that



Here, the  are the eigenvalues of the matrix 
 
 
 
 .
(Figure)
An illustration of Complex Morse Lemma



Proof of Complex Morse Lemma


The following proof is a straightforward generalization of the proof of the real Morse Lemma, which can be found in.3 We begin by demonstrating

Auxiliary Statement. Let  be holomorphic in a neighborhood of the origin and 
 
 
 
 . Then in some neighborhood, there exist functions  such that
 
 



where each  is holomorphic and
 
 






Proof of Auxiliary Statement


From the identity



we conclude that



and





Without loss of generality, we translate the origin to , such that  0}} and 
 
 
 
 . Using the Auxiliary Statement, we have


 
  Since the origin is a saddle point,


 
  we can also apply the Auxiliary Statement to the functions  and obtain




(1)

Recall that an arbitrary matrix 
 
 
 
  can be represented as a sum of symmetric  and anti-symmetric  matrices,


 
  The contraction of any symmetric matrix B with an arbitrary matrix 
 
 
 
  is




(2)

i.e., the anti-symmetric component of 
 
 
 
  does not contribute because


 
  Thus,  in equation (1) can be assumed to be symmetric with respect to the interchange of the indices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Note that


 
  hence,  because the origin is a non-degenerate saddle point.
Let us show by induction that there are local coordinates  (u1, ... un), z {{=}} ψ(y), 0 {{=}} ψ(0)}}, such that




(3)

First, assume that there exist local coordinates  (y1, ... yn), z {{=}} φ(y), 0 {{=}} φ(0)}}, such that




(4)

where  is symmetric due to equation (2). By a linear change of the variables , we can assure that . From the chain rule, we have



Therefore:



whence,



The matrix  can be recast in the Jordan normal form:  LJL−1}}, were 
 
 
 
  gives the desired non-singular linear transformation and the diagonal of 
 
 
 
  contains non-zero eigenvalues of . If  then, due to continuity of , it must be also non-vanishing in some neighborhood of the origin. Having introduced 
 
 
 
 , we write



Motivated by the last expression, we introduce new coordinates 
 
 




The change of the variables 
 
 
 
  is locally invertible since the corresponding Jacobian is non-zero,



Therefore,




(5)

Comparing equations (4) and (5), we conclude that equation (3) is verified. Denoting the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  by , equation (3) can be rewritten as




(6)

Therefore,




(7)

From equation (6), it follows that 
 
 
 
 . The Jordan normal form of 
 
 
 
  reads 
 
 
 
 , where  is an upper diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues and 
 
 
 
 ; hence, 
 
 
 
 . We obtain from equation (7)



If 
 
 
 
 , then interchanging two variables assures that 
 
 
 
 .


The asymptotic expansion in the case of a single non-degenerate saddle point
Assume



 
  and 
 
 
 
  are holomorphic functions in an open, bounded, and simply connected set  such that the  Ωx ∩ Rn}} is connected;


 
  has a single maximum
 
 
 
  for exactly one point ;
 is a non-degenerate saddle point (i.e.,  0}} and 
 
 
 
 ).

Then, the following asymptotic holds




(8)

where  are eigenvalues of the Hessian

 
  and 
 
 
 
  are defined with arguments




(9)

This statement is a special case of more general results presented in Fedoryuk (1987).4


Derivation of equation (8)


(Figure)
An illustration to the derivation of equation (8)

First, we deform the contour  into a new contour 
 
 
 
  passing through the saddle point  and sharing the boundary with . This deformation does not change the value of the integral 
 
 
 
 . We employ the Complex Morse Lemma to change the variables of integration. According to the lemma, the function 
 
 
 
  maps a neighborhood  onto a neighborhood  containing the origin. The integral 
 
 
 
  can be split into two:  I0(λ) + I1(λ)}}, where  is the integral over 
 
 
 
 , while  is over 
 
 
 
  (i.e., the remaining part of the contour ). Since the latter region does not contain the saddle point , the value of  is exponentially smaller than  as 
 
 
 
 ;5 thus,  is ignored. Introducing the contour  such that 
 
 
 
 , we have




(10)

Recalling that  φ(0)}} as well as 
 
 
 
 , we expand the pre-exponential function into a Taylor series and keep just the leading zero-order term




(11)

Here, we have substituted the integration region  by  because both contain the origin, which is a saddle point, hence they are equal up to an exponentially small term.6 The integrals in the r.h.s. of equation (11) can be expressed as




(12)

From this representation, we conclude that condition (9) must be satisfied in order for the r.h.s. and l.h.s. of equation (12) to coincide. According to assumption 2, 
 
 
 
  is a negatively defined quadratic form (viz., 
 
 
 
 ) implying the existence of the integral 
 
 
 
 , which is readily calculated





Equation (8) can also be written as




(13)

where the branch of



is selected as follows



Consider important special cases:

If 
 
 
 
  is real valued for real 
 
 
 
  and  in  (aka, the multidimensional Laplace method), then7










If 
 
 
 
  is purely imaginary for real 
 
 
 
  (i.e., 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in ) and  in  (aka, the multidimensional stationary phase method),8 then9










where 
 
 
 
  denotes the signature of matrix

 
 , which equals to the number of negative eigenvalues minus the number of positive ones. It is noteworthy that in applications of the stationary phase method to the multidimensional WKB approximation in quantum mechanics (as well as in optics), 
 
 
 
  is related to the Maslov index see, e.g.,  and .
 

The case of multiple non-degenerate saddle points
If the function 
 
 
 
  has multiple isolated non-degenerate saddle points, i.e.,



where



is an open cover of , then the calculation of the integral asymptotic is reduced to the case of a singe saddle point by employing the partition of unity. The partition of unity allows us to construct a set of continuous functions  such that



Whence,



Therefore as 
 
 
 
  we have:



where equation (13) was utilized at the last stage, and the pre-exponential function 
 
 
 
  at least must be continuous.
The other cases
When  0}} and 
 
 
 
 , the point  is called a degenerate saddle point of a function 
 
 
 
 .
Calculating the asymptotic of



when 
 
 
 
  is continuous, and 
 
 
 
  has a degenerate saddle point, is a very rich problem, whose solution heavily relies on the catastrophe theory. Here, the catastrophe theory replaces the Morse lemma, valid only in the non-degenerate case, to transform the function 
 
 
 
  into one of the multitude of canonical representations. For further details see, e.g.,  and .
Integrals with degenerate saddle points naturally appear in many applications including optical caustics and the multidimensional WKB approximation in quantum mechanics.
The other cases such as, e.g., 
 
 
 
  and/or 
 
 
 
  are discontinuous or when an extremum of 
 
 
 
  lies at the integration region's boundary, require special care (see, e.g.,  and ).
Extensions and generalizations
An extension of the steepest descent method is the so-called nonlinear stationary phase/steepest descent method. Here, instead of integrals, one needs to evaluate asymptotically solutions of Riemann–Hilbert factorization problems.
Given a contour C in the complex sphere, a function f defined on that contour and a special point, say infinity, one seeks a function M holomorphic away from the contour C, with prescribed jump across C, and with a given normalization at infinity. If f and hence M are matrices rather than scalars this is a problem that in general does not admit an explicit solution.
An asymptotic evaluation is then possible along the lines of the linear stationary phase/steepest descent method. The idea is to reduce asymptotically the solution of the given Riemann–Hilbert problem to that of a simpler, explicitly solvable, Riemann–Hilbert problem. Cauchy's theorem is used to justify deformations of the jump contour.
The nonlinear stationary phase was introduced by Deift and Zhou in 1993, based on earlier work of the Russian mathematician Alexander Its. A (properly speaking) nonlinear steepest descent method was introduced by Kamvissis, K. McLaughlin and P. Miller in 2003, based on previous work of Lax, Levermore, Deift, Venakides and Zhou. As in the linear case, steepest descent contours solve a min-max problem.
The nonlinear stationary phase/steepest descent method has applications to the theory of soliton equations and integrable models, random matrices and combinatorics.
See also
Pearcey integral
Notes
References



English translation in 

.

.

.

[in Russian].

.

(Unpublished note, reproduced in Riemann's collected papers.)

Reprinted in Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Vol. 1. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1966.

.


.

"
Category:Asymptotic analysis Category:Perturbation theory



A modified version of Lemma 2.1.1 on page 56 in .
Lemma 3.3.2 on page 113 in 
, page 54; see also the comment on page 479 in .
, pages 417-420.
This conclusion follows from a comparison between the final asymptotic for , given by equation (8), and a simple estimate for the discarded integral .
This is justified by comparing the integral asymptotic over  [see equation (8)] with a simple estimate for the altered part.
See equation (4.4.9) on page 125 in 
Rigorously speaking, this case cannot be inferred from equation (8) because the second assumption, utilized in the derivation, is violated. To include the discussed case of a purely imaginary phase function, condition (9) should be replaced by 
 
 

See equation (2.2.6') on page 186 in 




