


Discontinuous-constituent phrase structure grammar




Discontinuous-constituent phrase structure grammar

Discontinuous-constituent Phrase Structure Grammar (DCPSG) (distinct from Discontinuous Phrase Structure Grammar/DPSG) is a formalism for describing discontinuous phrase structures in natural language, such as verb phrases in VSO languages. The formalism was introduced in the slightly more constrained form of Discontinuous-constituent Phrase Structure Grammar with Subscripts and Deletes (DCPSGsd) in Harman (1963).1 DCPSGs describe a superset of the context-free languages, by means of rewrite rules that permit a limited amount of wrapping, similar to that found in Head grammar. 
Description
Re''write rules of a DCPSG are identical to those of a CFG, with the addition of a meta-symbol, denoted here as an underscore. DCPSG rules therefore have the general form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a string of terminal symbols and/or non-terminal symbols and at most one underscore.
The rewrite semantics of DCPSG are identical as those of a CFG when the rule being used does not contain an underscore: given a rule 
 
 
 
 , an occurrence of 
 
 
 
  may be rewritten as 
 
 
 
 .
For rules with an underscore, the rewrite semantics are slightly different: given a rule 
 
 
 
 , an occurrence of 
 
 
 
  can be rewritten as 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  being inserted immediately after the next non-terminal that is introduced at the same time. Using strict left-most productions, 
 
 
 
  is simply inserted immediately after the non-terminal that follows 
 
 
 
  prior to the rewrite. ''
Example
We can characterize the gross sentence structure of a VSO language such as Irish with the following rules (substituting English words for Irish words, and using subscripts solely for demonstration of discontinuity):







A derivation for the sentence saw John Susan, where John is the subject, and Susan is the direct object forming a VP with saw is:



References


"
Category:Formal languages Category:Grammar frameworks



Harman, Gilbert H. 1963. Generative Grammars without Transformation Rules: A Defense of Phrase Structure. Language 39(4), 597-616.




