


Price of stability




Price of stability

In game theory, the price of stability (PoS) of a game is the ratio between the best objective function value of one of its equilibria and that of an optimal outcome. The PoS is relevant for games in which there is some objective authority that can influence the players a bit, and maybe help them converge to a good Nash equilibrium. When measuring how efficient a Nash equilibrium is in a specific game we often time also talk about the price of anarchy (PoA).
Examples
Another way of expressing PoS is:



In the following prisoner’s dilemma game, since there is a single equilibrium (B, R) we have PoS = PoA = 1/2.




Prisoner's Dilemma






Top



Bottom



On this example which is a version of the battle of sexes game, there are two equilibrium points, (T, L) and (B, R), with values 3 and 15, respectively. The optimal value is 15. Thus, PoS = 1 while PoA = 1/5.










Top



Bottom



Background and milestones
The price of stability was first studied by A. Schulzan and N. Moses and was so-called in the studies of E. Anshelevich. They showed that a pure strategy Nash equilibrium always exists and the price of stability of this game is at most the nth harmonic number in directed graphs. For undirected graphs Anshelevich and others presented a tight bound on the price of stability of 4/3 for a single source and two players case. Jian Li has proved that for undirected graphs with a distinguished destination to which all players must connect the price of stability of the Shapely network design game is 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the number of players. On the other hand, the price of anarchy is about 
 
 
 
 
  in this game.
Network design games
Setup
Network design games have a very natural motivation for the Price of Stability. In these games, the Price of Anarchy can be much worse than the Price of Stability.
Consider the following game.



 
  players;
Each player 
 
 
 
  aims to connect 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  on a directed graph 
 
 
 
 
 ;
The strategies 
 
 
 
  for a player are all paths from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 ;
Each edge has a cost 
 
 
 
 
 ;
'Fair cost allocation': When 
 
 
 
  players choose edge 
 
 
 
 , the cost 
 
 
 
  is split equally among them;
The player cost is 
 
 

The social cost is the sum of the player costs:

.
(Figure)
A network design game with 
 
 
 
 
  Price of Anarchy

Price of anarchy
The price of anarchy can be 
 
 
 
 . Consider the following network design game.
(Figure)
Pathological Price of Stability game

Consider two different equilibria in this game. If everyone shares the 
 
 
 
  edge, the social cost is 
 
 
 
 . This equilibrium is indeed optimal. Note, however, that everyone sharing the 
 
 
 
  edge is a Nash equilibrium as well. Each agent has cost 
 
 
 
 
  at equilibrium, and switching to the other edge raises his cost to 
 
 
 
 .
Lower bound on price of stability
Here is a pathological game in the same spirit for the Price of Stability, instead. Consider 
 
 
 
  players, each originating from 
 
 
 
  and trying to connect to 
 
 
 
 . The cost of unlabeled edges is taken to be 0.
The optimal strategy is for everyone to share the 
 
 
 
 
  edge, yielding total social cost 
 
 
 
 . However, there is a unique Nash for this game. Note that when at the optimum, each player is paying 
 
 
 
 , and player 1 can decrease his cost by switching to the 
 
 
 
  edge. Once this has happened, it will be in player 2's interest to switch to the 
 
 
 
  edge, and so on. Eventually, the agents will reach the Nash equilibrium of paying for their own edge. This allocation has social cost 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
th harmonic number, which is 
 
 
 
 . Even though it is unbounded, the price of stability is exponentially better than the price of anarchy in this game.
Upper bound on price of stability
Note that by design, network design games are congestion games. Therefore, they admit a potential function 
 
 
 
 .
Theorem. [Theorem 19.13 from Reference 1] Suppose there exist constants 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that for every strategy 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  Then the price of stability is less than 
 
 

Proof. The global minimum 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is a Nash equilibrium, so



Now recall that the social cost was defined as the sum of costs over edges, so



We trivially have 
 
 
 
 , and the computation above gives 
 
 
 
 , so we may invoke the theorem for an upper bound on the price of stability.
References

Algorithmic Game Theory by N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, E. Tardos, and V. Vazirani (eds), Cambridge University Press, 2007. ISBN 0521872820
L. Agussurja and H. C. Lau. The Price of Stability in Selfish Scheduling Games. Web Intelligence and Agent Systems: An International Journal, 9:4, 2009.
Jian Li. ''An 
 
 
 
  upper bound on the price of stability for undirected Shapely network design games. Information Processing Letters 109 (15), 876-878, 2009.

"
Category:Game theory Category:Fixed points (mathematics) Category:Decision theory


