


Differential phase




Differential phase

Differential phase is a kind of linearity distortion which affects the color hue in TV broadcasting.
Composite color video signal
Composite color video signal (CCVS) consists of three terms:

Monochrome (luminance) signal
Auxiliary signals (sync pulse and blanking signals )
Color signal, which is actually a subcarrier modulated by chroma information

The first two terms are usually called composite video signal (CVS)
The modulation technique of the color subcarrier is quadrature amplitude modulation (QUAM ) both in PAL and NTSC systems. The amplitude of the color signal represents the saturation of the color and the phase lag of the color signal with respect to a certain reference which is called colorburst represents the hue; i.e., each phase lag is assigned for a different color hue. So, in order to reproduce the original color in the receiver, the phase difference between the colorburst and the color signal must be kept constant throughout the broadcasting.
The colorburst
The colorburst is a 10 period signal of color carrier (3.58 MHz in System M and 4.43 MHz in System B and System G). It is superimposed on the back porch of the CVS. The peak to peak amplitude is about 300 mV. That means that, when the color signal has a low luminance, its DC component is comparable to that of the colorburst. All dark colors have more or less the same DC component as the colorburst. But light colors have a higher luminance and hence a higher DC component.
Differential phase distortion
During broadcasting, the inherent non lineraity in electronic devices may cause a level dependent phase shift.1 Differential phase distortion (DP or dP) is the shift of color signal phase with respect to the colorburst phase. Since DC levels of the light colors and the colorburst are different, this type of distortion is more pronounced in lighter scenes. Especially a slight change in skin color may be irritating to the viewers. (too yellow or too red skin color dependeing on whether shift is positive or negative)
PAL system
To solve the problem of differential phase distortion in PAL system, the polarity of both the colorburst and the color signal are reversed in each consequative frame.23 So in one frame the phase of the colorburst leads and in the second frame the phase of the color signal leads. However if there is DP distortion in the system, the shift caused by DP has always the same polarity, thus the overall shift is more than the original in one frame and less than the original in the second frame by the same amount. The average of two frames yields the original phase difference and thus the color.
(Figure)
1.Original phase, 2.Phase in the first frame, 3.Phase in the second frame, 4.Vectorial addition, 5.Original phase reconstructed (with reduced amplitude)

The mathematics involved is as follows:
Let 

 be the phase difference of the color signal with respect to colorburst and 

 be the extra shift introduced by DP.
The original signal is






If there is a DP distortion, the received signal for the first frame is






In the second frame (after multiplying by -1)

' 
 
 
'
 

The average is



So while the effect of 

 diminishes on the color hue, the amplitude of the color signal is reduced by 

 which means that color saturatioın is reduced.
See also

Differential gain

References


"
Category:Broadcasting Category:Television technology



Television Measurements: NTSC Systems. Techtronix
Gordon J.King:Beginner’s Guide to color television, Newness technical, London, 1978; ISBN 0-408-00101-1, p 65-70
V.F.Samoylov-B.P.Khromoy: Television (trans:Boris Kuznetsov) Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1977, p.375




