


Slow-growing hierarchy




Slow-growing hierarchy

In computability theory, computational complexity theory and proof theory, the slow-growing hierarchy is an ordinal-indexed family of slowly increasing functions gα: N → N (where N is the set of natural numbers, {0, 1, ...}). It contrasts with the fast-growing hierarchy.
Definition
Let μ be a large countable ordinal such that a fundamental sequence is assigned to every limit ordinal less than μ. The slow-growing hierarchy of functions gα: N → N, for α  g_0(n) = 0 






 
  for limit ordinal α.

Here α[n] denotes the nth element of the fundamental sequence assigned to the limit ordinal α.
The article on the Fast-growing hierarchy describes a standardized choice for fundamental sequence for all α 0.
Relation to fast-growing hierarchy
The slow-growing hierarchy grows much more slowly than the fast-growing hierarchy. Even gε0 is only equivalent to f3 and gα only attains the growth of fε0 (the first function that Peano arithmetic cannot prove total in the hierarchy) when α is the Bachmann–Howard ordinal.123
However, Girard proved that the slow-growing hierarchy eventually catches up with the fast-growing one.4 Specifically, that there exists an ordinal α such that for all integers n

gα(n) α(n) α(n + 1)
 

where fα are the functions in the fast-growing hierarchy. He further showed that the first α this holds for is the ordinal of the theory ID<ω of arbitrary finite iterations of an inductive definition.5 However for the assignment of fundamental sequences found in 6 the first match up occurs at the level ε0.7 For Buchholz style tree ordinals it could be shown that the first match up even occurs at 
 
 
 
 .
Extensions of the result proved8 to considerably larger ordinals show that there are very few ordinals below the ordinal of transfinitely iterated 
 
 
 
 -comprehension where the slow- and fast-growing hierarchy match up.9
The slow-growing hierarchy depends extremely sensitively on the choice of the underlying fundamental sequences.10111213
Relation to term rewriting
Cichon provided an interesting connection between the slow-growing hierarchy and derivation length for term rewriting.14
References

 PDF's: part 1 2 3. (In particular part 3, Section 12, pp. 59–64, "A Glimpse at Hierarchies of Fast and Slow Growing Functions".)

Notes


"
Category:Computability theory Category:Proof theory Category:Hierarchy of functions



↩
↩
↩

↩

↩

↩

Weiermann, A. (1999), [http://books.google.com/books?id=2IHm3RT2bBoC&lpg;;=PP1&pg;=PA403#v=onepage&q;=&f;=false "What makes a (pointwise) subrecursive hierarchy slow growing?"] Cooper, S. Barry (ed.) et al., Sets and proofs. Invited papers from the Logic colloquium '97, European meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic, Leeds, UK, July 6–13, 1997. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lond. Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 258; 403-423.↩

Weiermann, A. (2001) $\Gamma_0$ may be minimal subrecursively inaccessible. Mathematical Logic Quarterly 47 (2001) 397-408.↩





