


Lie point symmetry




Lie point symmetry

Towards the end of the nineteenth century, Sophus Lie introduced the notion of Lie group in order to study the solutions of ordinary differential equations123 (ODEs). He showed the following main property: the order of an ordinary differential equation can be reduced by one if it is invariant under one-parameter Lie group of point transformations.4 This observation unified and extended the available integration techniques. Lie devoted the remainder of his mathematical career to developing these continuous groups that have now an impact on many areas of mathematically based sciences. The applications of Lie groups to differential systems were mainly established by Lie and Emmy Noether, and then advocated by Élie Cartan.
Roughly speaking, a Lie point symmetry of a system is a local group of transformations that maps every solution of the system to another solution of the same system. In other words, it maps the solution set of the system to itself. Elementary examples of Lie groups are translations, rotations and scalings.
The Lie symmetry theory is a well-known subject. In it are discussed continuous symmetries opposed to, for example, discrete symmetries. The literature for this theory can be found, among other places, in these notes.56789
Overview
Types of symmetries
Lie groups and hence their infinitesimal generators can be naturally "extended" to act on the space of independent variables, state variables (dependent variables) and derivatives of the state variables up to any finite order. There are many other kinds of symmetries. For example, contact transformations let coefficients of the transformations infinitesimal generator depend also on first derivatives of the coordinates. Lie-Bäcklund transformations let them involve derivatives up to an arbitrary order. The possibility of the existence of such symmetries was recognized by Noether.10 For Lie point symmetries, the coefficients of the infinitesimal generators depend only on coordinates, denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
Lie symmetries were introduced by Lie in order to solve ordinary differential equations. Another application of symmetry methods is to reduce systems of differential equations, finding equivalent systems of differential equations of simpler form. This is called reduction. In the literature, one can find the classical reduction process,11 and the moving frame-based reduction process.121314 Also symmetry groups can be used for classifying different symmetry classes of solutions.
Geometrical framework
Infinitesimal approach
Lie's fundamental theorems underline that Lie groups can be characterized by their infinitesimal generators. These mathematical objects form a Lie algebra of infinitesimal generators. Deduced "infinitesimal symmetry conditions" (defining equations of the symmetry group) can be explicitly solved in order to find the closed form of symmetry groups, and thus the associated infinitesimal generators.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of coordinates on which a system is defined where 
 
 
 
  is the cardinal of 
 
 
 
 . An infinitesimal generator 
 
 
 
  in the field 
 
 
 
  is a linear operator 
 
 
 
  that has 
 
 
 
  in its kernel and that satisfies the Leibniz rule:


 
 . In the canonical basis of elementary derivations 
 
 
 
 , it is written as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
Lie groups and Lie algebras of infinitesimal generators
Lie algebras can be generated by a generating set of infinitesimal generators. To every Lie group, one can associate a Lie algebra. Roughly, a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is an algebra constituted by a vector space equipped with Lie bracket as additional operation. The base field of a Lie algebra depends on the concept of invariant. Here only finite-dimensional Lie algebras are considered.
Continuous dynamical systems
A dynamical system (or flow) is a one-parameter group action. Let us denote by 
 
 
 
  such a dynamical system, more precisely, a (left-)action of a group 
 
 
 
  on a manifold

 
 :


 
  such that for all point 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 :



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the neutral element of 
 
 
 
 ;
for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .

A continuous dynamical system is defined on a group 
 
 
 
  that can be identified to 
 
 
 
  i.e. the group elements are continuous.
Invariants
An invariant, roughly speaking, is an element that does not change under a transformation.
Definition of Lie point symmetries
In this paragraph, we consider precisely expanded Lie point symmetries i.e. we work in an expanded space meaning that the distinction between independent variable, state variables and parameters are avoided as much as possible.
A symmetry group of a system is a continuous dynamical system defined on a local Lie group 
 
 
 
  acting on a manifold 
 
 
 
 . For the sake of clarity, we restrict ourselves to n-dimensional real manifolds 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the number of system coordinates.
Lie point symmetries of algebraic systems
Let us define algebraic systems used in the forthcoming symmetry definition.
Algebraic systems
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite set of rational functions over the field 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are polynomials in 
 
 
 
  i.e. in variables 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 . An algebraic system associated to 
 
 
 
  is defined by the following equalities and inequalities:



An algebraic system defined by 
 
 
 
  is regular (a.k.a. smooth) if the system 
 
 
 
  is of maximal rank 
 
 
 
 , meaning that the Jacobian matrix

 
  is of rank 
 
 
 
  at every solution 
 
 
 
  of the associated semi-algebraic variety.
Definition of Lie point symmetries
The following theorem (see th. 2.8 in ch.2 of 15) gives necessary and sufficient conditions so that a local Lie group 
 
 
 
  is a symmetry group of an algebraic system.
Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  be a connected local Lie group of a continuous dynamical system acting in the n-dimensional space 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  define a regular system of algebraic equations:


 
  Then 
 
 
 
  is a symmetry group of this algebraic system if, and only if,


 
  for every infinitesimal generator 
 
 
 
  in the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Let us consider the algebraic system defined on a space of 6 variables, namely 
 
 
 
  with:



The infinitesimal generator


 
  is associated to one of the one-parameter symmetry groups. It acts on 4 variables, namely 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . One can easily verify that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus the relations 
 
 
 
  are satisfied for any 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  that vanishes the algebraic system.
Lie point symmetries of dynamical systems
Let us define systems of first-order ODEs used in the forthcoming symmetry definition.
Systems of ODEs and associated infinitesimal generators
Let 
 
 
 
  be a derivation w.r.t. the continuous independent variable 
 
 
 
 . We consider two sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The associated coordinate set is defined by 
 
 
 
  and its cardinal is 
 
 
 
 . With these notations, a system of first-order ODEs is a system where:


 
  and the set 
 
 
 
  specifies the evolution of state variables of ODEs w.r.t. the independent variable. The elements of the set 
 
 
 
  are called state variables, these of 
 
 
parameters.
One can associate also a continuous dynamical system to a system of ODEs by resolving its equations.
An infinitesimal generator is a derivation that is closely related to systems of ODEs (more precisely to continuous dynamical systems). For the link between a system of ODEs, the associated vector field and the infinitesimal generator, see section 1.3 of.16 The infinitesimal generator 
 
 
 
  associated to a system of ODEs, described as above, is defined with the same notations as follows:



Definition of Lie point symmetries
Here is a geometrical definition of such symmetries. Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous dynamical system and 
 
 
 
  its infinitesimal generator. A continuous dynamical system 
 
 
 
  is a Lie point symmetry of 
 
 
 
  if, and only if, 
 
 
 
  sends every orbit of 
 
 
 
  to an orbit. Hence, the infinitesimal generator 
 
 
 
  satisfies the following relation17 based on Lie bracket:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is any constant of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  i.e. 
 
 
 
 . These generators are linearly independent.
One does not need the explicit formulas of 
 
 
 
  in order to compute the infinitesimal generators of its symmetries.
Example
Consider Pierre François Verhulst's logistic growth model with linear predation,18 where the state variable 
 
 
 
  represents a population. The parameter 
 
 
 
  is the difference between the growth and predation rate and the parameter 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the receptive capacity of the environment:



The continuous dynamical system associated to this system of ODEs is:


 
  The independent variable 
 
 
 
  varies continuously; thus the associated group can be identified with 
 
 
 
 .
The infinitesimal generator associated to this system of ODEs is:



The following infinitesimal generators belong to the 2-dimensional symmetry group of 
 
 
 
 :



Software
There exist many software packages in this area.192021 For example, the package liesymm of Maple provides some Lie symmetry methods for PDEs.22 It manipulates integration of determining systems and also differential forms. Despite its success on small systems, its integration capabilities for solving determining systems automatically are limited by complexity issues. The DETools package uses the prolongation of vector fields for searching Lie symmetries of ODEs. Finding Lie symmetries for ODEs, in the general case, may be as complicated as solving the original system.
References
"
Category:Lie groups Category:Symmetry





























