


Indirect Fourier transform




Indirect Fourier transform

Indirect Fourier transform (IFT) is a solution of ill-posed given by Fourier transform of noisy data (as from biological small-angle scattering) proposed by Glatter.1 IFT is used instead of direct Fourier transform of noisy data, since a direct FT would give large systematic errors.2
Transform is computed by linear fit to a subfamily of functions corresponding to constraints on a reasonable solution. If a result of the transform is distance distribution function, it is common to assume that the function is non-negative, and is zero at P(0) =  0  and P(Dmax)≥;0, where Dmax is a maximum diameter of the particle. It is approximately true, although it disregards inter-particle effects.
IFT is also performed in order to regularize noisy data.3
Fourier transformation in small angle scattering
see Lindner et al. for a thorough introduction 4
The intensity I per unit volume V is expressed as:



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the scattering length density. We introduce the correlation function 
 
 
 
  by:



That is, taking the fourier transformation of the correlation function gives the intensity.
The probability of finding, within a particle, a point 
 
 
 
  at a distance 
 
 
 
  from a given point 
 
 
 
 
  is given by the distance probability function 
 
 
 
 . And the connection between the correlation function 
 
 
 
  and the distance probability function 
 
 
 
  is given by:


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
 
  is the scattering length of the point 
 
 
 
 . That is, the correlation function is weighted by the scattering length. For X-ray scattering, the scattering length 
 
 
 
  is directly proportional to the electron density 
 
 
 
 .
Distance distribution function p(r)
See main article on distribution functions.
We introduce the distance distribution function 
 
 
 
  also called the pair distance distribution function (PDDF). It is defined as:



The 
 
 
 
  function can be considered as a probability of the occurrence of specific distances in a sample weighted by the scattering length density 
 
 
 
 . For diluted samples, the 
 
 
 
  function is not weightened by the scattering length density, but by the excess scattering length density 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the difference between the scattering length density of position 
 
 
 
 
  in the sample and the scattering length density of the solvent. The excess scattering length density is also called the contrast. Since the contrast can be negative, the 
 
 
 
  function may contain negative values. That is e.g. the case for alkyl groups in fat when dissolved in H2O.
Introduction to indirect fourier transformation
This is an brief outline of the method introduced by Otto Glatter (Glatter, 1977).5 Another approach is given by Moore (Moore, 1980).6
In indirect fourier transformation, a Dmax is defined and an initial distance distribution function 
 
 
 
  is expressed as a sum of N cubic spline functions

 
  evenly distributed on the interval (0,Dmax):
where 
 
 
 
  are scalar coefficients. The relation between the scattering intensity I(q) and the PDDF pi(r) is:
Inserting the expression for pi(r) (1) into (2) and using that the transformation from p(r) to I(q) is linear gives:



where 
 
 
 
  is given as:



The 
 
 
 
 's are unchanged under the linear Fourier transformation and can be fitted to data, thereby obtaining the coifficients 
 
 
 
 . Inserting these new coefficients into the expression for 
 
 
 
 
  gives a final PDDF 
 
 
 
 . The coefficients 
 
 
 
  are chosen to minimize the reduced 
 
 
 
  of the fit, given by:



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the number of datapoints, 
 
 
 
  is number of free parameters and 
 
 
 
  is the standard deviation (the error) on data point 
 
 
 
 . However, the problem is ill posed and a very oscillating function would also give a low 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, the smoothness function 
 
 
 
 
  is introduced:


 
 .
The larger the oscillations, the higher 
 
 
 
 . Instead of minimizing 
 
 
 
 , the Lagrangian

 
  is minimized, where the Lagrange multiplier 
 
 
 
 
  is called the smoothness parameter. It seems reasonably to call the method indirect fourier transformation, since a direct formation is not performed, but is done in three steps
 
 
 
 .
Applications
There are recent proposals at automatic determination of constraint parameters using Bayesian reasoning 7 or heuristics.8
Alternative approaches
The distance distribution function 
 
 
 
  can also be obtained by IFT with an approach using maximum entropy (e.g. Jaynes, 1983;9 Skilling, 198910)
References


"
Category:Fourier analysis






Neutrons, X-rays and Light: Scattering Methds Applied to Soft Condensed Matter by P. Lindner and Th.Zemb (chapter 3 by Olivier Spalla)










