


Lévy hierarchy




Lévy hierarchy

In set theory and mathematical logic, the Lévy hierarchy, introduced by Azriel Lévy in 1965, is a hierarchy of formulas in the formal language of the Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, which is typically called just the language of set theory. This is analogous to the arithmetical hierarchy which provides the classifications but for sentences of the language of arithmetic.
Definitions
In the language of set theory, atomic formulas are of the form x = y or x ∈ y, standing for equality and respectively set membership predicates.
The first level of the Levy hierarchy is defined as containing only formulas with no unbounded quantifiers, and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .1 The next levels are given by finding an equivalent formula in Prenex normal form, and counting the number of changes of quantifiers:
In the theory ZFC, a formula 
 
 
 
  is called:2

 
  if 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
  in ZFC, where 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 

 
  if 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
  in ZFC, where 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 

If a formula is both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it is called 
 
 
 
 . As a formula might have several different equivalent formulas in Prenex normal form, it might belong to several different levels of the hierarchy. In this case, the lowest possible level is the level of the formula.
The Lévy hierarchy is sometimes defined for other theories S. In this case 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  by themselves refer only to formulas that start with a sequence of quantifiers with at most i−1 alternations, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  refer to formulas equivalent to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  formulas in the theory S. So strictly speaking the levels 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the Lévy hierarchy for ZFC defined above should be denoted by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
===Σ0=Π0=Δ0 formulas and concepts===

x = {y, z}
x ⊆ y
x is a transitive set
x is an ordinal, x is a limit ordinal, x is a successor ordinal
x is a finite ordinal
The first countable ordinal ω.
f is a function. The range and domain of a function. The value of a function on a set.
The product of two sets.
The union of a set.

Δ1-formulas and concepts

x is a well-founded relation on y
x is finite
Ordinal addition and multiplication and exponentiation
The rank of a set
The transitive closure of a set

Σ1-formulas and concepts

x is countable
|X|≤|Y|, |X|=|Y|
x is constructible

Π1-formulas and concepts

x is a cardinal
x is a regular cardinal
x is a limit cardinal
x is an inaccessible cardinal.
x is the powerset of y

Δ2-formulas and concepts

κ is γ-supercompact

Σ2-formulas and concepts

the Continuum Hypothesis
there exists an inaccessible cardinal
there exists a measurable cardinal
κ is an n-huge cardinal

Π2-formulas and concepts

The axiom of constructibility: V = L

Δ3-formulas and concepts
Σ3-formulas and concepts

There is a supercompact cardinal

Π3-formulas and concepts

κ is an extendible cardinal

Σ4-formulas and concepts

There is a extendible cardinal

Properties
Jech p. 184 Devlin p. 29
See also

arithmetic hierarchy
Absoluteness

References






"
Category:Mathematical logic Category:Set theory



Walicki, Michal (2012). Mathematical Logic, p. 225. World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. ISBN 9789814343862↩





