


Graded manifold




Graded manifold

In algebraic geometry, Graded manifolds are extensions of the manifold concept based on ideas coming from supersymmetry and supercommutative algebra. Both graded manifolds and supermanifolds are phrased in terms of sheaves of graded commutative algebras. However, graded manifolds are characterized by sheaves on smooth manifolds, while supermanifolds are constructed by gluing of sheaves of supervector spaces.
Graded manifolds
A graded manifold of dimension 
 
 
 
  is defined as a locally ringed space

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional smooth manifold and 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -sheaf of Grassmann algebras of rank 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the sheaf of smooth real functions on 
 
 
 
 . A sheaf 
 
 
 
  is called the structure sheaf of a graded manifold 
 
 
 
 , and a manifold 
 
 
 
  is said to be the body of 
 
 
 
 . Sections of the sheaf 
 
 
 
  are called graded functions on a graded manifold 
 
 
 
 . They make up a graded commutative 
 
 
 
 -ring 
 
 
 
  called the structure ring of 
 
 
 
 . The well-known Batchelor theorem and Serre-Swan theorem characterize graded manifolds as follows.
Serre-Swan theorem for graded manifolds
Let 
 
 
 
  be a graded manifold. There exists a vector bundle

 
  with an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional typical fiber 
 
 
 
  such that the structure sheaf 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the structure sheaf of sections of the exterior product

 
  of 
 
 
 
 , whose typical fibre is the Grassmann algebra

 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth manifold. A graded commutative 
 
 
 
 -algebra is isomorphic to the structure ring of a graded manifold with a body 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is the exterior algebra of some projective 
 
 
 
 -module of finite rank.
Graded functions
Note that above mentioned Batchelor's isomorphism fails to be canonical, but it often is fixed from the beginning. In this case, every trivialization chart 
 
 
 
  of the vector bundle 
 
 
 
  yields a splitting domain 
 
 
 
  of a graded manifold 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the fiber basis for 
 
 
 
 . Graded functions on such a chart are 
 
 
 
 -valued functions


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  are smooth real functions on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are odd generating elements of the Grassmann algebra 
 
 
 
 .
Graded vector fields
Given a graded manifold 
 
 
 
 , graded derivations of the structure ring of graded functions 
 
 
 
  are called graded vector fields on 
 
 
 
 . They constitute a real Lie superalgebra

 
  with respect to the superbracket


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Grassmann parity of 
 
 
 
 . Graded vector fields locally read


 
 .
They act on graded functions 
 
 
 
  by the rule


 
 .
Graded exterior forms
The 
 
 
 
 -dual of the module graded vector fields 
 
 
 
  is called the module of graded exterior one-forms 
 
 
 
 . Graded exterior one-forms locally read 
 
 
 
  so that the duality (interior) product between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  takes the form


 
 .
Provided with the graded exterior product


 
 ,
graded one-forms generate the graded exterior algebra 
 
 
 
  of graded exterior forms on a graded manifold. They obey the relation


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
 
  denotes the form degree of 
 
 
 
 . The graded exterior algebra 
 
 
 
  is a graded differential algebra with respect to the graded exterior differential


 
 ,
where the graded derivations 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are graded commutative with the graded forms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . There are the familiar relations


 
 .
Graded differential geometry
In the category of graded manifolds, one considers graded Lie groups, graded bundles and graded principal bundles. One also introduces the notion of jets of graded manifolds, but they differ from jets of graded bundles.
Graded differential calculus
The differential calculus on graded manifolds is formulated as the differential calculus over graded commutative algebras similarly to the differential calculus over commutative algebras.
Physical outcome
Due to the above-mentioned Serre-Swan theorem, odd classical fields on a smooth manifold are described in terms of graded manifolds. Extended to graded manifolds, the variational bicomplex provides the strict mathematical formulation of Lagrangian classical field theory and Lagrangian BRST theory.
See also

Connection (algebraic framework)
Graded (mathematics)
Serre-Swan theorem
Supergeometry
Supermanifold
Supersymmetry

References

C. Bartocci, U. Bruzzo, D. Hernandez Ruiperez, The Geometry of Supermanifolds (Kluwer, 1991) ISBN 0-7923-1440-9
T. Stavracou, Theory of connections on graded principal bundles, Rev. Math. Phys. 10 (1998) 47
B. Kostant, Graded manifolds, graded Lie theory, and prequantization, in Differential Geometric Methods in Mathematical Physics, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 570 (Springer, 1977) p. 177
A. Almorox, Supergauge theories in graded manifolds, in Differential Geometric Methods in Mathematical Physics, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1251 (Springer, 1987) p. 114
D. Hernandez Ruiperez, J. Munoz Masque, Global variational calculus on graded manifolds, J. Math. Pures Appl. 63 (1984) 283
G. Giachetta, L. Mangiarotti, G. Sardanashvily, Advanced Classical Field Theory (World Scientific, 2009) ISBN 978-981-283-895-7; arXiv: math-ph/0102016; arXiv: 1304.1371.

External links

G. Sardanashvily, Lectures on supergeometry, arXiv: 0910.0092.

"
Category:Supersymmetry Category:Generalized manifolds


