


Twists of curves




Twists of curves

In mathematical field of algebraic geometry, an elliptic curve E over a field K has an associated quadratic twist, that is another elliptic curve which is isomorphic to E over an algebraic closure of K. In particular, an isomorphism between elliptic curves is an isogeny of degree 1, that is an invertible isogeny. Some curves have higher order twists such as cubic and quartic twists. The curve and its twists have the same j-invariant.
Quadratic twist
First assume K is a field of characteristic different from 2. Let E be an elliptic curve over K of the form:



Given 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the quadratic twist of 
 
 
 
 
  is the curve 
 
 
 
 , defined by the equation:



or equivalently



The two elliptic curves 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are not isomorphic over 
 
 
 
 , but over the field extension

 
 .
Now assume K is of characteristic 2. Let E be an elliptic curve over K of the form:



Given 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  is an irreducible polynomial over K, the quadratic twist of E is the curve Ed, defined by the equation:



The two elliptic curves 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not isomorphic over 
 
 
 
 , but over the field extension

 
 
 .
Quadratic twist over finite fields
If 
 
 
 
  is a finite field with 
 
 
 
  elements, then for all 
 
 
 
  there exist a 
 
 
 
  such that the point 
 
 
 
 
  belongs to either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . In fact, there are always exactly two such 
 
 
 
  unless the point belongs to both curves (which can happen if the characteristic is not 
 
 
 
 ).
As a consequence,


 
  or equivalently 
 
 

where 
 
 
 
  is the trace of the Frobenius endomorphism of the curve.
Quartic twist
It is possible to "twist" elliptic curves with j-invariant equal to 1728 by quartic characters; twisting a curve E by a quartic twist, one obtains precisely four curves: one is isomorphic to E, one is its quadratic twist, and only the other two are really new. Also in this case, twisted curves are isomorphic over the field extension given by the twist degree.
Cubic twist
Analogously to the quartic twist case, an elliptic curve over 
 
 
 
  with j-invariant equal to zero can be twisted by cubic characters. The curves obtained are isomorphic to the starting curve over the field extension given by the twist degree.
Examples

Twisted Hessian curves
Twisted Edwards curve
Twisted tripling-oriented Doche–Icart–Kohel curve

References









"
Category:Elliptic curves Category:Elliptic curve cryptography


