


Plate theory




Plate theory

thumb | 250px | right| Vibration mode of a clamped square plate In continuum mechanics, ' plate theories' are mathematical descriptions of the mechanics of flat plates that draws on the theory of beams. Plates are defined as plane structural elements with a small thickness compared to the planar dimensions.1 The typical thickness to width ratio of a plate structure is less than 0.1. A plate theory takes advantage of this disparity in length scale to reduce the full three-dimensional solid mechanics problem to a two-dimensional problem. The aim of plate theory is to calculate the deformation and stresses in a plate subjected to loads.
Of the numerous plate theories that have been developed since the late 19th century, two are widely accepted and used in engineering. These are

the Kirchhoff–Love theory of plates (classical plate theory)
The Mindlin–Reissner theory of plates (first-order shear plate theory)

Kirchhoff–Love theory for thin plates
thumb | 250px | Deformation of a thin plate highlighting the displacement, the mid-surface (red) and the normal to the mid-surface (blue) The Kirchhoff–Love theory is an extension of Euler–Bernoulli beam theory to thin plates. The theory was developed in 1888 by Love2 using assumptions proposed by Kirchhoff. It is assumed that a mid-surface plane can be used to represent the three-dimensional plate in two-dimensional form.
The following kinematic assumptions that are made in this theory:3

straight lines normal to the mid-surface remain straight after deformation
straight lines normal to the mid-surface remain normal to the mid-surface after deformation
the thickness of the plate does not change during a deformation.

Displacement field
The Kirchhoff hypothesis implies that the displacement field has the form  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Cartesian coordinates on the mid-surface of the undeformed plate, 
 
 
 
  is the coordinate for the thickness direction, 
 
 
 
  are the in-plane displacements of the mid-surface, and 
 
 
 
  is the displacement of the mid-surface in the 
 
 
 
  direction.
If 
 
 
 
  are the angles of rotation of the normal to the mid-surface, then in the Kirchhoff–Love theory 
 
 




(Figure)
Displacement of the mid-surface (left) and of a normal (right)




Strain-displacement relations
For the situation where the strains in the plate are infinitesimal and the rotations of the mid-surface normals are less than 10° the strains-displacement relations are


 
 
  Therefore the only non-zero strains are in the in-plane directions.
If the rotations of the normals to the mid-surface are in the range of 10° to 15°, the strain-displacement relations can be approximated using the von Kármán strains. Then the kinematic assumptions of Kirchhoff-Love theory lead to the following strain-displacement relations


 
 
  This theory is nonlinear because of the quadratic terms in the strain-displacement relations.
Equilibrium equations
The equilibrium equations for the plate can be derived from the principle of virtual work. For the situation where the strains and rotations of the plate are small, the equilibrium equations for an unloaded plate are given by


 
 
  where the stress resultants and stress moment resultants are defined as


 
  and the thickness of the plate is 
 
 
 
 . The quantities 
 
 
 
  are the stresses.
If the plate is loaded by an external distributed load 
 
 
 
  that is normal to the mid-surface and directed in the positive 
 
 
 
  direction, the principle of virtual work then leads to the equilibrium equations 
For moderate rotations, the strain-displacement relations take the von Karman form and the equilibrium equations can be expressed as



Boundary conditions
The boundary conditions that are needed to solve the equilibrium equations of plate theory can be obtained from the boundary terms in the principle of virtual work.
For small strains and small rotations, the boundary conditions are


 
 
  Note that the quantity 
 
 
 
  is an effective shear force.
Stress–strain relations
The stress–strain relations for a linear elastic Kirchhoff plate are given by


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  do not appear in the equilibrium equations it is implicitly assumed that these quantities do not have any effect on the momentum balance and are neglected.
It is more convenient to work with the stress and moment results that enter the equilibrium equations. These are related to the displacements by


 
  and


 
  The ' extensional stiffnesses' are the quantities


 
  The ' bending stiffnesses' (also called flexural rigidity) are the quantities



Isotropic and homogeneous Kirchhoff plate
For an isotropic and homogeneous plate, the stress–strain relations are


 
  The moments corresponding to these stresses are



Pure bending
The displacements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are zero under pure bending conditions. For an isotropic, homogeneous plate under pure bending the governing equation is


 
  In index notation,


 
  In direct tensor notation, the governing equation is 
Transverse loading
For a transversely loaded plate without axial deformations, the governing equation has the form


 
  where


 
  In index notation,


 
  and in direct notation
In cylindrical coordinates 
 
 
 
 , the governing equation is



Orthotropic and homogeneous Kirchhoff plate
For an orthotropic plate


 
  Therefore,


 
  and



Transverse loading
The governing equation of an orthotropic Kirchhoff plate loaded transversely by a distributed load 
 
 
 
  per unit area is


 
  where



Dynamics of thin Kirchhoff plates
The dynamic theory of plates determines the propagation of waves in the plates, and the study of standing waves and vibration modes.
Governing equations
The governing equations for the dynamics of a Kirchhoff–Love plate are  where, for a plate with density 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  and



The figures below show some vibrational modes of a circular plate.
Image:Drum vibration mode01.gif|mode k = 0, p = 1 Image:Drum vibration mode12.gif|mode k = 1, p = 2
Isotropic plates
The governing equations simplify considerably for isotropic and homogeneous plates for which the in-plane deformations can be neglected and have the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the bending stiffness of the plate. For a uniform plate of thickness 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  In direct notation 
Mindlin–Reissner theory for thick plates
In the theory of thick plates, or theory of Raymond Mindlin4 and Eric Reissner, the normal to the mid-surface remains straight but not necessarily perpendicular to the mid-surface. If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  designate the angles which the mid-surface makes with the 
 
 
 
  axis then



Then the Mindlin–Reissner hypothesis implies that 
Strain-displacement relations
Depending on the amount of rotation of the plate normals two different approximations for the strains can be derived from the basic kinematic assumptions.
For small strains and small rotations the strain-displacement relations for Mindlin–Reissner plates are


 
 
  The shear strain, and hence the shear stress, across the thickness of the plate is not neglected in this theory. However, the shear strain is constant across the thickness of the plate. This cannot be accurate since the shear stress is known to be parabolic even for simple plate geometries. To account for the inaccuracy in the shear strain, a shear correction factor (
 
 
 
 ) is applied so that the correct amount of internal energy is predicted by the theory. Then



Equilibrium equations
The equilibrium equations have slightly different forms depending on the amount of bending expected in the plate. For the situation where the strains and rotations of the plate are smallthe equilibrium equations for a Mindlin–Reissner plate are  The resultant shear forces in the above equations are defined as



Boundary conditions
The boundary conditions are indicated by the boundary terms in the principle of virtual work.
If the only external force is a vertical force on the top surface of the plate, the boundary conditions are



Constitutive relations
The stress–strain relations for a linear elastic Mindlin–Reissner plate are given by


 
 
  Since 
 
 
 
  does not appear in the equilibrium equations it is implicitly assumed that it do not have any effect on the momentum balance and is neglected. This assumption is also called the plane stress assumption. The remaining stress–strain relations for an orthotropic material, in matrix form, can be written as


 
  Then,


 
  and


 
  For the shear terms


 
  The ' extensional stiffnesses' are the quantities


 
  The ' bending stiffnesses' are the quantities



Isotropic and homogeneous Mindlin–Reissner plates
For uniformly thick, homogeneous, and isotropic plates, the stress–strain relations in the plane of the plate are


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Young's modulus, 
 
 
 
  is the Poisson's ratio, and 
 
 
 
  are the in-plane strains. The through-the-thickness shear stresses and strains are related by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the shear modulus.
Constitutive relations
The relations between the stress resultants and the generalized displacements for an isotropic Mindlin–Reissner plate are:





 
  and


 
  The bending rigidity is defined as the quantity


 
  For a plate of thickness 
 
 
 
 , the bending rigidity has the form


 
  where H=h/2
Governing equations
If we ignore the in-plane extension of the plate, the governing equations are


 
 
  In terms of the generalized deformations 
 
 
 
 , the three governing equations are  The boundary conditions along the edges of a rectangular plate are



Reissner–Stein theory for isotropic cantilever plates
In general, exact solutions for cantilever plates using plate theory are quite involved and few exact solutions can be found in the literature. Reissner and Stein5 provide a simplified theory for cantilever plates that is an improvement over older theories such as Saint-Venant plate theory.
The Reissner-Stein theory assumes a transverse displacement field of the form


 
  The governing equations for the plate then reduce to two coupled ordinary differential equations:  where


 
 
  At 
 
 
 
 , since the beam is clamped, the boundary conditions are


 
  The boundary conditions at 
 
 
 
  are


 
 
  where









Derivation of Reissner–Stein cantilever plate equations





The strain energy of bending of a thin rectangular plate of uniform thickness 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the transverse displacement, 
 
 
 
  is the length, 
 
 
 
  is the width, 
 
 
 
  is the Poisson's ratio, 
 
 
 
  is the Young's modulus, and


 
  The potential energy of transverse loads 
 
 
 
  (per unit length) is


 
  The potential energy of in-plane loads 
 
 
 
  (per unit width) is


 
  The potential energy of tip forces 
 
 
 
  (per unit width), and bending moments 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (per unit width) is


 
  A balance of energy requires that the total energy is


 
  With the Reissener–Stein assumption for the displacement, we have








 
 
  and


 
 
  Taking the first variation of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  and setting it to zero gives us the Euler equations


 
  and


 
  where


 
 
  Since the beam is clamped at 
 
 
 
 , we have


 
  The boundary conditions at 
 
 
 
  can be found by integration by parts:


 
 
  where








References


See also

Bending of plates
Vibration of plates
Infinitesimal strain theory
Membrane theory of shells
Finite strain theory
Stress (mechanics)
Stress resultants
Linear elasticity
Bending
Euler–Bernoulli beam equation
Timoshenko beam theory

de:Plattentheorie gl:Laxe (construción)"
Category:Continuum mechanics



Timoshenko, S. and Woinowsky-Krieger, S. "Theory of plates and shells". McGraw–Hill New York, 1959.↩
A. E. H. Love, On the small free vibrations and deformations of elastic shells, Philosophical trans. of the Royal Society (London), 1888, Vol. série A, N° 17 p. 491–549.↩
Reddy, J. N., 2007, Theory and analysis of elastic plates and shells, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis.↩
R. D. Mindlin, Influence of rotatory inertia and shear on flexural motions of isotropic, elastic plates, Journal of Applied Mechanics, 1951, Vol. 18 p. 31–38.↩
E. Reissner and M. Stein. Torsion and transverse bending of cantilever plates. Technical Note 2369, National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics,Washington, 1951.↩




