


David Shmoys




David Shmoys

David Bernard Shmoys (born 1959) is a Professor in the School of Operations Research and Information Engineering and the Department of Computer Science at Cornell University. He obtained his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley in 1984. His major focus has been in the design and analysis of algorithms for discrete optimization problems.
In particular, his work has highlighted the role of linear programming in the design of approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems. He is known for his pioneering research on providing first constant factor performance guarantee for several scheduling and clustering problems including the k-center and k-median problems and the generalized assignment problem. Polynomial-time approximation schemes that he developed for scheduling problems have found applications in many subsequent works. His current research includes stochastic optimization, computational sustainability and optimization techniques in computational biology. Shmoys is married to Éva Tardos, who is a Jacob Gould Schurman Professor of Computer Science at Cornell University.
Key contributions
Two of his key contributions are

Constant factor approximation algorithm for the Generalized Assignment Problem and Unrelated Parallel Machine Scheduling.


Constant factor approximation algorithm for k-Medians and Facility location problem.

These contributions are described briefly below:
Generalized Assignment Problem & Unrelated Parallel Machine Scheduling
The paper1 is a joint work by David Shmoys and Eva Tardos.
The generalized assignment problem can be viewed as the following problem of scheduling unrelated parallel machine with costs. Each of 
 
 
 
  independent jobs (denoted 
 
 
 
 ) have to be processed by exactly one of 
 
 
 
  unrelated parallel machines (denoted 
 
 
 
 ). Unrelated implies same job might take different amount of processing time on different machines. Job 
 
 
 
  takes 
 
 
 
  time units when processed by machine 
 
 
 
  and incurs a cost 
 
 
 
 . Given 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we wish to decide if there exists a schedule with total cost at most 
 
 
 
  such that for each machine 
 
 
 
  its load, the total processing time required for the jobs assigned to it is at most 
 
 
 
 . By scaling the processing times, we can assume, without loss of generality, that the machine load bounds satisfy 
 
 
 
 . ``In other words, generalized assignment problem is to find a schedule of minimum cost subject to the constraint that the makespan, that the maximum machine load is at most 
 
 
 
  ".
The work of Shmoys with Lenstra and Tardos cited here2 gives a 2 approximation algorithm for the unit cost case. The algorithm is based on a clever design of linear program using parametric pruning and then rounding an extreme point solution of the linear program deterministically. Algorithm for the generalized assignment problem is based on a similar LP through parametric pruning and then using a new rounding technique on a carefully designed bipartite graph. We now state the LP formulation and briefly describe the rounding technique.
We guess the optimum value of makespan 
 
 
 
  and write the following LP. This technique is known as parametric pruning.


 
 ;




 
 ;
 


 
 ;
 


 
 ;
 


 
 ;
 



The obtained LP solution is then rounded to an integral solution as follows. A weighted bipartite graph 
 
 
 
  is constructed. One side of the bipartite graph contains the job nodes, 
 
 
 
 , and the other side contains several copies of each machine node, 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . To construct the edges to machine nodes corresponding to say machine 
 
 
 
 , first jobs are arranged in decreasing order of processing time 
 
 
 
 . For simplicity, suppose, 
 
 
 
 . Now find the minimum index 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
 . Include in 
 
 
 
  all the edges 
 
 
 
  with nonzero 
 
 
 
  and set their weights to 
 
 
 
 . Create the edge 
 
 
 
  and set its weight to 
 
 
 
 . This ensures that the total weight of the edges incident on the vertex 
 
 
 
  is at most 1. If 
 
 
 
 , then create an edge 
 
 
 
  with weight 
 
 
 
 . Continue with assigning edges to 
 
 
 
  in a similar way.
In the bipartite graph thus created, each job node in 
 
 
 
  has a total edge weight of 1 incident on it, and each machine node in 
 
 
 
  has edges with total weight at most 1 incident on it. Thus the vector 
 
 
 
  is an instance of a fractional matching on 
 
 
 
  and thus it can be rounded to obtain an integral matching of same cost.
Now considering the ordering of processing times of the jobs on the machines nodes during construction of 
 
 
 
  and using an easy charging argument, the following theorem can be proved:
Theorem: If 
 
 
 
  has a feasible solution then a schedule can be constructed with makespan 
 
 
 
  and cost 
 
 
 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
 , a 2 approximation is obtained.
K-medians and Facility Location Problem
The paper3 is a joint work by Moses Charikar, Sudipto Guha, Éva Tardos and David Shmoys. They obtain a 
 
 
 
  approximation to the metric k medians problem. This was the first paper to break the previously best known 
 
 
 
  approximation.
Shmoys has also worked extensively on the facility location problem. His recent results include obtaining a 
 
 
 
  approximation algorithm for the capacitated facility location problem. The joint work with Fabian Chudak,4 has resulted in improving the previous known 
 
 
 
  approximation for the same problem. Their algorithm is based on a variant of randomized rounding called the randomized rounding with a backup, since a backup solution is incorporated to correct for the fact that the ordinary randomized rounding rarely generates a feasible solution to the associated set covering problem.
For the uncapacitated version of the facility location problem, again in a joint work with Chudak5 he obtained a 
 
 
 
 -approximation algorithm which was a significant improvement on the previously known approximation guarantees. The improved algorithm works by rounding an optimal fractional solution of a linear programming relaxation and using the properties of the optimal solutions of the linear program and a generalization of a decomposition technique.
Awards & honors
David Shmoys is an ACM Fellow[http://fellows.acm.org/fellow_citation.cfm?id=2563864&srt;;=all]. He received College of Engineering Sonny Yau Excellence in Teaching Award three times and has been awarded NSF Presidential Young Investigator Award.
External links

David Shmoys's home page
Éva Tardos's home page

References


"
Category:1959 births Category:Living people Category:Cornell University faculty Category:20th-century American mathematicians Category:21st-century American mathematicians Category:Theoretical computer scientists Category:Fellows of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




