


Hurwitz's theorem (composition algebras)




Hurwitz's theorem (composition algebras)
In [[mathematics]], '''Hurwitz's theorem''' is a theorem of [[Adolf Hurwitz]] (1859–1919), published posthumously in 1923, on finite-dimensional unital [[real numbers|real]] [[non-associative algebra]]s endowed with a [[positive-definite quadratic form]]. The theorem states that if the [[quadratic form]]
 defines a homomorphism into the positive real numbers on the non-zero part of the algebra, then the algebra must be isomorphic to the real numbers, the complex numbers, the quaternions or the octonions. The non-associative algebras occurring are called Hurwitz algebras or composition algebras. The problem has an equivalent formulation in terms of quadratic forms 

, composability requiring the existence of a bilinear "composition" 

 such that 

. Subsequent proofs have used the Cayley–Dickson construction.  Although neither commutative nor associative, composition algebras have the special property of being alternative algebras, i.e. left and right multiplication preserves squares, a weakened version of associativity. Their theory has subsequently been generalized to arbitrary quadratic forms and arbitrary fields.See:






Hurwitz's theorem implies that multiplicative formulas for sums of squares can only occur in 1, 2, 4 and 8 dimensions, a result originally proved by Hurwitz in 1898. It is a special case of the Hurwitz problem, solved also in . Subsequent proofs of the restrictions on the dimension have been given by  using the representation theory of finite groups and by  and  using Clifford algebras. Hurwitz's theorem has been applied in algebraic topology to problems on vector fields on spheres and the homotopy groups of the classical groupsSee:



 and in quantum mechanics to the classification of simple Jordan algebras.1

Euclidean Hurwitz algebras
Definition
A Hurwitz algebra or composition algebra is a finite-dimensional nonassociative algebra 
 
 
 
  with identity endowed with a nondegenerate quadratic form 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . If the underlying coefficient field is the reals and 
 
 
 
  is positive-definite, so that 
 
 
 
  is an inner product, then 
 
 
 
  is called a Euclidean Hurwitz algebra.2
If 
 
 
 
  is a Euclidean Hurwitz algebra and 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 , define the involution and right and left multiplication operators by



Evidently the involution has period two and preserves the inner product and norm. These operators have the following properties:

the involution is an antiautomorphism, i.e. 
 
 




 
 , 
 
 
 
 , so that the involution on the algebra corresponds to taking adjoints


 
  if 
 
 




, , so that 
 
 
 
  is an alternating algebra

These properties are proved starting from the polarized version of the identity 
 
 
 
 :



Setting 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  yields 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Hence 
 
 
 
 .
Similarly 
 
 
 
 .
Hence 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 .
By the polarized identity  so . Applied to 1 this gives . Replacing 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  gives the other identity.
Substituting the formula for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  gives .
Classification
It is routine to check that the real numbers 
 
 
 
 , the complex numbers 
 
 
 
  and the quaternions 
 
 
 
  are examples of associative Euclidean Hurwitz algebras with their standard norms and involutions. There are moreover natural inclusions 
 
 
 
 .
Analysing such an inclusion leads to the Cayley–Dickson construction, formalized by A.A. Albert. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Euclidean Hurwitz algebra and 
 
 
 
  a proper unital subalgebra, so a Euclidean Hurwitz algebra in its own right. Pick a unit vector

 
  in 
 
 
 
  orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 , it follows that 
 
 
 
  and hence . Let 
 
 
 
  be subalgebra generated by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It is unital and is again a Euclidean Hurwitz algebra. It satisfies the following Cayley–Dickson multiplication laws:



To check this note that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are orthogonal, since 
 
 
 
  is orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 , since by orthogonal 
 
 
 
 . The formula for the involution follows. To show that 
 
 
 
  is closed under multiplication note that 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is orthogonal to 1, 
 
 
 
 .



 
  since 
 
 
 
  so that, for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .


 
  taking adjoints above.


 
  since 
 
 
 
  = 0, so that, for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .

Imposing the multiplicativity of the norm on 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  gives:



which leads to



Hence 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
must be associative.
This analysis applies to the inclusion of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Taking 
 
 
 
  with the product and inner product above gives a noncommutative nonassociative algebra generated by 
 
 
 
 . This recovers the usual definition of the octonions or Cayley numbers. If 
 
 
 
  is a Euclidean algebra, it must contain 
 
 
 
 . If it is strictly larger than 
 
 
 
 , the argument above shows that it contains 
 
 
 
 . If it is larger than 
 
 
 
 , it contains 
 
 
 
 . If it is larger still, it must contain 
 
 
 
 . But there the process must stop, because 
 
 
 
  is not associative. In fact 
 
 
 
  is not commutative and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .3
 The only Euclidean Hurwitz algebras are the real numbers, the complex numbers, the quaternions and the octonions.
Other proofs
The proofs of  and  use Clifford algebras to show that the dimension 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  must be 1, 2, 4 or 8. In fact the operators 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  satisfy  and so form a real Clifford algebra. If 
 
 
 
  is a unit vector, then 
 
 
 
  is skew-adjoint with square 
 
 
 
 . So 
 
 
 
  must be even. The real Clifford algebra and its complexification act on the complexification of 
 
 
 
 , an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional complex space. Since 
 
 
 
  is even, 
 
 
 
  is odd, so the Clifford algebra has exactly two complex irreducible representations of dimension . So this power of 2 must divide 
 
 
 
 . It is easy to see that this implies 
 
 
 
  can only be 1, 2, 4 or 8.
The proof of  uses the representation theory of finite groups, or the projective representation theory of elementary Abelian 2-groups, known to be equivalent to the representation theory of real Clifford algebras. Indeed taking an orthonormal basis  of the orthogonal complement of 1 gives rise to operators  satisfying



This is a projective representation of a direct product of 
 
 
 
  groups of order 2. (
 
 
 
  is assumed to be greater than 1.) The operators  by construction are skew-symmetric and orthogonal. In fact Eckmann constructed operators of this type in a slightly different but equivalent way. It is in fact the method originally followed in .See:



 Assume that there is a composition law for two forms




where  is bilinear in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus



where the matrix  is linear in 
 
 
 
 . The relations above are equivalent to



Writing



the relations become



Now set . Thus  and the  are skew-adjoint, orthogonal satisfying exactly the same relations as the 's:



Since  is an orthogonal matrix with square 
 
 
 
  on a real vector space, 
 
 
 
  is even.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the finite group generated by elements  such that



where 
 
 
 
  is central of order 2. The commutator subgroup 
 
 
 
  is just formed of 1 and 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is odd this coincides with the center while if 
 
 
 
  is even the center has order 4 with extra elements  and 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is not in the center its conjugacy class is exactly 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus there are  conjugacy classes for 
 
 
 
  odd and  for 
 
 
 
  even. 
 
 
 
  has   / [G, G] {{!}} = 2N − 1}} 1-dimensional complex representations. The total number of irreducible complex representations is the number of conjugacy classes. So since 
 
 
 
  is even, there are two further irreducible complex representations. Since the sum of the squares of the dimensions equals 
 
 
 
  and the dimensions divide 
 
 
 
 , the two irreducibles must have dimension . When 
 
 
 
  is even, there are two and their dimension must divide the order of the group, so is a power of two, so they must both have dimension . The space on which the 's act can be complexified. It will have complex dimension 
 
 
 
 . It breaks up into some of complex irreducible representations of 
 
 
 
 , all having dimension . In particular this dimension is 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  is less than or equal to 8. If 
 
 
 
 , the dimension is 4, which does not divide 6. So N can only be 1, 2, 4 or 8.
Applications to Jordan algebras
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Euclidean Hurwitz algebra and let  be the algebra of 
 
 
 
 -by-
 
 
 
  matrices over 
 
 
 
 . It is a unital nonassociative algebra with an involution given by



The trace 
 
 
 
  is defined as the sum of the diagonal elements of 
 
 
 
  and the real-valued trace by . The real-valued trace satisfies:



These are immediate consequences of the known identities for 
 
 
 
 .
In 
 
 
 
  define the associator by



It is trilinear and vanishes identically if 
 
 
 
  is associative. Since 
 
 
 
  is an alternating algebra 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Polarizing it follows that the associator is antisymmetric in its three entries. Note also that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  lie in 
 
 
 
  then the 
 
 
 
 . This implies that  has certain commutation properties. In fact if 
 
 
 
  is a matrix in  with real entries on the diagonal then



with 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . In fact if , then



Since the diagonal entries of 
 
 
 
  are real, the off diagonal entries of 
 
 
 
  vanish. Each diagonal entry of 
 
 
 
  is a sum of two associators involving only off diagonal terms of 
 
 
 
 . Since the associators are invariant under cyclic permutations, the diagonal entries of 
 
 
 
  are all equal.
Let  be the space of self-adjoint elements in  with product 
 
 
 
  and inner product .
  is a Euclidean Jordan algebra if 
 
 
 
  is associative (the real numbers, complex numbers or quaternions) and 
 
 
 
  or if 
 
 
 
  is nonassociative (the octonions) and 
 
 
 
 .
The exceptional Jordan algebra  is called the Albert algebra after A.A. Albert.
To check that  satisfies the axioms for a Euclidean Jordan algebra, note that the real trace defines a symmetric bilinear form with . So it is an inner product. It satisfies the associativity property 
 
 
 
  because of the properties of the real trace. The main axiom to check is the Jordan condition for the operators 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
 :



This is easy to check when 
 
 
 
  is associative, since  is an associative algebra so a Jordan algebra with 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  a special argument is required, one of the shortest being due to . See:





In fact if 
 
 
 
  is in  with 
 
 
 
 , then



defines a skew-adjoint derivation of . Indeed



so that



Polarizing yields:



Setting 
 
 
 
 , shows that 
 
 
 
  is skew-adjoint. The derivation property 
 
 
 
  follows by this and the associativity property of the inner product in the identity above.
With 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as in the statement of the theorem, let 
 
 
 
  be the group of automorphisms of  leaving invariant the inner product. It is a closed subgroup of 
 
 
 
  so a compact Lie group. Its Lie algebra consists of skew-adjoint derivations.  showed that given 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  there is an automorphism 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a diagonal matrix. (By self-adjointness the diagonal entries will be real.) Freudenthal's diagonalization theorem immediately implies the Jordan condition, since Jordan products by real diagonal matrices commute on  for any non-associative algebra 
 
 
 
 .
To prove the diagonalization theorem, take 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . By compactness 
 
 
 
  can be chosen in 
 
 
 
  minimizing the sums of the squares of the norms of the off-diagonal terms of 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  preserves the sums of all the squares, this is equivalent to maximizing the sums of the squares of the norms of the diagonal terms of 
 
 
 
 . Replacing 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , it can be assumed that the maximum is attained at 
 
 
 
 . Since the symmetric group , acting by permuting the coordinates, lies in 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  is not diagonal, it can be supposed that  and its adjoint  are non-zero. Let 
 
 
 
  be the skew-adjoint matrix with 
 
 
 
  entry 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  entry 
 
 
 
  and 0 elsewhere and let 
 
 
 
  be the derivation ad 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Let  in 
 
 
 
 . Then only the first two diagonal entries in  differ from those of 
 
 
 
 . The diagonal entries are real. The derivative of  at 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
  coordinate of 
 
 
 
 , i.e. . This derivative is non-zero if . On the other hand the group  preserves the real-valued trace. Since it can only change  and , it preserves their sum. However on the line 
 
 
 
 constant,  has no local maximum (only a global minimum), a contradiction. Hence 
 
 
 
  must be diagonal.
See also

Composition algebra
Multiplicative quadratic form
Radon–Hurwitz number

Notes
References









(reprint of 1951 article)














Further reading




Max Koecher & Reinhold Remmert (1990) "Composition Algebras. Hurwitz's Theorem — Vector-Product Algebras", chapter 10 of Numbers by Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus et al., Springer, ISBN 0-387-97202-1



"
Category:Non-associative algebras Category:Quadratic forms Category:Representation theory Category:Theorems in abstract algebra










