


(g,K)-module




(g,K)-module

In mathematics, more specifically in the representation theory of reductive Lie groups, a 
 
 
-module is an algebraic object, first introduced by Harish-Chandra,1 used to deal with continuous infinite-dimensional representations using algebraic techniques. Harish-Chandra showed that the study of irreducible unitary representations of a real reductive Lie group, G, could be reduced to the study of irreducible 
 
 
 
 -modules, where 
 
 
 
  is the Lie algebra of G and K is a maximal compact subgroup of G.2
Definition
Let G be a real Lie group. Let 
 
 
 
  be its Lie algebra, and K a maximal compact subgroup with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . A 
 
 
 
 -module is defined as follows:3 it is a vector space V that is both a Lie algebra representation of 
 
 
 
  and a group representation of K (without regard to the topology of K) satisfying the following three conditions

1. for any v ∈ V, k ∈ K, and X ∈ 
 
 




2. for any v ∈ V, Kv spans a finite-dimensional subspace of V on which the action of K is continuous
 
3. for any v ∈ V and Y ∈ 
 
 





In the above, the dot, 
 
 
 
 , denotes both the action of 
 
 
 
  on V and that of K. The notation Ad(k) denotes the adjoint action of G on 
 
 
 
 , and Kv is the set of vectors 
 
 
 
  as k varies over all of K.
The first condition can be understood as follows: if G is the general linear group GL(n, R), then 
 
 
 
  is the algebra of all n by n matrices, and the adjoint action of k on X is kXk−1; condition 1 can then be read as


 
  In other words, it is a compatibility requirement among the actions of K on V, 
 
 
 
  on V, and K on 
 
 
 
 . The third condition is also a compatibility condition, this time between the action of 
 
 
 
  on V viewed as a sub-Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  and its action viewed as the differential of the action of K on V.
Notes


References




"
Category:Representation theory of Lie groups



Page 73 of 
Page 12 of 
This is James Lepowsky's more general definition, as given in section 3.3.1 of 




