


Doob–Dynkin lemma




Doob–Dynkin lemma

In mathematics, in particular probability theory, the Doob–Dynkin lemma, named after Joseph L. Doob and Eugene Dynkin, characterizes the situation when one random variable is a function of another by the inclusion of the 

 
 -algebras generated by the random variables. The usual statement of the lemma is formulated in terms of one random variable being measurable with respect to the 
 
 
 
 -algebra generated by the other.
The lemma plays an important role in the conditional expectation in probability theory, where it allows to replace the conditioning on a random variable by conditioning on the 

 
 -algebra that is generated by the random variable.
Statement of the lemma
Let 
 
 
 
  be a sample space. For a function 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -algebra generated by 
 
 
 
  is defined as the family of sets 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are all Borel sets.
Lemma Let 
 
 
 
  be random elements and 
 
 
 
  be the 
 
 
 
  algebra generated by 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -measurable if and only if 
 
 
 
  for some Borel measurable function 
 
 
 
 .
The "if" part of the lemma is simply the statement that the composition of two measurable functions is measurable. The "only if" part is the nontrivial one.
By definition, 
 
 
 
  being 
 
 
 
 -measurable is the same as 
 
 
 
  for any Borel set 
 
 
 
 , which is the same as 
 
 
 
 . So, the lemma can be rewritten in the following, equivalent form.
Lemma Let 
 
 
 
  be random elements and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the 
 
 
 
  algebras generated by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. Then 
 
 
 
  for some Borel measurable function 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
References

A. Bobrowski: Functional analysis for probability and stochastic processes: an introduction, Cambridge University Press (2005), ISBN 0-521-83166-0
M. M. Rao, R. J. Swift : Probability Theory with Applications, Mathematics and Its Applications, Band 582, Springer-Verlag (2006), ISBN 0-387-27730-7

"
Category:Probability theorems Category:Theorems in measure theory


