


Priestley space




Priestley space

In mathematics, a Priestley space is an ordered topological space with special properties. Priestley spaces are named after Hilary Priestley who introduced and investigated them.1 Priestley spaces play a fundamental role in the study of distributive lattices. In particular, there is a duality between the category of Priestley spaces and the category of bounded distributive lattices.2 3
Definition
A Priestley space is an ordered topological space

 
 , i. e. a set 
 
 
 
  equipped with a partial order

 
 
  and a topology

 
 , satisfying the following two conditions: (i) 
 
 
 
  is compact. (ii) If 
 
 
 
 , then there exists a clopen up-set

 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  such that  and 
 
 
 
 . (This condition is known as the Priestley separation axiom.)
Properties of Priestley spaces

Each Priestley space is Hausdorff. Indeed, given two points 
 
 
 
  of a Priestley space 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
 , then as 
 
 
 
 
  is a partial order, either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . Assuming, without loss of generality, that 
 
 
 
 , (ii) provides a clopen up-set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  such that  and 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are disjoint open subsets of 
 
 
 
  separating 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .


Each Priestley space is also zero-dimensional; that is, each open neighborhood

 
  of a point 
 
 
 
  of a Priestley space 
 
 
 
  contains a clopen neighborhood 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . To see this, one proceeds as follows. For each , either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . By the Priestley separation axiom, there exists a clopen up-set or a clopen down-set containing 
 
 
 
  and missing 
 
 
 
 
 . Obviously the intersection of these clopen neighborhoods of 
 
 
 
  does not meet 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, as 
 
 
 
  is compact, there exists a finite intersection of these clopen neighborhoods of 
 
 
 
  missing 
 
 
 
 
 . This finite intersection is the desired clopen neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  contained in 
 
 
 
 .

It follows that for each Priestley space 
 
 
 
 , the topological space 
 
 
 
 
  is a Stone space; that is, it is a compact Hausdorff zero-dimensional space.
Some further useful properties of Priestley spaces are listed below.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Priestley space.


(a) For each closed subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , both  and  are closed subsets of 
 
 
 
 .
 





(b) Each open up-set of 
 
 
 
 
  is a union of clopen up-sets of 
 
 
 
  and each open down-set of 
 
 
 
  is a union of clopen down-sets of 
 
 
 
 .
 





(c) Each closed up-set of 
 
 
 
  is an intersection of clopen up-sets of 
 
 
 
 
  and each closed down-set of 
 
 
 
  is an intersection of clopen down-sets of 
 
 
 
 .
 





(d) Clopen up-sets and clopen down-sets of 
 
 
 
  form a subbasis for 
 
 
 
 .
 





(e) For each pair of closed subsets 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
 , then there exists a clopen up-set 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
 



A Priestley morphism from a Priestley space 
 
 
 
  to another Priestley space 
 
 
 
  is a map 
 
 
 
  which is continuous and order-preserving.
Let Pries denote the category of Priestley spaces and Priestley morphisms.
Connection with spectral spaces
Priestley spaces are closely related to spectral spaces. For a Priestley space 
 
 
 
 
 , let  denote the collection of all open up-sets of 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, let  denote the collection of all open down-sets of 
 
 
 
 .
Theorem:4 If 
 
 
 
  is a Priestley space, then both  and  are spectral spaces.
Conversely, given a spectral space 
 
 
 
 , let  denote the patch topology on 
 
 
 
 
 ; that is, the topology generated by the subbasis consisting of compact open subsets of 
 
 
 
  and their complements. Let also 
 
 
 
  denote the specialization order of 
 
 
 
 .
Theorem:5 If 
 
 
 
  is a spectral space, then  is a Priestley space.
In fact, this correspondence between Priestley spaces and spectral spaces is functorial and yields an isomorphism between Pries and the category Spec of spectral spaces and spectral maps.
Connection with bitopological spaces
Priestley spaces are also closely related to bitopological spaces.
Theorem:6 If 
 
 
 
 
  is a Priestley space, then  is a pairwise Stone space. Conversely, if  is a pairwise Stone space, then 
 
 
 
  is a Priestley space, where 
 
 
 
  is the join of  and  and 
 
 
 
  is the specialization order of .
The correspondence between Priestley spaces and pairwise Stone spaces is functorial and yields an isomorphism between the category Pries of Priestley spaces and Priestley morphisms and the category PStone of pairwise Stone spaces and bi-continuous maps.
Thus, one has the following isomorphisms of categories:





One of the main consequences of the duality theory for distributive lattices is that each of these categories is dually equivalent to the category of bounded distributive lattices.
See also

Spectral space
Pairwise Stone space
Distributive lattice
Stone duality
Duality theory for distributive lattices

Notes
References

Priestley, H. A. (1970). Representation of distributive lattices by means of ordered Stone spaces.Bull. London Math. Soc., (2) 186–190.


Priestley, H. A. (1972). Ordered topological spaces and the representation of distributive lattices. Proc. London Math. Soc., 24(3) 507–530.


Cornish, W. H. (1975). On H. Priestley's dual of the category of bounded distributive lattices. Mat. Vesnik, 12(27) (4) 329–332.


M. Hochster (1969). Prime ideal structure in commutative rings. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 142 43–60


Bezhanishvili, G., Bezhanishvili, N., Gabelaia, D., Kurz, A. (2010). Bitopological duality for distributive lattices and Heyting algebras. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 20.

"
Category:Topology Category:Topological spaces



Priestley, (1970).
Cornish, (1975).
Bezhanishvili et al. (2010)
Cornish, (1975). Bezhanishvili et al. (2010).
Cornish, (1975). Bezhanishvili et al. (2010).
Bezhanishvili et al. (2010).




