


Phonon scattering




Phonon scattering

Phonons can scatter through several mechanisms as they travel through the material. These scattering mechanisms are: Umklapp phonon-phonon scattering, phonon-impurity scattering, phonon-electron scattering, and phonon-boundary scattering. Each scattering mechanism can be characterised by a relaxation rate 1/
 
 
 
  which is the inverse of the corresponding relaxation time.
All scattering processes can be taken into account using Matthiessen's rule. Then the combined relaxation time 
 
 
 
  can be written as:



The parameters 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are due to Umklapp scattering, mass-difference impurity scattering, boundary scattering and phonon-electron scattering, respectively.
Phonon-phonon scattering
For phonon-phonon scattering, effects by normal processes (processes which conserve the phonon wave vector - N processes) are ignored in favor of Umklapp processes (U processes). Since normal processes vary linearly with 
 
 
 
  and umklapp processes vary with 
 
 
 
 
 , Umklapp scattering dominates at high frequency.1

 
  is given by:



where 
 
 
 
  is Gruneisen anharmonicity parameter, μ is shear modulus, V0 is volume per atom and 
 
 
 
  is Debye frequency.2
Mass-difference impurity scattering
Mass-difference impurity scattering is given by:



where 
 
 
 
  is a measure of the impurity scattering strength. Note that 
 
 
 
  is dependent of the dispersion curves.
Boundary scattering
Boundary scattering is particularly important for low-dimensional nanostructures and its relaxation time is given by:



where D is the dimension of the system and p represents the surface roughness parameter. The value p=1 means a smooth perfect surface that the scattering is purely specular and the relaxation time goes to ∞; hence, boundary scattering does not affect thermal transport. The value p=0 represents a very rough surface that the scattering is then purely diffusive which gives:



This equation is also known as Casimir limit.3
Phonon-electron scattering
Phonon-electron scattering can also contribute when the material is lightly doped. The corresponding relaxation time is given as:



The parameter 
 
 
 
  is conduction electrons concentration, ε is deformation potential, ρ is mass density and m* is effective electron mass.4 It is usually assumed that contribution to thermal conductivity by phonon-electron scattering is negligible.
See also

Lattice scattering

References
"
Category:Condensed matter physics Category:Scattering



↩
↩
↩





