


Quantum beats




Quantum beats

In physics, quantum beats are simple examples of phenomena that cannot be described by semiclassical theory, but can be described by fully quantized calculation, especially quantum electrodynamics. In semiclassical theory (SCT), there is an interference or beat note term for both V-type and 
 
 
 
 -type atoms. However, in the quantum electrodynamic (QED) calculation, V-type atoms have a beat term but 
 
 
 
 -types do not. This is strong evidence in support of quantum electrodynamics.
Historical overview
The observation of quantum beats was first reported by A.T. Forrester, R.A. Gudmunsen and P.O. Johnson in 1955,1 in an experiment that was performed on the basis of an earlier proposal by A.T. Forrester, W.E. Parkins and E. Gerjuoy.2 This experiment involved the mixing of the Zeeman components of ordinary incoherent light, that is, the mixing of different components resulting from a split of the spectral line into several components in the presence of a magnetic field due to the Zeeman effect. These light components were mixed at a photoelectric surface, and the electrons emitted from that surface then excited a microwave cavity, which allowed the output signal to be measured in dependence on the magnetic field.34
Since the invention of the laser, quantum beats can be demonstrated by using light originating from two different laser sources.
V-type and 
 
 
 
 -type atoms
There is a figure in Quantum Optics5 that describes V-type and 
 
 
 
 -type atoms clearly.
Simply, V-type atoms have 3 states
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . The energy levels of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are higher than that of 
 
 
 
 . When electrons in states 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  subsequently decay to state 
 
 
 
 , two kinds of emission are radiated.
In 
 
 
 
 -type atoms, there are also 3 states
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . However, in this type, 
 
 
 
  is at the highest energy level, while 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are at lower levels. When two electrons in state 
 
 
 
  decay to states 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, two kinds of emission are also radiated.
The derivation below follows the reference Quantum Optics6
Calculation based on semiclassical theory
In the semiclassical picture, the state vector of electrons is


 
 . If the nonvanishing dipole matrix elements are described by


 
  for V-type atoms,


 
  for 
 
 
 
 -type atoms, then each atom has two microscopic oscillating dipoles


 
  for V-type, when 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  for 
 
 
 
 -type, when 
 
 
 
 . In the semiclassical picture, the field radiated will be a sum of these two terms


 
 , so it is clear that there is an interference or beat note term in a square law detector


 
 .
Calculation based on quantum electrodynamics
For quantum electrodynamical calculation, we should introduce the creation and annihilation operators from second quantization of quantum mechanics.
Let


 
  is a annihilation operator and


 
  is an creation operator. Then the beat note becomes


 
  for V-type and


 
  for 
 
 
 
 -type, when the state vector for each type is


 
  and


 
 .
The beat note term becomes


 
  for V-type and


 
  for 
 
 
 
 -type. By orthogonality of eigenstates, however 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Therefore, there is a beat note term for V-type atoms, but not for 
 
 
 
 -type atoms.
Conclusion
As a result of calculation, V-type atoms have quantum beats but 
 
 
 
 -type atoms do not. This difference is caused by quantum mechanical uncertainty. A V-type atom decays to state 
 
 
 
  via the emission with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since both transitions decayed to the same state, one cannot determine along which path each decayed, similar to Young's double-slit experiment. However, 
 
 
 
 -type atoms decay to two different states. Therefore, in this case we can recognize the path, even if it decays via two emissions as does V-type. Simply, we already know the path of the emission and decay.
The calculation by QED is correct in accordance with the most fundamental principle of quantum mechanics, the uncertainty principle. Quantum beats phenomena are good examples of such that can be described by QED but not by SCT.
See also

Quantum electrodynamics
Double-slit experiment

References


Further reading




"
Category:Quantum electrodynamics



A.T. Forrester, R.A. Gudmunsen, P.O. Johnson, Physical Review, vol. 99, pp. 1691–1700, 1955 (abstract)
A.T. Forrester, W.E. Parkins, E. Gerjuoy: On the possibility of observing beat frequencies between lines in the visible spectrum, Physical Review, vol. 72, pp. 241–243, 1947
Edward Gerjuoy: Atomic physics, In: H. Henry Stroke (ed.): The Physical Review—the First Hundred Years: A Selection of Seminal Papers and Commentaries, Springer, 1995, ISBN 978-1-56396-188-5, pp. 83–102, [http://books.google.com/books?id=3U2HSMHsouMC&pg;;=PA97 p. 97]
Paul Hartman: A Memoir on The Physical Review: A History of the First Hundred Years, Springer, 2008, ISBN 978-1-56396-282-0, [http://books.google.com/books?id=tPxu74KtAeQC&pg;;=PA193 p. 193]






