


Abstract elementary class




Abstract elementary class

In model theory, a discipline within mathematical logic, an abstract elementary class, or AEC for short, is a class of models with a partial order similar to the relation of an elementary substructure of an elementary class in first-order model theory. They were introduced by Saharon Shelah.1
Definition


 
 , for 
 
 
 
  a class of structures in some language 
 
 
 
 , is an AEC if it has the following properties:



 
  is a partial order on 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is a substructure of 
 
 
 
 .
Isomorphisms

 
  is closed under isomorphisms, and if 
 
 



 
  and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

Coherence: If 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

Tarski–Vaught chain axioms: If 
 
 
 
  is an ordinal and 
 
 
 
  is a chain (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ), then:
 



If 
 
 
 
 , for all 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 


Löwenheim–Skolem axiom: There exists a cardinal

 
 , such that if 
 
 
 
  is a subset of the universe of 
 
 
 
 , then there is 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  whose universe contains 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . We let 
 
 
 
  denote the least such 
 
 
 
  and call it the Löwenheim–Skolem number of 
 
 
 
 .

Note that we usually do not care about the models of size less than the Löwenheim–Skolem number and often assume that there are none (we will adopt this convention in this article). This is justified since we can always remove all such models from an AEC without influencing its structure above the Löwenheim–Skolem number.
A 
 
 
 
 -embedding is a map 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism from 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is clear from context, we omit it.
Examples
The following are examples of abstract elementary classes:2

An Elementary class is the most basic example of an AEC: If T is a first-order theory, then the class 
 
 
 
  of models of T together with elementary substructure forms an AEC with Löwenheim–Skolem number |T|.
If 
 
 
 
  is a sentence in the infinitary logic

 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a countable fragment containing 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is an AEC with Löwenheim–Skolem number 
 
 
 
 . This can be generalized to other logics, like 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  expresses "there exists uncountably many".
If T is a first-order countable superstable theory, the set of 
 
 
 
 -saturated models of T, together with elementary substructure, is an AEC with Löwenheim–Skolem number 
 
 
 
 .
Zilber's pseudo-exponential fields form an AEC.

Common assumptions
AECs are very general objects and one usually make some of the assumptions below when studying them:

An AEC has joint embedding if any two model can be embedded inside a common model.
An AEC has no maximal model if any model has a proper extension.
An AEC 
 
 
 
  has amalgamation if for any triple 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , there is 
 
 
 
  and embeddings of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  inside 
 
 
 
  that fix 
 
 
 
  pointwise.

Note that in elementary classes, joint embedding holds whenever the theory is complete, while amalgamation and no maximal models are well-known consequences of the compactness theorem. These three assumptions allow us to build a universal model-homogeneous monster model 
 
 
 
 , exactly as in the elementary case.
Another assumption that one can make is tameness.
Shelah's categoricity conjecture
Shelah introduced AECs to provide a uniform framework in which to generalize first-order classification theory. Classification theory started with Morley's categoricity theorem, so it is natural to ask whether a similar result holds in AECs. This is Shelah's categoricity conjecture. It states that there should be a Hanf number for categoricity:
For every AEC K there should be a cardinal 
 
 
 
  depending only on 
 
 
 
  such that if K is categorical in some

 
  (i.e. K has exactly one (up to isomorphism) model of size 
 
 
 
 ), then K is categorical in 
 
 
 
  for all

 
 .
Several approximations have been published (see for example the results section below), assuming set-theoretic assumptions (such as the existence of large cardinals or variations of the generalized continuum hypothesis), or model-theoretic assumptions (such as amalgamation or tameness). As of 2014, the original conjecture remains open.
Results
The following are some important results about AECs. Except for the last, all results are due to Shelah.

Shelah's Presentation Theorem:3 Any AEC 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 : it is a reduct of a class of models of a first-order theory omitting at most 
 
 
types.
Hanf number for existence:4 Any AEC 
 
 
 
  which has a model of size 
 
 
 
  has models of arbitrarily large sizes.
Amalgamation from categoricity:5 If K is an AEC categorical in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then K has amalgamation for models of size 
 
 
 
 .
Existence from categoricity:6 If K is a 
 
 
 
  AEC with Löwenheim–Skolem number 
 
 
 
  and K is categorical in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then K has a model of size 
 
 
 
 . In particular, no sentence of 
 
 
 
  can have exactly one uncountable model.
Approximations to Shelah's categoricity conjecture:
 
Downward transfer from a successor:7 If K is an abstract elementary class with amalgamation that is categorical in a "high-enough" successor

 
 , then K is categorical in all high-enough 
 
 
 
 .
Shelah's categoricity conjecture for a successor from large cardinals:8 If there are class-many strongly compact cardinals, then Shelah's categoricity conjecture holds when we start with categoricity at a successor.


See also

Tame abstract elementary class

Notes
References










"
Category:Model theory Category:Category theory



.
, Section 1.
, Theorem 3.4.
, Corollary 3.5. Note that there is a typo there and that 
 
 
 
  should be replaced by 
 
 
 
 .
, Theorem 4.3.
, Theorem 5.1.
.
This is due to Will Boney, but combines results of many people, including Grossberg, Makkai, Shelah, and VanDieren. A proof appears in , Theorem 7.5.




