


Coppersmith method




Coppersmith method

The Coppersmith method, proposed by Don Coppersmith, is a method to find small integer roots of polynomial equations. These polynomials can be univariate or bivariate. In cryptography the algorithm is mainly used in attacks on RSA when parts of the secret key are known.
The method uses the Lenstra–Lenstra–Lovász lattice basis reduction algorithm (LLL) to find a polynomial that has the roots of the target polynomial as roots and has small coefficients.1
Approach
Coppersmith’s method is based on lattice reduction. A lattice L is a subgroup of 
 
 
 
 . Also there exists a k such that 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a basis of L. The LLL algorithm computes a basis 
 
 
 
  of short vectors. If k=n, the determinant of the lattice is given by det(L)=det(B); in general 
 
 
 
 .
For any LLL reduced basis 
 
 
 
  it holds that 
 
 
 
 .2
Let 
 
 
 
  and assume that 
 
 
 
  for some integer 
 
 
 
 . Coppersmith’s algorithm can be used to find this integer solution 
 
 
 
 .
Finding roots over Q is easy using e.g. Newton's method but these algorithms do not work modulo a composite number M. The idea behind Coppersmith’s method is to find a different polynomial 
 
 
 
  related to F that has the same 
 
 
 
  as a solution and has only small coefficients. If the coefficients and 
 
 
 
  are so small that 
 
 
 
  over the integers, then 
 
 
 
  is a root of F over Q and can easily be found.
Computing small roots
Coppersmith’s approach is a reduction of solving modular polynomial equations to solving polynomials over the integers. Coppersmith's algorithm uses LLL to construct the polynomial 
 
 
 
  with small coefficients.
Given F, the algorithm constructs polynomials 
 
 
 
  that have the same 
 
 
 
  as root modulo 
 
 
 
 , where a is some integer chosen dependent on the degree of F and the size of 
 
 
 
 . Any linear combination of these polynomials has 
 
 
 
  as root modulo 
 
 
 
 .
The next step is to use the LLL algorithm to construct a linear combination 
 
 
 
  of the 
 
 
 
  so that the inequality 
 
 
 
  holds. Now standard factorization methods can calculate the roots of 
 
 
 
  over the integers.
See also

Coppersmith's Attack

References
"
Category:Asymmetric-key algorithms









