


Wrapped Cauchy distribution




Wrapped Cauchy distribution

In probability theory and directional statistics, a wrapped Cauchy distribution is a wrapped probability distribution that results from the "wrapping" of the Cauchy distribution around the unit circle. The Cauchy distribution is sometimes known as a Lorentzian distribution, and the wrapped Cauchy distribution may sometimes be referred to as a wrapped Lorentzian distribution.
The wrapped Cauchy distribution is often found in the field of spectroscopy where it is used to analyze diffraction patterns (e.g. see Fabry–Pérot interferometer)
Description
The probability density function of the wrapped Cauchy distribution is:1



where 
 
 
 
  is the scale factor and 
 
 
 
  is the peak position of the "unwrapped" distribution. Expressing the above pdf in terms of the characteristic function of the Cauchy distribution yields:



In terms of the circular variable 
 
 
 
  the circular moments of the wrapped Cauchy distribution are the characteristic function of the Cauchy distribution evaluated at integer arguments:



where 
 
 
 
  is some interval of length 
 
 
 
 . The first moment is then the average value of z, also known as the mean resultant, or mean resultant vector:



The mean angle is



and the length of the mean resultant is



Estimation of parameters
A series of N measurements 
 
 
 
  drawn from a wrapped Cauchy distribution may be used to estimate certain parameters of the distribution. The average of the series 
 
 
 
  is defined as



and its expectation value will be just the first moment:



In other words, 
 
 
 
  is an unbiased estimator of the first moment. If we assume that the peak position 
 
 
 
  lies in the interval 
 
 
 
 , then Arg
 
 
 
  will be a (biased) estimator of the peak position 
 
 
 
 .
Viewing the 
 
 
 
  as a set of vectors in the complex plane, the 
 
 
 
  statistic is the length of the averaged vector:



and its expectation value is



In other words, the statistic



will be an unbiased estimator of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  will be a (biased) estimator of 
 
 
 
 .
Entropy
The information entropy of the wrapped Cauchy distribution is defined as:2



where 
 
 
 
  is any interval of length 
 
 
 
 . The logarithm of the density of the wrapped Cauchy distribution may be written as a Fourier series in 
 
 
 
 :



where



which yields:


 
  (c.f. Gradshteyn and Ryzhik  4.224.15) and



(c.f. Gradshteyn and Ryzhik  4.397.6). The characteristic function representation for the wrapped Cauchy distribution in the left side of the integral is:



where 
 
 
 
 . Substituting these expressions into the entropy integral, exchanging the order of integration and summation, and using the orthogonality of the cosines, the entropy may be written:



The series is just the Taylor expansion for the logarithm of 
 
 
 
  so the entropy may be written in closed form as:



See also

Wrapped distribution
Dirac comb
Wrapped normal distribution
Circular uniform distribution
McCullagh's parametrization of the Cauchy distributions

References






"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Directional statistics Category:Probability distributions



↩





