


Secondary vector bundle structure




Secondary vector bundle structure

In mathematics, particularly differential topology, the secondary vector bundle structure refers to the natural vector bundle structure  on the total space TE of the tangent bundle of a smooth vector bundle 
 
 
 
 , induced by the push-forward  of the original projection map 
 
 
 
 
 . This gives rise to a double vector bundle structure 
 
 
 
 .
In the special case  (TM, πTM, M)}}, where 
 
 
 
  is the double tangent bundle, the secondary vector bundle  is isomorphic to the tangent bundle  of 
 
 
 
  through the canonical flip.
Construction of the secondary vector bundle structure
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth vector bundle of rank 
 
 
 
 
 . Then the preimage  of any tangent vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  in the push-forward  of the canonical projection 
 
 
 
  is a smooth submanifold of dimension 
 
 
 
 , and it becomes a vector space with the push-forwards



of the original addition and scalar multiplication



as its vector space operations. The triple  becomes a smooth vector bundle with these vector space operations on its fibres.
Proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be a local coordinate system on the base manifold 
 
 
 
  with  (x1, ..., xn)}} and let



be a coordinate system on 
 
 
 
 
  adapted to it. Then



so the fiber of the secondary vector bundle structure at 
 
 
 
  in  is of the form



Now it turns out that



gives a local trivialization  for , and the push-forwards of the original vector space operations read in the adapted coordinates as



and



so each fibre  is a vector space and the triple  is a smooth vector bundle.
Linearity of connections on vector bundles
The general Ehresmann connection

 
  on a vector bundle 
 
 
 
  can be characterized in terms of the connector map



where  is the vertical lift, and  is the vertical projection. The mapping



induced by an Ehresmann connection is a covariant derivative on 
 
 
 
  in the sense that



if and only if the connector map is linear with respect to the secondary vector bundle structure  on 
 
 
 
 . Then the connection is called linear. Note that the connector map is automatically linear with respect to the tangent bundle structure .
See also

Connection (vector bundle)
Double tangent bundle
Ehresmann connection
Vector bundle

References

P.Michor. Topics in Differential Geometry, American Mathematical Society (2008).

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Topology Category:Differential topology


