


Kontsevich quantization formula




Kontsevich quantization formula

In mathematics, the Kontsevich quantization formula describes how to construct a generalized ★-product operator algebra from a given arbitrary Poisson manifold. This operator algebra amounts to the deformation quantization of the corresponding Poisson algebra. It is due to Maxim Kontsevich.12
Deformation quantization of a Poisson algebra
Given a Poisson algebra , a deformation quantization is an associative unital product ★ on the algebra of formal power series in , subject to the following two axioms,



If one were given a Poisson manifold , one could ask, in addition, that



where the  are linear bidifferential operators of degree at most 
 
 
 
 .
Two deformations are said to be equivalent iff they are related by a gauge transformation of the type,


 
  where  are differential operators of order at most 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding induced ★-product, ★′, is then



For the archetypal example, one may well consider Groenewold's original "Moyal–Weyl" ★-product.
Kontsevich graphs
A Kontsevich graph is a simple directed graph without loops on 2 external vertices, labeled f and g; and 
 
 
 
  internal vertices, labeled 
 
 
 
 . From each internal vertex originate two edges. All (equivalence classes of) graphs with 
 
 
 
  internal vertices are accumulated in the set .
An example on two internal vertices is the following graph,




Associated bidifferential operator
Associated to each graph 
 
 
 
 , there is a bidifferential operator  defined as follows. For each edge there is a partial derivative on the symbol of the target vertex. It is contracted with the corresponding index from the source symbol. The term for the graph 
 
 
 
  is the product of all its symbols together with their partial derivatives. Here f and g stand for smooth functions on the manifold, and 
 
 
 
  is the Poisson bivector of the Poisson manifold.
The term for the example graph is



Associated weight
For adding up these bidifferential operators there are the weights  of the graph 
 
 
 
 . First of all, to each graph there is a multiplicity 
 
 
 
  which counts how many equivalent configurations there are for one graph. The rule is that the sum of the multiplicities for all graphs with 
 
 
 
  internal vertices is . The sample graph above has the multiplicity 
 
 
 
 . For this, it is helpful to enumerate the internal vertices from 1 to 
 
 
 
 .
In order to compute the weight we have to integrate products of the angle in the upper half-plane, H, as follows. The upper half-plane is 
 
 
 
 , endowed with a metric



and, for two points 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , we measure the angle 
 
 
 
  between the geodesic from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  counterclockwise. This is



The integration domain is Cn(H) the space



The formula amounts


 
 , where t1(j) and t2(j) are the first and second target vertex of the internal vertex 
 
 
 
 . The vertices f and g are at the fixed positions 0 and 1 in 
 
 
 
 .
The formula
Given the above three definitions, the Kontsevich formula for a star product is now



Explicit formula up to second order
Enforcing associativity of the ★-product, it is straightforward to check directly that the Kontsevich formula must reduce, to second order in 
 
 
 
 , to just



References
"
Category:Mathematical quantization



M. Kontsevich (2003), Deformation Quantization of Poisson Manifolds, Letters of Mathematical Physics 66, pp. 157–216.





