


Symmetry-preserving filter




Symmetry-preserving filter

Symmetry-preserving observers,12 also known as invariant filters, are estimation techniques whose structure and design take advantage of the natural symmetries (or invariances) of the considered nonlinear model. As such, the main benefit is an expected much larger domain of convergence than standard filtering methods, e.g. Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) or Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF).
Motivation
Most physical systems possess natural symmetries (or invariance), i.e. there exist transformations (e.g. rotations, translations, scalings) that leave the system unchanged. From mathematical and engineering viewpoints, it makes sense that a filter well-designed for the system being considered should preserve the same invariance properties.
Definition
Consider 
 
 
 
  a Lie group, and (local) transformation groups 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 .
The nonlinear system


 
 
  is said to be invariant if it is left unchanged by the action of 
 
 
 
 , i.e.



where 
 
 
 
 .

 The system 
 
 
 
 
  is then an invariant filter if



 
 , i.e. that it can be witten 
 
 
 
 , where the correction term 
 
 
 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 





 
 , i.e. it is left unchanged by the transformation group.

General equation and main result
It has been proved 3 that every invariant observer reads



where



 
  is an invariant output error, which is different from the usual output error 
 
 





 
  is an invariant frame




 
  is an invariant vector




 
  is a freely chosen gain matrix.

Given the system and the associated transformation group being considered, there exists a constructive method to determine 
 
 
 
 , based on the moving frame method.
To analyze the error convergence, an invariant state error 
 
 
 
  is defined, which is different from the standard output error 
 
 
 
 , since the standard output error usually does not preserve the symmetries of the system. One of the main benefits of symmetry-preserving filters is that the error system is "autonomous", but for the free known invariant vector 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 . This important property allows the estimator to have a very large domain of convergence, and to be easy to tune.45
To choose the gain matrix 
 
 
 
 , there are two possibilities:

a deterministic approach, that leads to the construction of truly nonlinear symmetry-preserving filters (similar to Luenberger-like observers)


a stochastic approach, that leads to Invariant Extended Kalman Filters (similar to Kalman-like observers).

Applications
There has been numerous applications that use such invariant observers to estimate the state of the considered system. The application areas include

attitude and heading reference systems with 6 or without 7 position/velocity sensor (e.g. GPS)


ground vehicle localization systems


chemical reactors8


oceanography

References


"
Category:Nonlinear filters Category:Signal estimation




S. Bonnabel, Ph. Martin and E. Salaün, "Invariant Extended Kalman Filter: theory and application to a velocity-aided attitude estimation problem", 48th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 1297-1304, 2009.↩
S. Bonnabel, Ph. Martin, and P. Rouchon, “Symmetry-preserving observers,” IEEE Transaction on Automatic and Control, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 2514–2526, 2008.↩
Ph. Martin and E. Salaün, "An invariant observer for Earth-velocity-aided attitude heading reference systems", 17th IFAC World Congress, pp. 9857-9864, 2008.↩
Ph. Martin and E. Salaün, "Design and implementation of a low-cost observer-based Attitude and Heading Reference System", Control Engineering Practice, 2010.↩







