


Least-upper-bound property




Least-upper-bound property

In mathematics, the least-upper-bound property (sometimes the completeness or supremum property)1 is a fundamental property of the real numbers and certain other ordered sets. The property states that any non-empty set of real numbers that has an upper bound necessarily has a least upper bound (or supremum).
The least-upper-bound property is one form of the completeness axiom for the real numbers, and is sometimes referred to as Dedekind completeness.2 It can be used to prove many of the fundamental results of real analysis, such as the intermediate value theorem, the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, the extreme value theorem, and the Heine–Borel theorem. It is usually taken as an axiom in synthetic constructions of the real numbers (see least upper bound axiom), and it is also intimately related to the construction of the real numbers using Dedekind cuts.
In order theory, this property can be generalized to a notion of completeness for any partially ordered set. A linearly ordered set that is dense and has the least upper bound property is called a linear continuum.
Statement of the property
Statement for real numbers
Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-empty set of real numbers.

A real number 
 
 
 
  is called an upper bound for 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
A real number 
 
 
 
  is the least upper bound (or supremum) for 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is an upper bound for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for every upper bound 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 .

The least-upper-bound property states that any non-empty set of real numbers that has an upper bound must have a least upper bound in real numbers.
Generalization to ordered sets
More generally, one may define upper bound and least upper bound for any subset of a partially ordered set

 
 , with “real number” replaced by “element of 
 
 
 
 ”. In this case, we say that 
 
 
 
  has the least-upper-bound property if every non-empty subset of 
 
 
 
  with an upper bound has a least upper bound.
For example, the set 
 
 
 
  of rational numbers does not have the least-upper-bound property under the usual order. For instance, the set



has an upper bound in 
 
 
 
 , but does not have a least upper bound in 
 
 
 
  (since the square root of two is irrational). The construction of the real numbers using Dedekind cuts takes advantage of this failure by defining the irrational numbers as the least upper bounds of certain subsets of the rationals.
Proof
Logical status
The least-upper-bound property is equivalent to other forms of the completeness axiom, such as the convergence of Cauchy sequences or the nested intervals theorem. The logical status of the property depends on the construction of the real numbers used: in the synthetic approach, the property is usually taken as an axiom for the real numbers (see least upper bound axiom); in a constructive approach, the property must be proved as a theorem, either directly from the construction or as a consequence of some other form of completeness.
Proof using Cauchy sequences
It is possible to prove the least-upper-bound property using the assumption that every Cauchy sequence of real numbers converges. Let 
 
 
 
  be a nonempty set of real numbers, and suppose that 
 
 
 
  has an upper bound . Since 
 
 
 
  is nonempty, there exists a real number  that is not an upper bound for 
 
 
 
 . Define sequences  and  recursively as follows:

Check whether  is an upper bound for 
 
 
 
 .
If it is, let  An}} and let  (An + Bn) ⁄ 2}}.
Otherwise there must be an element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  so that . Let  s}} and let  Bn}}.

Then  and An − Bn{{!}} → 0}} as 
 
 
 
 . It follows that both sequences are Cauchy and have the same limit 
 
 
 
 , which must be the least upper bound for 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
The least-upper-bound property of 
 
 
 
  can be used to prove many of the main foundational theorems in real analysis.
Intermediate value theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous function, and suppose that 
 
 



.


That is, 
 
 
 
  is the initial segment of 
 
 
 
  that takes negative values under 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is an upper bound for 
 
 
 
 , and the least upper bound must be a root of 
 
 
 
 .
Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem
The Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem for 
 
 
 
  states that every sequence  of real numbers in a closed interval 
 
 
 
  must have a convergent subsequence. This theorem can be proved by considering the set


.


Clearly 
 
 
 
  is an upper bound for 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  has a least upper bound 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  must be a limit point of the sequence , and it follows that  has a subsequence that converges to 
 
 
 
 .
Extreme value theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous function and let 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  has no upper bound. The extreme value theorem states that 
 
 
 
  is finite and 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . This can be proved by considering the set


.


If 
 
 
 
  is the least upper bound of this set, then it follows from continuity that 
 
 
 
 .
Heine–Borel theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be a closed interval in 
 
 
 
 , and let  be a collection of open sets that covers

 
 . Then the Heine–Borel theorem states that some finite subcollection of  covers 
 
 
 
  as well. This statement can be proved by considering the set


.


This set must have a least upper bound 
 
 
 
 . But 
 
 
 
  is itself an element of some open set , and it follows that 
 
 
 
  can be covered by finitely many  for some sufficiently small 
 
 
 
 . This proves that 
 
 
 
 , and it also yields a contradiction unless $c = b$.
See also

List of real analysis topics

Notes
References
























"
Category:Real analysis Category:Order theory Category:Articles containing proofs



Bartle and Sherbert (2011) define the "completeness property" and say that it is also called the "supremum property". (p. 39)↩
Willard says that an ordered space "X is Dedekind complete iff every subset of X having an upper bound has a least upper bound." (pp. 124-5, Problem 17E.)↩




