


Sakuma–Hattori equation




Sakuma–Hattori equation

The Sakuma–Hattori equation is a mathematical model for predicting the amount of thermal radiation, radiometric flux or radiometric power emitted from a perfect blackbody or received by a thermal radiation detector.
History
The Sakuma–Hattori was first proposed by Fumihiro Sakuma, Akira Ono and Susumu Hattori in 1987.1 In 1996 a study investigated the usefulness of various forms of the Sakuma–Hattori equation. This study showed the Planckian form to provide the best fit for most applications.2 This study was done for 10 different forms of the Sakuma–Hattori equation containing not more than three fitting variables. In 2008, BIPM CCT-WG5 recommended its use for radiation thermometry uncertainty budgets below 960 °C.3
General form
The Sakuma–Hattori equation gives the electromagnetic signal from thermal radiation based on an object's temperature. The signal can be electromagnetic flux or signal produced by a detector measuring this radiation. It has been suggested that below the silver point, a method using the Sakuma–Hattori equation be used.4 In its general form it looks like:5


 
  where:








Scalar coefficient







Second Radiation Constant (0.014387752 m⋅K6)







Temperature dependent effective wavelength in meters







Temperature in Kelvin





Planckian form
Derivation
The Planckian form is realized by the following substitution:



Making this substitution renders the following the Sakuma–Hattori equation in the Planckian form.




Sakuma–Hattori equation (Planckian form)







Inverse equation 7







First derivative 8







Discussion
The Planckian form is recommended for use in calculating uncertainty budgets for radiation thermometry9 and infrared thermometry.10 It is also recommended for use in calibration of radiation thermometers below the silver point.11
The Planckian form resembles Planck's Law.



However the Sakuma–Hattori equation becomes very useful when considering low-temperature, wide-band radiation thermometry. To use Planck's Law over a wide spectral band, an integral like the following would have to be considered:



This integral yields an incomplete polylogarithm function, which can make its use very cumbersome. The standard numerical treatment expands the incomplete integral in a geometric series of the exponential


 
  after substituting 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . Then





 
  provides an approximation if the sum is truncated at some order.
The Sakuma–Hattori equation shown above was found to provide the best curve-fit for interpolation of scales for radiation thermometers among a number of alternatives investigated.12
The inverse Sakuma–Hattori function can be used without iterative calculation. This is an addition advantage over integration of Planck's Law.
Other forms
The 1996 paper investigated 10 different forms. They are listed in the chart below in order of quality of curve-fit to actual radiometric data.13




Name

Equation

Bandwidth

Planckian





Sakuma–Hattori Planck III





narrow

yes



Sakuma–Hattori Planck IV





narrow

yes



Sakuma–Hattori – Wien's II





narrow

no



Sakuma–Hattori Planck II





broad and narrow

yes



Sakuma–Hattori – Wien's I





broad and narrow

no



Sakuma–Hattori Planck I





monochromatic

yes



New





narrow

no



Wien's





monochromatic

no



Effective Wavelength – Wien's





narrow

no



Exponent





broad

no



See also

Stefan–Boltzmann law
Planck's law
Rayleigh–Jeans law
Wien approximation
Wien's displacement law
Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation


Infrared thermometer
Pyrometer
Thin filament pyrometry
Thermography


Black body
Thermal radiation
Radiance
Emissivity


ASTM Subcommittee E20.02 on Radiation Thermometry

Notes
References


"
Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Equations






F Sakuma, S Hattori, "Establishing a practical temperature standard by using a narrow-band radiation thermometer with a silicon detector", in Temperature: Its Measurement and Control in Science and Industry, vol. 5, edited by J F Schooley, New York, AIP, 421–427 (1982).↩
J. Fischer, P. Saunders, M. Sadli, M. Battuello, C. W. Park, Y. Zundong, H. Yoon, W. Li, E. van der Ham, F. Sakuma, Y. Yamada, M. Ballico, G. Machin, N. Fox, J. Hollandt, M. Matveyev, P. Bloembergen and S. Ugur, "Uncertainty budgets for calibration of radiation thermometers below the silver point" (pdf), CCT-WG5 on Radiation Thermometry, BIPM, Sèvres, France (2008).↩
↩

ASTM Standard E2758-10 – Standard Guide for Selection and Use of Wideband, Low Temperature Infrared Thermometers, ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA, (2010).↩

MSL Technical Guide 22 – Calibration of Low Temperature Infrared Thermometers (pdf), Measurement Standards Laboratory of New Zealand (2008).↩

Sakuma F, Kobayashi M., "Interpolation equations of scales of radiation thermometers", Proceedings of TEMPMEKO 1996, pp. 305–310 (1996).↩





