


Dipole model of the Earth's magnetic field




Dipole model of the Earth's magnetic field

(Figure)
Plot showing field lines (which, in three dimensions would describe "shells") for L-values 1.5, 2, 3, 4 and 5 using a dipole model of the Earth's magnetic field

The dipole model of the Earth's magnetic field is a first order approximation of the rather complex true Earth's magnetic field. Due to effects of the interplanetary magnetic field, and the solar wind, the dipole model is particularly inaccurate at high L-shells (e.g., above L=3), but may be a good approximation for lower L-shells. For more precise work, or for any work at higher L-shells, a more accurate model that incorporates solar effects, such as the Tsyganenko magnetic field model, is recommended.
Equations
The following equations describe the dipole magnetic field.1
First, define 
 
 
 
  as the mean value of the magnetic field at the magnetic equator on the Earth's surface. Typically 
 
 
 
 .
Then, the radial and azimuthal fields can be described as





where 
 
 
 
  is the mean radius of the Earth (approximately 6370 km), 
 
 
 
  is the radial distance from the center of the Earth (using the same units as used for 
 
 
 
 ), and 
 
 
 
 
  is the azimuth measured from the north magnetic pole.
It is sometimes more convenient to express the magnetic field in terms of magnetic latitude and distance in earth radii. The magnetic latitude 
 
 
 
  is measured northwards from the equator (analogous to geographic latitude) and is related to 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . In this case, the radial and azimuthal components of the magnetic field (the latter still in the 
 
 
 
  direction, measured from the axis of the north pole) are given by





where 
 
 
 
  in this case has units of Earth radii (
 
 
 
 ).
Invariant latitude
Invariant latitude is a parameter that describes where a particular magnetic field line touches the surface of the Earth. It is given by2


or



where 
 
 
 
  is the invariant latitude and 
 
 
 
  is the L-shell describing the magnetic field line in question.
On the surface of the earth, the invariant latitude (
 
 
 
 ) is equal to the magnetic latitude (
 
 
 
 
 ).
See also

Earth's magnetic field
Dipole
L-shell

References
External links

Instant run of Tsyganenko magnetic field model from NASA CCMC
Nikolai Tsyganenko's website including Tsyganenko model source code

"
Category:Geomagnetism Category:Space physics









