


Binet equation




Binet equation

The Binet equation, derived by Jacques Philippe Marie Binet, provides the form of a central force given the shape of the orbital motion in plane polar coordinates. The equation can also be used to derive the shape of the orbit for a given force law, but this usually involves the solution to a second order nonlinear ordinary differential equation. A unique solution is impossible in the case of circular motion about the center of force.
Equation
The shape of an orbit is often conveniently described in terms of relative distance 
 
 
 
  as a function of angle 
 
 
 
  . For the Binet equation, the orbital shape is instead more concisely described by the reciprocal 
 
 
 
  as a function of 
 
 
 
 . Define the specific angular momentum as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the angular momentum and 
 
 
 
  is the mass. The Binet equation1 is



Derivation
Newton's Second Law for a purely central force is



The conservation of angular momentum requires that



Derivatives of 
 
 
 
  with respect to time may be rewritten as derivatives of 
 
 
 
  with respect to angle.



Combine all of the above and we have



Examples
Kepler problem
The traditional Kepler problem of calculating the orbit of an inverse square law may be read off from the Binet equation as the solution to the differential equation



If the angle 
 
 
 
 
  is measured from the periapsis, then the general solution for the orbit expressed in (reciprocal) polar coordinates is



The above polar equation describes conic sections, with 
 
 
 
  the semi-latus rectum and 
 
 
 
  the orbital eccentricity.
The relativistic equation derived for Schwarzschild coordinates is2



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the speed of light and 
 
 
 
  is the Schwarzschild radius. And for Reissner–Nordström metric we will obtain



where 
 
 
 
  is the electric charge and 
 
 
 
  is the vacuum permittivity.
Inverse Kepler problem
Consider the inverse Kepler problem. What kind of force law produces a noncircular elliptical orbit (or more generally a noncircular conic section) around a focus of the ellipse?
Differentiating twice the above polar equation for an ellipse gives



The force law is therefore



which is the anticipated inverse square law. Matching the orbital 
 
 
 
  to physical values like 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  reproduces Newton's law of universal gravitation or Coulomb's law, respectively.
The effective force for Schwarzschild coordinates is3


 
 .
where the second term is an inverse-quartic force corresponding to quadrupole effects such as the angular shift of periapsis (It can be also obtained via retarded potentials4).
In the parameterized post-Newtonian formalism we will obtain


 
 .
where 
 
 
 
  for the general relativity and 
 
 
 
  in the classical case.
Cotes spirals
An inverse cube force law has the form



The shapes of the orbits of an inverse cube law are known as Cotes spirals. The Binet equation shows that the orbits must be solutions to the equation



The differential equation has three kinds of solutions, in analogy to the different conic sections of the Kepler problem. When 
 
 
 
 , the solution is the epispiral, including the pathological case of a straight line when 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
 , the solution is the hyperbolic spiral. When 
 
 
 
  the solution is Poinsot's spiral.
Off-axis circular motion
Although the Binet equation fails to give a unique force law for circular motion about the center of force, the equation can provide a force law when the circle's center and the center of force do not coincide. Consider for example a circular orbit that passes directly through the center of force. A (reciprocal) polar equation for such a circular orbit of diameter 
 
 
 
 
  is



Differentiating 
 
 
 
  twice and making use of the Pythagorean identity gives



The force law is thus



Note that solving the general inverse problem, i.e. constructing the orbits of an attractive 
 
 
 
 
  force law, is a considerably more difficult problem because it is equivalent to solving



which is a second order nonlinear differential equation.
See also

Bohr–Sommerfeld quantization#Relativistic orbit
Classical central-force problem
General relativity
Two-body problem in general relativity
Bertrand theorem

References
External links

Yan Kun. [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007Prgeo..22..451Y General form of Binet’s equation] (2007)

"
Category:Classical mechanics



↩
http://www.wbabin.net/science/kren3.pdf↩
http://chaos.swarthmore.edu/courses/PDG07/AJP/AJP000352.pdf - The first-order orbital equation↩
http://arxiv.org/pdf/astro-ph/0306611.pdf - A flat space-time relativistic explanation for the perihelion advance of Mercury↩




