


Schur algebra




Schur algebra
In mathematics, '''Schur algebras''', named after [[Issai Schur]], are certain finite-dimensional [[associative algebra|algebras]] closely associated with [[Schur–Weyl duality]] between [[general linear group|general linear]] and [[symmetric group|symmetric]] groups. They are used to relate the [[representation theory|representation theories]] of those two [[group (mathematics)|groups]]. Their use was promoted by the influential monograph of [[J. A. Green]] first published in 1980.[[J. A. Green]], ''Polynomial Representations of G
 Ln'', Springer Lecture Notes 830, Springer-Verlag 1980. , ISBN 978-3-540-46944-5, ISBN 3-540-46944-3 The name "Schur algebra" is due to Green. In the modular case (over infinite fields of positive characteristic) Schur algebras were used by Gordon James and Karin Erdmann to show that the (still open) problems of computing decomposition numbers for general linear groups and symmetric groups are actually equivalent.1 Schur algebras were used by Friedlander and Suslin to prove finite generation of cohomology of finite group schemes.2
Construction
The Schur algebra 
 
 
 
  can be defined for any commutative ring

 
  and integers 
 
 
 
 . Consider the algebra

 
  of polynomials (with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 ) in 
 
 
 
  commuting variables 
 
 
 
 , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 
 
 
 
 . Denote by 
 
 
 
  the homogeneous polynomials of degree 
 
 
 
 . Elements of 
 
 
 
  are k-linear combinations of monomials formed by multiplying together 
 
 
 
  of the generators 
 
 
 
  (allowing repetition). Thus



Now, 
 
 
 
  has a natural coalgebra structure with comultiplication 
 
 
 
  and counit 
 
 
 
  the algebra homomorphisms given on generators by


 
     (Kronecker's delta).
Since comultiplication is an algebra homomorphism, 
 
 
 
  is a bialgebra. One easily checks that 
 
 
 
  is a subcoalgebra of the bialgebra 
 
 
 
 , for every r ≥ 0.
Definition. The Schur algebra (in degree 
 
 
 
 ) is the algebra 
 
 
 
 . That is, 
 
 
 
  is the linear dual of 
 
 
 
 .
It is a general fact that the linear dual of a coalgebra 
 
 
 
  is an algebra in a natural way, where the multiplication in the algebra is induced by dualizing the comultiplication in the coalgebra. To see this, let


 
  and, given linear functionals 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , define their product to be the linear functional given by


 
  The identity element for this multiplication of functionals is the counit in 
 
 
 
 .
Main properties

One of the most basic properties expresses 
 
 
 
  as a centralizer algebra. Let 
 
 
 
  be the space of rank 
 
 
 
  column vectors over 
 
 
 
 , and form the tensor power



 
  Then the symmetric group

 
  on 
 
 
 
  letters acts naturally on the tensor space by place permutation, and one has an isomorphism


 
  In other words, 
 
 
 
  may be viewed as the algebra of endomorphisms of tensor space commuting with the action of the symmetric group.



 
  is free over 
 
 
 
  of rank given by the binomial coefficient

 
 .


Various bases of 
 
 
 
  are known, many of which are indexed by pairs of semistandard Young tableaux of shape 
 
 
 
 , as 
 
 
 
  varies over the set of partitions of 
 
 
 
  into no more than 
 
 
 
  parts.


In case k is an infinite field, 
 
 
 
  may also be identified with the enveloping algebra (in the sense of H. Weyl) for the action of the general linear group

 
  acting on tensor space (via the diagonal action on tensors, induced from the natural action of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  given by matrix multiplication).


Schur algebras are "defined over the integers". This means that they satisfy the following change of scalars property:





for any commutative ring 
 
 
 
 .
 


Schur algebras provide natural examples of quasihereditary algebras3 (as defined by Cline, Parshall, and Scott), and thus have nice homological properties. In particular, Schur algebras have finite global dimension.

Generalizations

Generalized Schur algebras (associated to any reductive algebraic group) were introduced by Donkin in the 1980s.4 These are also quasihereditary.


Around the same time, Dipper and James5 introduced the quantized Schur algebras (or q-Schur algebras for short), which are a type of q-deformation of the classical Schur algebras described above, in which the symmetric group is replaced by the corresponding Hecke algebra and the general linear group by an appropriate quantum group.


There are also generalized q-Schur algebras, which are obtained by generalizing the work of Dipper and James in the same way that Donkin generalized the classical Schur algebras.6


There are further generalizations, such as the affine q-Schur algebras7 related to affine Kac–Moody Lie algebras and other generalizations, such as the cyclotomic q-Schur algebras8 related to Ariki-Koike algebras (which are q-deformations of certain complex reflection groups).

The study of these various classes of generalizations forms an active area of contemporary research.
References
Further reading

Stuart Martin, Schur Algebras and Representation Theory, Cambridge University Press 1993. , ISBN 978-0-521-10046-5
Andrew Mathas, Iwahori-Hecke algebras and Schur algebras of the symmetric group, University Lecture Series, vol.15, American Mathematical Society, 1999. , ISBN 0-8218-1926-7
Hermann Weyl, The Classical Groups. Their Invariants and Representations. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1939. , ISBN 0-691-05756-7

"
Category:Algebra Category:Representation theory



Karin Erdmann, Decomposition numbers for symmetric groups and composition factors of Weyl modules. Journal of Algebra 180 (1996), 316–320.  
Eric Friedlander and Andrei Suslin, Cohomology of finite group schemes over a field. Inventiones Mathematicae 127 (1997), 209--270.  
Edward Cline, Brian Parshall, and Leonard Scott, Finite-dimensional algebras and highest weight categories. Journal für die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik [Crelle's Journal] 391 (1988), 85–99. 
Stephen Donkin, On Schur algebras and related algebras, I. Journal of Algebra 104 (1986), 310–328.  
Richard Dipper and Gordon James, The q-Schur algebra. Proceedings of the London Math. Society (3) 59 (1989), 23–50.  
Stephen Doty, Presenting generalized q-Schur algebras. Representation Theory 7 (2003), 196--213 (electronic). 
R. M. Green, The affine q-Schur algebra. Journal of Algebra 215 (1999), 379--411. 
Richard Dipper, Gordon James, and Andrew Mathas, Cyclotomic q-Schur algebras. Math. Zeitschrift 229 (1998), 385--416.  




