


Holmgren's uniqueness theorem




Holmgren's uniqueness theorem

In the theory of partial differential equations, Holmgren's uniqueness theorem, or simply Holmgren's theorem, named after the Swedish mathematician Erik Albert Holmgren (1873–1943), is a uniqueness result for linear partial differential equations with real analytic coefficients.1
Simple form of Holmgren's theorem
We will use the multi-index notation: Let 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  standing for the nonnegative integers; denote 
 
 
 
  and


 
 .
Holmgren's theorem in its simpler form could be stated as follows:

Assume that P = ∑|α| ≤m Aα(x)∂ is an elliptic partial differential operator with real-analytic coefficients. If Pu is real-analytic in a connected open neighborhood Ω ⊂ Rn, then u is also real-analytic.
 

This statement, with "analytic" replaced by "smooth", is Hermann Weyl's classical lemma on elliptic regularity:2

If P is an elliptic differential operator and Pu is smooth in Ω, then u is also smooth in Ω.
 

This statement can be proved using Sobolev spaces.
Classical form
Let 
 
 
 
  be a connected open neighborhood in 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be an analytic hypersurface in 
 
 
 
 , such that there are two open subsets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , nonempty and connected, not intersecting 
 
 
 
  nor each other, such that 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a differential operator with real-analytic coefficients.
Assume that the hypersurface 
 
 
 
  is noncharacteristic with respect to 
 
 
 
  at every one of its points:


 
 .
Above,



the principal symbol of 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is a conormal bundle to 
 
 
 
 , defined as 
 
 
 
 .
The classical formulation of Holmgren's theorem is as follows:

Holmgren's theorem

Let 
 
 
 
  be a distribution in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  vanishes in 
 
 
 
 , then it vanishes in an open neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 .François Treves,
 

"Introduction to pseudodifferential and Fourier integral operators", vol. 1, Plenum Press, New York, 1980.
Relation to the Cauchy–Kowalevski theorem
Consider the problem



with the Cauchy data



Assume that 
 
 
 
  is real-analytic with respect to all its arguments in the neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 
  and that 
 
 
 
  are real-analytic in the neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 .

Theorem (Cauchy–Kowalevski)
 
There is a unique real-analytic solution 
 
 
 
  in the neighborhood of 
 
 
.
 

Note that the Cauchy–Kowalevski theorem does not exclude the existence of solutions which are not real-analytic.
On the other hand, in the case when 
 
 
 
 
  is polynomial of order one in 
 
 
 
 , so that



Holmgren's theorem states that the solution 
 
 
 
  is real-analytic and hence, by the Cauchy–Kowalevski theorem, is unique.
See also

Cauchy–Kowalevski theorem
FBI transform

References


"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Theorems in analysis



Eric Holmgren, "Über Systeme von linearen partiellen Differentialgleichungen", Öfversigt af Kongl. Vetenskaps-Academien Förhandlinger, 58 (1901), 91–103.





