


Six factor formula




Six factor formula

The six-factor formula is used in nuclear engineering to determine the multiplication of a nuclear chain reaction in a non-infinite medium. The formula is1









Symbol

Name

Meaning

Formula

Typical Thermal Reactor Value









Thermal Fission Factor (Eta)

The number of fission neutrons produced per absorption in the fuel.





1.65







The thermal utilization factor

Probability that a neutron that gets absorbed does so in the fuel material.





0.71







The resonance escape probability

Fraction of fission neutrons that manage to slow down from fission to thermal energies without being absorbed.





0.87







The fast fission factor (Epsilon)










1.02









The fast non-leakage probability

The probability that a fast neutron will not leak out of the system.





0.97









The thermal non-leakage probability

The probability that a thermal neutron will not leak out of the system.





0.99





The symbols are defined as:2



 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the average number of neutrons produced per fission in the medium (2.43 for Uranium-235).


 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the microscopic fission and absorption cross sections for fuel, respectively.


 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the macroscopic absorption cross sections in fuel and in total, respectively.


 
  is the number density of atoms of a specific nuclide.


 
  is the resonance integral for absorption of a specific nuclide.
 


 
 .



 
  (often referred to as worm-bar or squigma-bar) is the average lethargy gain per scattering event.
 
Lethargy is defined as decrease in neutron energy.



 
  (fast utilization) is the probability that a fast neutron is absorbed in fuel.


 
  is the probability that a fast neutron absorption in fuel causes fission.


 
  is the probability that a thermal neutron absorption in fuel causes fission.


 
  is the geometric buckling.


 
  is the diffusion length of thermal neutrons.
 


 
 .



 
  is the age to thermal.
 


 
 .


 
  is the evaluation of 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the energy of the neutron at birth.


Multiplication
The multiplication factor, k, is defined as (see Nuclear chain reaction):





If k is greater than 1, the chain reaction is supercritical, and the neutron population will grow exponentially.
 If k is less than 1, the chain reaction is subcritical, and the neutron population will exponentially decay.
 If k = 1, the chain reaction is critical and the neutron population will remain constant.
See also

Critical mass
Nuclear chain reaction
Nuclear reactor
Four factor formula

References
"
Category:Nuclear technology Category:Radioactivity









