


Kelvin–Stokes theorem




Kelvin–Stokes theorem


For a more conventional discussion see Stokes Theorem.

The Kelvin–Stokes theorem,12345 also known as the curl theorem,6 is a theorem in vector calculus on . Given a vector field, the theorem relates the integral of the curl of the vector field over some surface, to the line integral of the vector field around the boundary of the surface. The Kelvin–Stokes theorem is a special case of the “generalized Stokes' theorem.”78 In particular, a vector field on  can be considered as a 1-form in which case curl is the exterior derivative.
Theorem
Let  be a Piecewise smooth Jordan plane curve. The Jordan curve theorem implies that 
 
 
 
  divides  into two components, a compact one and another that is non-compact. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the compact part that is bounded by 
 
 
 
  and suppose  is smooth, with 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is the space curve defined by 
 
 
9 and 
 
 
 
  is a smooth vector field on , then:101112



Proof
The proof of the Theorem consists of 4 steps.1314 If you know the differential form, when we considering following identification of the vector field  (a1, a2, a3)}},






the proof here is similar to the proof using the pullback of . Under the identification  F}} the following equations are satisfied.



Here, 
 
 
 
  stands for Exterior derivative of Differential form,  stands for pull back by 
 
 
 
  and,  and  are same as  and  of the body text of this article respectively. We assume Green's theorem, so what is of concern is how to boil down the three-dimensional complicated problem (Kelvin–Stokes theorem) to a two-dimensional rudimentary problem (Green's theorem). In an ordinary, mathematicians use the differential form, especially "pull-back15 of differential form" is very powerful tool for this situation, however, learning differential form needs too much background knowledge. So, the proof below does not require background information on differential form, and may be helpful for understanding the notion of differential form.
First step of the proof (defining the pullback)
Define



so that 
 
 
 
  is the pull-back16 of 
 
 
 
 , and that 
 
 
 
  is -valued function, depends on two parameter 
 
 
 
 . In order to do so we define  and  as follows.



Where, 
 
 
 
  is the normal inner product of  and hereinafter, 
 
 
 
  stands for bilinear form according to matrix 
 
 
 
 .Given a 
 
 
 
  matrix 
 
 
 
  we define a bilinear form:



which also satisfies ( is the transpose of the matrix 
 
 
 
 ):






Second step of the proof (first equation)
According to the definition of line integral,



where, 
 
 
 
  stands for the Jacobian matrix of 
 
 
 
 . Hence,17



So, we obtain following equation



Third step of the proof (second equation)
First, calculate the partial derivatives, using Leibniz rule of inner product



So,18We prove following (★0).


 
 　(★0)
First, we note the linearity of the algebraic operator 
 
 
 
  and, we obtain its matrix representation. The method how to obtain the matrix representation of Linear map are described in for example 4. Let both of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be 3-dimensional Column vector represented as follows,



Then, according to the definition of Cross product, 
 
 
 
  are represented as follows.



Therefore, when we act the operator 
 
 
 
 　to each of the standard basis, we obtain followings, therefore, we obtain the matrix representation of 
 
 
 
  as shown in (★1).


 
 　


 
 　(★1)
Seconds, let 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  matrix and using the following substitution, (a1, ... , a3 are components of 
 
 
 
 ),


 
  (★2-1)


 
  (★2-2)


 
  (★2-3)
Then we obtain following (★3) from the (★1).


 
 　(★3)
Third we substitute the 
 
 
 
  to above mentioned A, under the substitution of (★2-1), (★2-2), and (★2-3), we obtain the following (★4)


 
 　(★4)
The (★0) is obvious from (★3) and (★4).



On the other hand, according to the definition of surface integral,



So, we obtain



Fourth step of the proof (reduction to Green's theorem)
Combining the second and third steps, and then applying Green's theorem completes the proof.
Application for conservative force and scalar potential
In this section, we will discuss the lamellar vector field based on Kelvin–Stokes theorem.
First, we define the notarization map as follows.



 
  is a strictly increasing function. For all piece-wise smooth paths  and all smooth vector fields 
 
 
 
 , the domain of which includes 
 
 
 
 , one has:



So, we can assume the domain of the curve to be 
 
 
 
 .
The Lamellar vector field



Definition 2-1 (Lamellar vector field). A smooth vector field, 
 
 
 
  on an open  is called a Lamellar vector field if 
 
 
 
 .



In mechanics a lamellar vector field is called a conservative force; in fluid dynamics, it is called a Vortex-free vector field. So, lamellar vector field, conservative force, and vortex-free vector field are the same notion.
Helmholtz's theorems
In this section, we will introduce a theorem that is derived from the Kelvin–Stokes theorem and characterizes vortex-free vector fields. In fluid dynamics it is called Helmholtz's theorems.19
That theorem is also important in the area of Homotopy theorem.20



Theorem 2-1 (Helmholtz's Theorem in Fluid Dynamics).21 and see p142 of Fujimoto22
 Let  be an open subset with a Lamellar vector field 
 
 
 
 , and piecewise smooth loops . If there is a function 
 
 
 
  such that

[TLH0]

 
  is piecewise smooth,
[TLH1]  c0(t)}} for all 
 
 
 
 ,
[TLH2]  c1(t)}} for all 
 
 
 
 ,
[TLH3]

 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .

Then,









Some textbooks such as Lawrence23 call the relationship between  and  stated in Theorem 2-1 as “homotope” and the function 
 
 
 
  as “homotopy between  and ”. However, “homotope” or “homotopy” in above-mentioned sense are different (stronger than) typical definitions of “homotope” or “homotopy”.Typical definition of homotopy and homotope are as follows.



Definition (Homotopy and Homotope). Suppose Z and W are topological spaces, with continuous maps f0, f1: Z → W.
(1) The continuous map 
 
 
 
  is said to be a "Homotopy between f0 and f1" if

[H1] H(t, 0) = f0(t) for all t ∈ Z,
[H2] H(t, 1) = f1(t) for all t ∈ Z.

(2) If there is a homotopy between f0 and f1", f0 and f1" are said to be homotope.
(3) Suppose f0 and f1 are homotope and H is a homotopy between them. f0 and f1 are said to be piecewise homotope, if f0, f1, and H are piecewise smooth. H is then said to be the piecewise homotopy between f0 and f1.



 So from now on we refer to homotopy (homotope) in the sense of Theorem 2-1 as tube-like-homotopy (homotope).In some textbooks such as  use the term of homotopy and homotope in Theorem 2-1 sense. homotopy and homotope in Theorem 2-1 sense Indeed, it is convenience to adopt such sense to discuss conservative force. However, homotopy in Theorem 2-1 sense and homotope in Theorem 2-1 sense are different from and stronger than homotopy in typical sense and homotope in typical sense. So there are no appropriate terminology which can discriminate between homotopy in typical sense and sense of Theorem 2-1. In this article, to avoid ambiguity and to discriminate between them, we will define two “just-in-time term”, tube-like homotopy and tube-like homotope as follows.



Definition (tube-like homotopy and tube-homotope). Suppose  satisfy the following:

[A] M is differentiable manifold,
[B] The domain of c0: [0, 1] → M and c1 : [0, 1] → M are the same,
[C] Both , and  are continuous curves.

Then,
(1) Tube-Like-Homotopy: A homotopy 
 
 
 
  is "Tube-Like", if

[TLH0] H is continues
[TLH1] H(t, 0) = c0(t)
[TLH2] H(t, 1) = c1(t)
[TLH3] H(0, s) = H(1, s) for all s ∈ [0, 1]

(2) Tube homotope: c0, and c1 are "Tube Homotope" if and only if "there are H such that there is a Tube-like-Homotopy between c0 and c1.
(3) Tube like and piecewise smooth homotopy: The homotopy H of (1) is Tube like and piecewise smooth homotopy when that H is piecewise smooth. And the relation of (1) is “Piecewise smooth Tube Homotope” when that H is piecewise smooth (so, it is “Piecewise smooth Tube Homotope”).




Proof of the theorem
(Figure)
 The definitions of 

Hereinafter, the ⊕ stands for joining pathsIf the two curves , satisfy  β(a2)}} then, we can define new curve 
 
 
 
  so that, for all smooth vector field 
 
 
 
  (if domain of which includes image of 
 
 
 
 )



which is also used when we define the fundamental group. To do so, accurate definition of the “joint of paths” is as follows.



Definition (Joint of paths). Let 
 
 
 
  be a topological space and , be two paths on 
 
 
 
 . If α and β satisfy  β(a2)}} then we can join them at this common point to produce new curve α ⊕ β : [a1, b1+(b2-a2)] → M defined by:






 the 
 
 
 
  stands for backwards of curveGiven curve on 
 
 
 
 , , we can define new curve 
 
 
 
 α so that, for all smooth vector field 
 
 
 
  (if domain of which includes image of α)



which is also used when we define fundamental group. To do so, accurate definition of the “backwards of curve” is as follows.



Definition (Backward of curve). Let 
 
 
 
  be a topological space and , be path on 
 
 
 
 . We can define backward thereof, 
 
 
α : [a1, b1] → M by:






And, given two curves on 
 
 
 
 , , which satisfy α(b1 = β(b2) (that means α(b1) = 
 
 
β(a2), we can define 
 
 
 
  as following manner.



Let 
 
 
 
 . By our assumption,  and  are piecewise smooth homotopic, there are the piecewise smooth homogony 
 
 




And, let S be the image of 
 
 
 
  under H. Then,



will be obvious according to the Theorem 1 and, 
 
 
 
  is Lamellar vector field that, right side of that equation is zero, so,



Here,


24
and, H is Tubeler-Homotopy that,



that, line integral along  and line integral along  are compensated each other25 so,



On the other hand,






that, subjected equation is proved.
Application for conservative force
Helmholtz's theorem, gives an explanation as to why the work done by a conservative force in changing an object's position is path independent. First, we introduce the Lemma 2-2, which is a corollary of and a special case of Helmholtz's theorem.



Lemma 2-2.2627 Let  be an open subset, with a Lamellar vector field 
 
 
 
  and a piecewise smooth loop . Fix a point 
 
 
 
 , if there is a homotopy (tube-like-homotopy) 
 
 
 
  such that

[SC0] H is piecewise smooth,
[SC1] H(t, 0) = c0(t) for all t ∈ [0, 1],
[SC2] H(t, 1) = p for all t ∈ [0, 1],
[SC3] H(0, s) = H(1, s) = p for all s ∈ [0, 1].

Then,









Lemma 2-2, obviously follows from Theorem 2-1. In Lemma 2-2, the existence of 
 
 
 
  satisfying [SC0] to [SC3] is crucial. It is a well-known fact that, if U is simply connected, such H exists. The definition of Simply connected space follows:



Definition 2-2 (Simply Connected Space).2829 Let  be non-empty, connected and path-connected. 
 
 
 
  is called simply connected if and only if for any continuous loop, 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  such that

[SC0'] H is continuous,
[SC1] H(t, 0) = c(t) for all t ∈ [0, 1],
[SC2] H(t, 1) = p for all t ∈ [0, 1],
[SC3] H(0, s) = H(1, s) = p for all s ∈ [0, 1].





You will find that, the [SC1] to [SC3] of both Lemma 2-2 and Definition 2-2 is same.
So, someone may think that, "for a conservative force, the work done in changing an object's position is path independent" is elucidated. However there are very large gaps between following two:

There are continuous

 
  such that it satisfies [SC1] to [SC3]
There are piecewise smooth

 
  such that it satisfies [SC1] to [SC3]

To fill that gap, the deep knowledge of Homotopy Theorem is required. For example the following resources may be helpful for you.

Lee teaches Whitney approximation theorem (30 page 136) and "How to use that theorem to this isuue" (31page 421).
More general statements appear in32 (see Theorems 7 and 8).

Considering above-mentioned fact and Lemma 2-2, we will obtain following theorem.



Theorem 2-2.3334 Let  be a simply connected and open with a Lamellar vector field 
 
 
 
 . For all piecewise smooth loops, 
 
 
 
  we have:









Kelvin–Stokes theorem on singular 2-cube and cube subdivisionable sphere
Singular 2-cube and boundary



Definition 3-1 (Singular 2-cube)35 Set  [a1, b1] × [a2, b2] ⊆ R2}} and let 
 
 
 
  be a non-empty open subset of . The image of 
 
 
 
  under a piecewise smooth map 
 
 
 
  is called a singular 2-cube. Moreover we define the notarization map of 
 
 




where 
 
 
 
 . Then  has the following property:









Lemma 3-1 (Notarization map of singular two cube). Let 
 
 
 
  be a singular 2-cube with map 
 
 
 
  and  open and non-empty. Suppose the image of 
 
 
 
  under a piecewise smooth map 
 
 
 
  be a singular 2-cube. If 
 
 
 
  is a smooth vector field on 
 
 
 
  we have:






We omit the proof of the lemma. Using the lemma from now we consider all singular 2-cubes to be notarized. In other words we assume that the domain of all singular 2-cubes is 
 
 
 
 .
In order to facilitate the discussion of boundary, we define


 are the one-dimensional edges of the image of 
 
 
 
 .Hereinafter, the ⊕ stands for joining paths36 and, the 
 
 
 
  stands for backwards of curve.37



Cube subdivision



Definition 3-2 (Cube subdivisionable sphere). (see Iwahori38 p. 399) A non-empty subset  is said to be a "Cube subdivisionable sphere" when there are at least one Indexed family of singular 2-cube



such that



 
  is a finite set.
[CSS0] For all 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 is an Injective function on 
 
 
 
  and,
for almost all ,











[CSS1] 
 
 
 
  is equal to the union of  as 
 
 
 
  varies in 
 
 
 
 .
[CSS2]  implies 
 
 

[CSS3] If  0}} or 
 
 
 
 ,  1}} or 
 
 
 
  and,








then
 
 




Then



is called a Cube subdivision of the 
 
 
 
 . 






Definitions 3-3 (Boundary of a Cube Subdivision Sphere). (see Iwahori39 p. 399) Let  be a cube subdivisionable sphere with cube subdivision:



(1) The 
 
 
 
  are said to be an edge of the cube subdivision if



implies 
 
 
 
 . That means, 
 
 
 
  is said to be an edge of 
 
 
 
  if and only if there are unique 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that, 
 
 
 
 .
(2) The boundary of the cube subdivision is a collection of edges in the above sense. 
 
 
 
  means the boundary of 
 
 

(3) The notation for an edge 
 
 
 
  is as follows:






The definition of the boundary of the Definitions 3-3 is apparently depends on the cube subdivision. However, considering the following fact, the boundary is not depends on the cube subdivision.



Lemma 3-4. (see Iwahori40 p. 399) Let  be a cube subdivisionable sphere with cube subdivisions:



Then



therefore the definition of boundary is not dependent on the choice of cube subdivision. 



Therefore the following Definition is well-defined:



Definitions 3-5 (Boundary of Surface). (see Iwahori41 p399) Let  be a cube subdivisionable sphere and, 
 
 
 
 , then
(1)



(2) If


 
  then


 
  and then such 
 
 
 
  are said to be an edge of 
 
 
 
 . 



Notes
References
"
Category:Electromagnetism Category:Mechanics Category:Vectors Category:Vector calculus



↩
This proof is based on the Lecture Notes given by Prof. Robert Scheichl (University of Bath, U.K) 1, please refer the 2↩
This proof is also same to the proof shown in↩
Nagayoshi Iwahori, et.al:"Bi-Bun-Seki-Bun-Gaku" Sho-Ka-Bou(jp) 1983/12 ISBN978-4-7853-1039-4 3(Written in Japanese)↩
Atsuo Fujimoto;"Vector-Kai-Seki Gendai su-gaku rekucha zu. C(1)" Bai-Fu-Kan(jp)(1979/01) ISBN 978-4563004415 [] (Written in Japanese)↩
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/CurlTheorem.html↩
Lawrence Conlon; "Differentiable Manifolds (Modern Birkhauser Classics)" Birkhaeuser Boston (2008/1/11) []↩
John M. Lee; "Introduction to Smooth Manifolds (Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 218) "Springer (2002/9/23) [] []↩


 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both loops, however, 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily a Jordan curve↩









There are a number of theorems with the same name, however they are not necessarily the same.↩












L. S. Pontryagin, Smooth manifolds and their applications in homotopy theory, American Mathematical Society Translations, Ser. 2, Vol. 11, American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1959, pp. 1–114. MR 0115178 (22 #5980 5)6↩


↩










