


Generalized context-free grammar




Generalized context-free grammar

Generalized Context-free Grammar (GCFG) is a grammar formalism that expands on context-free grammars by adding potentially non-context free composition functions to rewrite rules.1 Head grammar (and its weak equivalents) is an instance of such a GCFG which is known to be especially adept at handling a wide variety of non-CF properties of natural language.
Description
A GCFG consists of two components: a set of composition functions that combine string tuples, and a set of rewrite rules. The composition functions all have the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is either a single string tuple, or some use of a (potentially different) composition function which reduces to a string tuple. Rewrite rules look like 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ... are string tuples or non-terminal symbols.
The rewrite semantics of GCFGs is fairly straight forward. An occurrence of a non-terminal symbol is rewritten using rewrite rules as in a context-free grammar, eventually yielding just compositions (composition functions applied to string tuples or other compositions). The composition functions are then applied, successively reducing the tuples to a single tuple.
Example
A simple translation of a context-free grammar into a GCFG can be performed in the following fashion. Given the grammar in (1), which generates the palindrome language 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the string reverse of 
 
 
 
 , we can define the composition function conc as in (2a) and the rewrite rules as in (2b).













The CF production of abbbba is
S
aSa
abSba
abbSbba
abbbba
and the corresponding GCFG production is










Linear Context-free Rewriting Systems (LCFRSs)
Weir (1988)2 describes two properties of composition functions, linearity and regularity. A function defined as 
 
 
 
  is linear if and only if each variable appears at most once on either side of the =, making 
 
 
 
  linear but not 
 
 
 
 . A function defined as 
 
 
 
  is regular if the left hand side and right hand side have exactly the same variables, making 
 
 
 
  regular but not 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
A grammar in which all composition functions are both linear and regular is called a Linear Context-free Rewriting System (LCFRS). LCFRS is a proper subclass of the GCFGs, i.e. it has strictly less computational power than the GCFGs as a whole.
On the other hand, LCFRSs are strictly more expressive than linear-indexed grammars and their weakly equivalent variant tree adjoining grammars (TAGs).3 Head grammar is another example of an LCFRS that is strictly less powerful than the class of LCFRSs as a whole.
LCFRS are weakly equivalent to (set-local) multicomponent TAGs (MCTAGs) and also with multiple context-free grammar (MCFGs 1).4 and minimalist grammars (MGs). The languages generated by LCFRS (and their weakly equivalents) can be parsed in polynomial time.5
See also

range concatenation grammar

References


"
Category:Formal languages Category:Grammar frameworks












