


Self-Similarity of Network Data Analysis




Self-Similarity of Network Data Analysis

In computer networks, self-similarity is a feature of network data transfer dynamics. When modeling network data dynamics the traditional time series models, such as an autoregressive moving average model (ARMA(p, q)), are not appropriate. This is because these models only provide a finite number of parameters in the model and thus interaction in a finite time window, but the network data usually have a long-range dependent temporal structure. A self-similar process is one way of modeling network data dynamics with such a long range correlation. This article defines and describes network data transfer dynamics in the context of a self-similar process. Properties of the process are shown and methods are given for graphing and estimating parameters modeling the self-similarity of network data.
Definition
Suppose 
 
 
 
  be a weakly stationary (2nd-order stationary) process with mean 
 
 
 
 , variance 
 
 
 
 , and autocorrelation function 
 
 
 
 . Assume that the autocorrelation function 
 
 
 
  has the form 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a slowly varying function at infinity, that is 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . For example, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are slowly varying functions.
 Let 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , denote an aggregated point series over non-overlapping blocks of size 
 
 
 
 , for each 
 
 
 
  is a positive integer.
Exactly self-similar process



 
  is called an exactly self-similar process if there exists a self-similar parameter 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  has the same distribution as 
 
 
 
 . An example of exactly self-similar process with 
 
 
 
  is Fractional Gaussian Noise (FGN) with 

Definition:Fractional Gaussian Noise (FGN) {{-}} 
 
 
 
  is called the Fractional Gaussian Noise, where 
 
 
 
  is a Fractional Brownian motion.1
exactly second order self-similar process



 
  is called an exactly second order self-similar process if there exists a self-similar parameter 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  has the same variance and autocorrelation as 
 
 
 
 .

asymptotic second order self-similar process



 
  is called an asymptotic second order self-similar process with self-similar parameter 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 


Some relative situations of Self-Similar Processes
Long-Range-Dependence(LRD)
Suppose 
 
 
 
  be a weakly stationary (2nd-order stationary) process with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
 
 . The Autocorrelation Function (ACF) of lag 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 {{-}} Definition:{{-}} A weakly stationary process is said to be "Long-Range-Dependence" if 
 
 

A process which satisfies 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  is said to have long-range dependence. The spectral density function of long-range dependence follows a power law near the origin. Equivalently to 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  has long-range dependence if the spectral density function of autocorrelation function, 
 
 
 
 , has the form of 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is slowly varying at 0.
also see
Slowly decaying variances



 When an autocorrelation function of a self-similar process satisfies 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , that means it also satisfies 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a finite positive constant independent of m, and 0<βX is Fractional Gaussian Noise. Consider the series 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
 .
 The sample variance of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 {{-}} Definition:R/S statistic



 {{-}} If 
 
 
 
  is FGN, then 
 
 

 Consider fitting a regression model : 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 

 In particular for a time series of length 
 
 
 
  divide the time series data into 
 
 
 
  groups each of size 
 
 
 
 , compute 
 
 
 
  for each group.
 Thus for each n we have 
 
 
 
  pairs of data (
 
 
 
 ).There are 
 
 
 
  points for each 
 
 
 
 , so we can fit a regression model to estimate 
 
 
 
  more accurately. If the solpe of the regression line is between 0.5~1, it is a self-similar process.
Variance-time plot
Variance of the sample mean is given by 
 
 
 
 .
 For estimating H, calculate sample means

 
  for 
 
 
 
  sub-series of length 
 
 
 
  .
 Overall mean can be given by 
 
 
 
 , sample variance 
 
 
 
 .
 The variance-time plots are obtained by plotting 
 
 
 
  against 
 
 
 
  and we can fit a simple least square line through the resulting points in the plane ignoring the small values of k.
For large values of 
 
 
 
 , the points in the plot are expected to be scattered around a straight line with a negative slope 
 
 
 
 .For short-range dependence or independence among the observations, the slope of the straight line is equal to -1.
 Self-similarity can be inferred from the values of the estimated slope which is asymptotically between –1 and 0, and an estimate for the degree of self-similarity is given by 
 
 

Periodogram-based analysis
Whittle's approximate maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) is applied to solve the Hurst's parameter via the spectral density of 
 
 
 
 . It is not only a tool for visualizing the Hurst's parameter, but also a method to do some statistical inference about the parameters via the asymptotic properties of the MLE. In particular, 
 
 
 
  follows a Gaussian process. Let the spectral density of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  construct a short-range time series autoregression (AR) model, that is 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 .
Thus, the Whittle's estimator 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  minimizes the function 
 
 
 
  , where I(w) denotes the periodogram of X as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . These integrations can be assessed by Riemann sum.
 {{-}} Then 
 
 
 
  asymptotically follows a normal distribution if 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as a form of an infinite moving average model.{{-}} {{-}} To estimate 
 
 
 
 , first, one has to calculate this periodogram. Since 
 
 
 
  is an estimator of the spectral density, a series with long-range dependence should have a periodogram, which is proportional to 
 
 
 
  close to the origin. The periodogram plot is obtained by ploting 
 
 
 
  against 
 
 
 
 .
 Then fitting a regression model of the 
 
 
 
  on the 
 
 
 
  should give a slope of 
 
 
 
 . The slope of the fitted straight line is also the estimation of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the estimation 
 
 
 
  is obtained.
Note:
 There are two common problems when we apply the periodogram method. First, if the data does not follow a Gaussian distribution, transformation of the data can solve this kind of problems. Second, the sample spectrum which deviates from the assumed spectral density is another one. An aggregation method is suggested to solve this problem. If 
 
 
 
  is a Gaussian process and the spectral density function of 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , the function, 
 
 
 
 , converges in distribution to FGN as 
 
 
 
 .
References

P. Whittle, "Estimation and information in stationary time series", Art. Mat. 2, 423-434, 1953.
K. PARK,W. WILLINGER, Self-Similar Network Traffic and Performance Evaluation, WILEY,2000.
W. E. Leland, W. Willinger, M. S. Taqqu, D. V. Wilson, "On the self-similar nature of Ethernet traffic",ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 25,202-213,1995.
W. Willinger, M. S. Taqqu, W. E. Leland, D. V. Wilson, "Self-Similarity in High-Speed Packet Traffic: Analysis and Modeling of Ethernet Traffic Measurements",Statistical Science 10,67-85,1995.

"
Category:Computer network analysis



W. E. Leland, W. Willinger, M. S. Taqqu, D. V. Wilson, "On the self-similar nature of Ethernet traffic",ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 25,202-213,1995.↩




