


Direct method in the calculus of variations




Direct method in the calculus of variations

In the calculus of variations, a topic in mathematics, the direct method is a general method for constructing a proof of the existence of a minimizer for a given functional,1 introduced by Zaremba and David Hilbert around 1900. The method relies on methods of functional analysis and topology. As well as being used to prove the existence of a solution, direct methods may be used to compute the solution to desired accuracy.2
The method
The calculus of variations deals with functionals 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is some function space and 
 
 
 
 . The main interest of the subject is to find minimizers for such functionals, that is, functions 
 
 
 
  such that
 
 

The standard tool for obtaining necessary conditions for a function to be a minimizer is the Euler–Lagrange equation. But seeking a minimizer amongst functions satisfying these may lead to false conclusions if the existence of a minimizer is not established beforehand.
The functional 
 
 
 
  must be bounded from below to have a minimizer. This means



This condition is not enough to know that a minimizer exists, but it shows the existence of a minimizing sequence, that is, a sequence 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

The direct method may broken into the following steps

Take a minimizing sequence 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
Show that 
 
 
 
  admits some subsequence

 
 , that converges to a 
 
 
 
  with respect to a topology 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 .
Show that 
 
 
 
  is sequentially lower semi-continuous with respect to the topology 
 
 
 
 .

To see that this shows the existence of a minimizer, consider the following characterization of sequentially lower-semicontinuous functions.

The function 
 
 
 
  is sequentially lower-semicontinuous if
 
 

 
  for any convergent sequence 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .


The conclusions follows from


 
 , in other words


 
 .
Details
Banach spaces
The direct method may often be applied with success when the space 
 
 
 
  is a subset of a separable reflexive Banach space

 
 . In this case the sequential Banach–Alaoglu theorem implies that any bounded sequence 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  has a subsequence that converges to some 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  with respect to the weak topology. If 
 
 
 
  is sequentially closed in 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 , the direct method may be applied to a functional 
 
 
 
  by showing



 
  is bounded from below,
any minimizing sequence for 
 
 
 
  is bounded, and


 
  is weakly sequentially lower semi-continuous, i.e., for any weakly convergent sequence 
 
 
 
  it holds that 
 
 
 
 .

The second part is usually accomplished by showing that 
 
 
 
  admits some growth condition. An example is


 
  for some 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . A functional with this property is sometimes called coercive. Showing sequential lower semi-continuity is usually the most difficult part when applying the direct method. See below for some theorems for a general class of functionals.
Sobolev spaces
The typical functional in the calculus of variations is an integral of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a real-valued function on 
 
 
 
 . The argument of 
 
 
 
  is a differentiable function 
 
 
 
 , and its Jacobian

 
  is identified with a 
 
 
 
 -vector.
When deriving the Euler–Lagrange equation, the common approach is to assume 
 
 
 
  has a 
 
 
 
  boundary and let the domain of definition for 
 
 
 
  be 
 
 
 
 . This space is a Banach space when endowed with the supremum norm, but it is not reflexive. When applying the direct method, the functional is usually defined on a Sobolev space

 
  with 
 
 
 
 , which is a reflexive Banach space. The derivatives of 
 
 
 
  in the formula for 
 
 
 
  must then be taken as weak derivatives. The next section presents two theorems regarding weak sequential lower semi-continuity of functionals of the above type.
Sequential lower semi-continuity of integrals
As many functionals in the calculus of variations are of the form


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is open, theorems characterizing functions 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is weakly sequentially lower-semicontinuous in 
 
 
 
  is of great importance.
In general we have the following3

Assume that 
 
 
 
  is a function such that
 
The function 
 
 
 
  is continuous for almost every

 
 ,
the function 
 
 
 
  is measurable for every 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  for a fixed 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , a fixed 
 
 
 
 , for a.e. 
 
 
 
  and every 
 
 
 
  (here 
 
 
 
  means the inner product of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 ).


The following holds. If the function 
 
 
 
  is convex for a.e. 
 
 
 
  and every 
 
 
 
 ,
 
then 
 
 
 
  is sequentially weakly lower semi-continuous.
 

When 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  the following converse-like theorem holds4

Assume that 
 
 
 
  is continuous and satisfies
 
 



for every 
 
 
 
 , and a fixed function 
 
 
 
  increasing in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and locally integrable in 
 
 
 
 . It then holds, if 
 
 
 
  is sequentially weakly lower semi-continuous, then for any given 
 
 
 
  the function 
 
 
 
  is convex.
 

In conclusion, when 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , the functional 
 
 
 
 , assuming reasonable growth and boundedness on 
 
 
 
 , is weakly sequentially lower semi-continuous if, and only if, the function 
 
 
 
  is convex. If both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are greater than 1, it is possible to weaken the necessity of convexity to generalizations of convexity, namely polyconvexity and quasiconvexity.5
Notes
References and further reading



Jindřich Nečas: Direct Methods in the Theory of Elliptic Equations. (Transl. from French original 1967 by A.Kufner and G.Tronel), Springer, 2012, ISBN 978-3-642-10455-8.


"
Category:Calculus of variations



Dacorogna, pp. 1–43.

Dacorogna, pp. 74–79.
Dacorogna, pp. 66–74.
Dacorogna, pp. 87–185.




