


Cyclic polytope




Cyclic polytope

In mathematics, a cyclic polytope, denoted C(n,d), is a convex polytope formed as a convex hull of n distinct points on a rational normal curve in Rd, where n is greater than d. These polytopes were studied by Constantin Carathéodory, David Gale, Theodore Motzkin, Victor Klee, and others. They play an important role in polyhedral combinatorics: according to the upper bound theorem, proved by Peter McMullen and Richard Stanley, the boundary Δ(n,d) of the cyclic polytope C(n,d) maximizes the number fi of i-dimensional faces among all simplicial spheres of dimension d − 1 with n vertices.
Definition
The moment curve in 
 
 
 
  is defined by


 
 .1
The 
 
 
 
 -dimensional cyclic polytope with 
 
 
 
  vertices is the convex hull


 
  of 
 
 
 
  distinct points 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  on the moment curve.2
The combinatorial structure of this polytope is independent of the points chosen, and the resulting polytope has dimension d and n vertices.3 Its boundary is a (d − 1)-dimensional simplicial polytope denoted Δ(n,d).
Gale evenness condition
The Gale evenness condition4 provides a necessary and sufficient condition to determine a facet on a cyclic polytope.
Let 
 
 
 
 . Then, a 
 
 
 
 -subset 
 
 
 
  forms a facet of 
 
 
iff any two elements in 
 
 
 
  are separated by an even number of elements from 
 
 
 
  in the sequence 
 
 
 
 .
Neighborliness
Cyclic polytopes are examples of neighborly polytopes, in that every set of at most d/2 vertices forms a face. They were the first neighborly polytopes known, and Theodore Motzkin conjectured that all neighborly polytopes are combinatorially equivalent to cyclic polytopes, but this is now known to be false.56
Number of faces
The number of i-dimensional faces of the cyclic polytope Δ(n,d) is given by the formula



and 
 
 
 
  completely determine 
 
 
 
  via the Dehn–Sommerville equations.
Upper bound theorem
The upper bound theorem states that cyclic polytopes have the maximum possible number of faces for a given dimension and number of vertices: if Δ is a simplicial sphere of dimension d − 1 with n vertices, then



The upper bound conjecture for simplicial polytopes was proposed by Theodore Motzkin in 1957 and proved by Peter McMullen in 1970. Victor Klee suggested that the same statement should hold for all simplicial spheres and this was indeed established in 1975 by Richard P. Stanley7 using the notion of a Stanley–Reisner ring and homological methods.
See also

Combinatorial commutative algebra

References
"
Category:Polyhedral combinatorics







.
.





