


Leopoldt's conjecture




Leopoldt's conjecture

In algebraic number theory, Leopoldt's conjecture, introduced by , states that the p-adic regulator of a number field does not vanish. The p-adic regulator is an analogue of the usual regulator defined using p-adic logarithms instead of the usual logarithms, introduced by .
Leopoldt proposed a definition of a p-adic regulator Rp attached to K and a prime number p. The definition of Rp uses an appropriate determinant with entries the p-adic logarithm of a generating set of units of K (up to torsion), in the manner of the usual regulator. The conjecture, which for general K is still open , then comes out as the statement that Rp is not zero.
Formulation
Let K be a number field and for each prime P of K above some fixed rational prime p, let UP denote the local units at P and let U1,P denote the subgroup of principal units in UP. Set



Then let E1 denote the set of global units ε that map to U1 via the diagonal embedding of the global units in E.
Since 
 
 
 
  is a finite-index subgroup of the global units, it is an abelian group of rank 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the number of real embeddings of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the number of pairs of complex embeddings. Leopoldt's conjecture states that the 
 
 
 
 -module rank of the closure of 
 
 
 
  embedded diagonally in 
 
 
 
  is also 
 
 

Leopoldt's conjecture is known in the special case where 
 
 
 
  is an abelian extension of 
 
 
 
  or an abelian extension of an imaginary quadratic number field:  reduced the abelian case to a p-adic version of Baker's theorem, which was proved shortly afterwards by .  has announced a proof of Leopoldt's conjecture for all CM-extensions of 
 
 
 
 .
expressed the residue of the p-adic Dedekind zeta function of a totally real field at s = 1 in terms of the p-adic regulator. As a consequence, Leopoldt's conjecture for those fields is equivalent to their p-adic Dedekind zeta functions having a simple pole at s = 1.
References







.




.

"
Category:Algebraic number theory Category:Conjectures


