


Wirtinger's representation and projection theorem




Wirtinger's representation and projection theorem

In mathematics, Wirtinger's representation and projection theorem is a theorem proved by Wilhelm Wirtinger in 1932 in connection with some problems of approximation theory. This theorem gives the representation formula for the holomorphic subspace

 
  of the simple, unweighted holomorphic Hilbert space

 
  of functions square-integrable over the surface of the unit disc 
 
 
 
  of the complex plane, along with a form of the orthogonal projection from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Wirtinger's paper 1 contains the following theorem presented also in Joseph L. Walsh's well-known monograph 2 (p. 150) with a different proof. If

is of the class

 
  on 
 
 
 
 , ''i.e.



where 
 
 
 
  is the area element, then the unique function 
 
 
 
  of the holomorphic subclass 
 
 
 
 , such that



''is least, is given by



The last formula gives a form for the orthogonal projection from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Besides, replacement of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  makes it Wirtinger's representation for all 
 
 
 
 . This is an analog of the well-known Cauchy integral formula with the square of the Cauchy kernel. Later, after the 1950s, a degree of the Cauchy kernel was called reproducing kernel, and the notation 
 
 
 
  became common for the class 
 
 
 
 .
In 1948 Mkhitar Djrbashian3 extended Wirtinger's representation and projection to the wider, weighted Hilbert spaces 
 
 
 
  of functions 
 
 
 
  holomorphic in 
 
 
 
 , which satisfy the condition



and also to some Hilbert spaces of entire functions. The extensions of these results to some weighted 
 
 
 
  spaces of functions holomorphic in 
 
 
 
  and similar spaces of entire functions, the unions of which respectively coincide with all functions holomorphic in 
 
 
 
  and the whole set of entire functions can be seen in.4
See also



References
"
Category:Theorems in complex analysis Category:Theorems in functional analysis Category:Theorems in approximation theory











