


Semilinear transformation




Semilinear transformation

In linear algebra, particularly projective geometry, a semilinear transformation between vector spaces V and W over a field K is a function that is a linear transformation "up to a twist", hence semi-linear, where "twist" means "field automorphism of K". Explicitly, it is a function 
 
 
 
  that is:

linear with respect to vector addition
 
 

semilinear with respect to scalar multiplication
 
 
 
  where θ is a field automorphism of K, and 
 
 
 
  means the image of the scalar 
 
 
 
  under the automorphism. There must be a single automorphism θ for T, in which case T is called θ-semilinear.

The invertible semilinear transforms of a given vector space V (for all choices of field automorphism) form a group, called the general semilinear group and denoted 
 
 
 
  by analogy with and extending the general linear group.
Similar notation (replacing Latin characters with Greek) are used for semilinear analogs of more restricted linear transform; formally, the semidirect product of a linear group with the Galois group of field automorphism. For example, PΣU is used for the semilinear analogs of the projective special unitary group PSU. Note however, that it is only recently noticed that these generalized semilinear groups are not well-defined, as pointed out in  – isomorphic classical groups G and H (subgroups of SL) may have non-isomorphic semilinear extensions. At the level of semidirect products, this corresponds to different actions of the Galois group on a given abstract group, a semidirect product depending on two groups and an action. If the extension is non-unique, there are exactly two semilinear extensions; for example, symplectic groups have a unique semilinear extension, while SU(n,q) has two extension if n is even and q is odd, and likewise for PSU.
Definition
Let K be a field and k its prime subfield. For example, if K is C then k is Q, and if K is the finite field of order 
 
 
 
  then k is 
 
 

Given a field automorphism 
 
 
 
  of K, a function 
 
 
 
  between two K vector spaces V and W is 
 
 
 
 -semilinear, or simply semilinear, if for all 
 
 
 
  in V and 
 
 
 
  in K it follows:








where 
 
 
 
  denotes the image of 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 

Note that 
 
 
 
  must be a field automorphism for f to remain additive, for example, 
 
 
 
  must fix the prime subfield as


 
  Also


 
  so 
 
 
 
  Finally,



Every linear transformation is semilinear, but the converse is generally not true. If we treat V and W as vector spaces over k, (by considering K as vector space over k first) then every 
 
 
 
 -semilinear map is a k-linear map, where k is the prime subfield of K.
Examples

Let 
 
 
 
  with standard basis 
 
 
 
  Define the map 
 
 
 
  by





f is semilinear (with respect to the complex conjugation field automorphism) but not linear.
 


Let 
 
 
 
  – the Galois field of order 
 
 
p the characteristic. Let 
 
 
 
  By the Freshman's dream it is known that this is a field automorphism. To every linear map 
 
 
 
  between vector spaces V and W over K we can establish a 
 
 
 
 -semilinear map




Indeed every linear map can be converted into a semilinear map in such a way. This is part of a general observation collected into the following result.
General semilinear group
Given a vector space V, the set of all invertible semilinear maps (over all field automorphisms) is the group 
 
 

Given a vector space V over K, and k the prime subfield of K, then 
 
 
 
  decomposes as the semidirect product


 
  where Gal(K/k) is the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  Similarly, semilinear transforms of other linear groups can be defined as the semidirect product with the Galois group, or more intrinsically as the group of semilinear maps of a vector space preserving some properties.
We identify Gal(K/k) with a subgroup of 
 
 
 
  by fixing a basis B for V and defining the semilinear maps:


 
  for any 
 
 
 
  We shall denoted this subgroup by Gal(K/k)B. We also see these complements to GL(V) in 
 
 
 
  are acted on regularly by GL(V) as they correspond to a change of basis.
Proof
Every linear map is semilinear, thus 
 
 
 
  Fix a basis B of V. Now given any semilinear map f with respect to a field automorphism 
 
 
 
  then define 
 
 
 
  by


 
  As f(B) is also a basis of V, it follows that g is simply a basis exchange of V and so linear and invertible
 
 

Set 
 
 
 
  For every 
 
 
 
  in V,


 
  thus h is in the Gal(K/k) subgroup relative to the fixed basis B. This factorization is unique to the fixed basis B. Furthermore, GL(V) is normalized by the action of Gal(K/k)B, so 
 
 

Applications
Projective geometry
The 
 
 
 
  groups extend the typical classical groups in GL(V). The importance in considering such maps follows from the consideration of projective geometry. The induced action of 
 
 
 
  on the associated vector space P(V) yields the , denoted 
 
 
 
  extending the projective linear group, PGL(V).
The projective geometry of a vector space V, denoted PG(V), is the lattice of all subspaces of V. Although the typical semilinear map is not a linear map, it does follow that every semilinear map 
 
 
 
  induces an order-preserving map 
 
 
 
  That is, every semilinear map induces a projectivity. The converse of this observation (except for the projective line) is the fundamental theorem of projective geometry. Thus semilinear maps are useful because they define the automorphism group of the projective geometry of a vector space.
Mathieu group
The group PΓL(3,4) can be used to construct the Mathieu group M24, which is one of the sporadic simple groups; PΓL(3,4) is a maximal subgroup of M24, and there are many ways to extend it to the full Mathieu group.
References

Gruenberg, K. W. and Weir, A.J. Linear Geometry 2nd Ed. (English) Graduate Texts in Mathematics. 49. New York – Heidelberg – Berlin: Springer-Verlag. X, 198 pp. (1977).


"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Linear algebra Category:Linear operators Category:Projective geometry


