


Clausius–Duhem inequality




Clausius–Duhem inequality

The Clausius–Duhem inequality12 is a way of expressing the second law of thermodynamics that is used in continuum mechanics. This inequality is particularly useful in determining whether the constitutive relation of a material is thermodynamically allowable.3
This inequality is a statement concerning the irreversibility of natural processes, especially when energy dissipation is involved. It was named after the German physicist Rudolf Clausius and French physicist Pierre Duhem.
Clausius–Duhem inequality in terms of the specific entropy
The Clausius–Duhem inequality can be expressed in integral form as


 
  In this equation 
 
 
 
  is the time, 
 
 
 
  represents a body and the integration is over the volume of the body, 
 
 
 
  represents the surface of the body, 
 
 
 
  is the mass density of the body, 
 
 
 
  is the specific entropy (entropy per unit mass), 
 
 
 
  is the normal velocity of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the velocity of particles inside 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the unit normal to the surface, 
 
 
 
  is the heat flux vector, 
 
 
 
  is an energy source per unit mass, and 
 
 
 
  is the absolute temperature. All the variables are functions of a material point at 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
 .
In differential form the Clausius–Duhem inequality can be written as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the time derivative of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the divergence of the vector

 
 .




Proof





Assume that 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary fixed control volume. Then 
 
 
 
  and the derivative can be taken inside the integral to give


 
  Using the divergence theorem, we get


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is arbitrary, we must have


 
  Expanding out


 
  or,


 
  or,


 
  Now, the material time derivatives of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are given by


 
  Therefore,


 
  From the conservation of mass

 
 . Hence,






Clausius–Duhem inequality in terms of specific internal energy
The inequality can be expressed in terms of the internal energy as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the time derivative of the specific internal energy 
 
 
 
  (the internal energy per unit mass), 
 
 
 
  is the Cauchy stress, and 
 
 
 
  is the gradient of the velocity. This inequality incorporates the balance of energy and the balance of linear and angular momentum into the expression for the Clausius–Duhem inequality.




Proof





Using the identity 
 
 
 
 
  in the Clausius–Duhem inequality, we get


 
  Now, using index notation with respect to a Cartesian coordinate system

 
 ,


 
  Hence,


 
  From the balance of energy


 
  Therefore,


 
  Rearranging,






Dissipation
The quantity


 
  is called the dissipation which is defined as the rate of internal entropy production per unit volume times the absolute temperature. Hence the Clausius–Duhem inequality is also called the dissipation inequality. In a real material, the dissipation is always greater than zero.
See also

Entropy
Second law of thermodynamics

References
External links

Memories of Clifford Truesdell by Bernard D. Coleman, Journal of Elasticity, 2003.
Thoughts on Thermomechanics by Walter Noll, 2008.

"
Category:Continuum mechanics



.
.
.




