


Littlewood's rule




Littlewood's rule

The earliest Revenue Management model is known as Littlewood’s rule, developed by Ken Littlewood while working at British Overseas Airways Corporation.
The two class model
Littlewood proposed the first static single resource quantity based RM model.1 It was a solution method for the seat inventory problem for a single leg flight with two fare classes. Those two fare classes have a fare of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , whereby 
 
 
 
 . The total capacity is 
 
 
 
  and demand for class 
 
 
 
  is indicated with 
 
 
 
 . The demand is distributed via a distribution that is indicated with 
 
 
 
 . The demand for class 2 comes before demand for class 1. The question now is how much demand for class 2 should be accepted so that the optimal mix of passengers is achieved and the highest revenue is obtained. Littlewood suggests closing down class 2 when the certain revenue from selling another low fare seat is exceeded by the expected revenue of selling the same seat at the higher fare.2 In formula form this means: accept demand for class 2 as long as:



where

 
  is the value of the lower valued segment


 
  is the value of the higher valued segment


 
  is the demand for the higher valued segment and


 
  is the capacity left
This suggests that there is an optimal protection limit 
 
 
 
 . If the capacity left is less than this limit demand for class 2 is rejected. If a continuous distribution

 
  is used to model the demand, then 
 
 
 
  can be calculated using what is called Littlewood’s rule:
{R_{1}}) |cellpadding |border |border colour = #50C878 |background colour = #ECFCF4}}
This gives the optimal protection limit, in terms of the division of the marginal revenue of both classes.
Alternatively bid prices can be calculated via



Littlewood's model is limited to two classes. P. Belobaba developed a model based on this rule called Expected marginal seat revenue, abbreviated as EMSR, which is an 
 
 
 
 -class model 3
References
See also

Yield management
Expected marginal seat revenue

"
Category:Pricing



Pak, K. and N. Piersma (2002). Airline Revenue Management: An overview of OR Techniques 1982-2001. Rotterdam, Erasmus university↩
Littlewood, K. (1972). "Forecasting and Control of Passenger Bookins." AGIFORS Symposium Proc. 12 http://www.palgrave-journals.com/rpm/journal/v4/n2/pdf/5170134a.pdf↩
Belobaba, P. P. (1987). Air Travel Demand and Airline Seat Inventory Management. Flight Transportation Laboratory. Cambridge, MIT. PhD↩




