


K-distribution




K-distribution

The K-distribution is a probability distribution that arises as the consequence of a statistical or probabilistic model used in Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imagery. The K-distribution is formed by compounding two separate probability distributions, one representing the radar cross-section, and the other representing speckle that is a characteristic of coherent imaging.
The model used to represent the observed intensity 
 
 
 
  involves compounding two gamma distributions. In each case a reparameterisation of the usual form of the family of gamma distributions is used, such that the parameters are:
:*the mean of the distribution, and
:*the usual shape parameter.
Density
The model is that random variable

 
  has a gamma distribution with mean 
 
 
 
  and shape parameter 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  being treated as a random variable having another gamma distribution, this time with mean 
 
 
 
  and shape parameter 
 
 
 
 . The result is that 
 
 
 
  has the following probability density function (pdf) for 
 
 
 
 :1


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is a modified Bessel function of the second kind. In this derivation, the K-distribution is a compound probability distribution. It is also a product distribution:2 it is the distribution of the product of two independent random variables, one having a gamma distribution with mean 1 and shape parameter 
 
 
 
 , the second having a gamma distribution with mean 
 
 
 
  and shape parameter 
 
 
 
 .
This distribution derives from a paper by Jakeman and Pusey (1978).
Moments
The mean and variance are given3 by






Other properties
All the properties of the distribution are symmetric in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .4
Differential equation
The pdf of the K-distribution is a solution of the following differential equation:



Notes
Sources

Redding, Nicholas J. (1999) Estimating the Parameters of the K Distribution in the Intensity Domain [http://oai.dtic.mil/oai/oai?verb=getRecord&metadataPrefix;;=html&identifier;=ADA368069]. Report DSTO-TR-0839, DSTO Electronics and Surveillance Laboratory, South Australia. p. 60
Jakeman, E. and Pusey, P. N. (1978) "Significance of K-Distributions in Scattering Experiments", Physical Review Letters, 40, 546–550 

Further reading

Jakeman, E. (1980) "On the statistics of K-distributed noise", Journal of Physics A: Mathematics and General, 13, 31–48
Ward, K.D.; Tough, Robert J.A; Watts, Simon (2006) '' Sea Clutter: Scattering, the K Distribution and Radar Performance'', Institution of Engineering and Technology. ISBN 0-86341-503-2

"
Category:Radar signal processing Category:Continuous distributions Category:Compound distributions Category:Probability distributions Category:Synthetic aperture radar



Redding (1999)↩

Redding (1999)↩





