


GRAph ALigner (GRAAL)




GRAph ALigner (GRAAL)
'''GRAaph ALigner (GRAAL)'''Oleksii Kuchaiev, Tijana Milenković, Vesna Memisević, Wayne Hayes, and Nataša Pržulj, Topological network alignment uncovers biological function and phylogeny, Journal of the Royal Society Interface 2010, to appear. is an algorithm for global network alignment that is based solely on network topology. It aligns two networks  and  by producing an alignment that consists of a set of ordered pairs , where  is a node in  and  is a node in . GRAAL matches pairs of nodes originating in different networks based on their
 graphlet degree signature similarities,1 where a higher similarity between two nodes corresponds to a higher topological similarity between their extended neighborhoods (out to distance 4).  GRAAL produces global alignments, i.e., it aligns each node in the smaller network to exactly one node in the larger network. The matching proceeds using a technique analogous to the "seed and extend" approach of the popular BLAST algorithm for sequence alignment: it first chooses a single "seed" pair of nodes (one node from each network) with high graphlet degree signature similarity. It then expands the alignment radially outward around the seed as far as practical using a greedy algorithm (see [Kuchaiev et al., 2010]2 for details).
Method
When aligning two graphs 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , GRAAL first computes costs of aligning each node 
 
 
 
  in G with each node 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . The cost of aligning two nodes takes into account the graphlet degree signature similarity3 between them, modified to reduce the cost as the degrees of both nodes increase, since higher degree nodes with similar signatures provide a tighter constraint than correspondingly similar low degree nodes. In this way, GRAAL align the densest parts of the networks first. Let 
 
 
 
  be the degree of a node 
 
 
 
  in network 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the maximum degree of nodes in 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the graphlet degree signature similarity of nodes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be a parameter in [0, 1] that controls the contribution of the node signature similarity to the cost function (that is, 
 
 
 
  is the parameter that controls the contribution of node degrees to the cost function), then the cost of aligning nodes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is computed as:

 
 .
 A cost of 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a pair of topologically identical nodes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , while a cost close to 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a pair of topologically different nodes.
GRAAL chooses as the initial seed a pair of nodes 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , that have the smallest cost. Ties are broken randomly. Once the seed is found, GRAAL builds "spheres" of all possible radii around nodes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . A sphere of radius 
 
 
 
  around node 
 
 
 
  is the set of nodes 
 
 
 
  that are at distance 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 , where the distance 
 
 
 
  is the length of the shortest path from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Spheres of the same radius in two networks are then greedily aligned together by searching for the pairs 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that are not already aligned and that can be aligned with the minimal cost. When all spheres around the seed 
 
 
 
  have been aligned, some nodes in both networks may remain unaligned. For this reason, GRAAL repeats the same algorithm on a pair of networks 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and searches for the new seed again, if necessary. Network 
 
 
 
  is defined as a new network 
 
 
 
  having the same set of nodes as 
 
 
 
  and having 
 
 
 
  if and only if the distance between nodes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is less than or equal to 
 
 
 
 , i.e., 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
 . Using 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , allows us to align a path of length 
 
 
 
  in one network to a single edge in another network, which is analogous to allowing "insertions" or "deletions" in a sequence alignment. GRAAL stops when each node from 
 
 
 
  is aligned to exactly one node in 
 
 
 
 .
Application
GRAAL was used to align two protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks and predict biological function of unannotated proteins based on the function of their annotated aligned partners.4 Also, GRAAL was used to compute a pairwise all-to-all network similarity matrix between metabolic networks of a group of species and then build their phylogenetic tree.5 All of this was achieved using solely network topological information.
References
External links



"
Category:Networks



Tijana Milenkovic and Nataša Pržulj, Uncovering Biological Network Function via Graphlet Degree Signatures, Cancer Informatics 2008, 6:257–273.








