


Quadratic integer




Quadratic integer

In number theory, quadratic integers are a generalization of the integers to quadratic fields. Quadratic integers are the solutions of equations of the form

 = 0
 

with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  integers. They are thus algebraic integers of the degree two. When algebraic integers are considered, usual integers are often called rational integers.
Common examples of quadratic integers are the square roots of integers, such as 
 
 
 
 , and the complex number

 
 , which generates the Gaussian integers. Another common example is the non-real cubic root of unity

 
 , which generates the Eisenstein integers.
Quadratic integers occur in the solutions of many Diophantine equations, such as Pell's equations. The study of rings of quadratic integers is basic for many questions of algebraic number theory.
History
Medieval Indian mathematicians had already discovered a multiplication of quadratic integers of the same 
 
 
 
 , which allowed them to solve some cases of Pell's equation.
The characterization of the quadratic integers was first given by Richard Dedekind in 1871.12
Definition
A quadratic integer is a complex number which is a solution of an equation of the form




with B and C integers. In other words, a quadratic integer is an algebraic integer in a quadratic field. Each quadratic integer that is not an integer lies in a uniquely determined quadratic field, namely, the extension of 
 
 
 
  generated by the square-root of , which can always be written in the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the unique square-free integer for which  for some integer 
 
 
 
 .
The quadratic integers (including the ordinary integers), which belong to a quadratic fieds 
 
 
 
  form a integral domain called ring of integers of


Here and in the following, 
 
 
 
  is supposed to be a square-free integer. This does not restricts the generality, as the equality  (for any positive integer 
 
 
 
 ) implies 
 
 

Every quadratic integer may be written 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are integers, and where 
 
 
 
  is defined by:


 
  (as 
 
 
 
  has been supposed square-free the case 
 
 
 
  is impossible, since it would imply that D would be divisible by the square 4).
Although the quadratic integers belonging to a given quadratic field form a ring, the set of all quadratic integers is not a ring, because it is not closed under addition, as 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic integer, which has a minimal polynomial of degree four.
Norm and conjugation
A quadratic integer in 
 
 
 
  may be written



 
 ,
 

where either 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are either integers, or, only if 
 
 
 
 , halves of odd integers. The norm of such a quadratic integer is

.
 

The norm of a quadratic integer is always an integer. If 
 
 

Every quadratic integer 
 
 
 
  has a conjugate


 
  An algebraic integer has the same norm as its conjugate, and this norm is the product of the algebraic integer and its conjugate. The conjugate of a sum or a product of algebraic integers it the sum or the product (respectively) of the conjugates. This means that the conjugation is an automorphism of the ring of the integers of 
 
 

Units
A quadratic integer is a unit in the ring of the integers of 
 
 
 
  if and only if its norm is 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . In the first case its multiplicative inverse is its conjugate. It is the opposite of its conjugate in the second case.
If 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
 , the ring of the integers of 
 
 
 
  has infinitely many units that are equal to , where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary integer, and 
 
 
 
  is a particular unit called a fundamental unit. Given a fundamental unit 
 
 
 
 , there are three other fundamental units, its conjugate 
 
 
 
  and also 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  Commonly, one calls the fundamental unit, the unique one which has an absolute value greater than 1 (as a real number). It is the unique fundamental unit that may be written 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  positive (integers or halves of integers).
The fundamental units for the 10 smallest positive square-free 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  (the golden ratio), 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . For larger 
 
 
 
 , the coefficients of the fundamental unit may be very large. For example, for 
 
 
 
 , the fundamental units are respectively 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Quadratic integer rings
Every square-free integer (different of 0 and 1) 
 
 
 
  defines a quadratic integer ring, which is the integral domain of the algebraic integers contained in 
 
 
 
  It is the set 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is defined as above. It is called the ring of integers of Q(
 
 
 
 ) and often denoted 
 
 
 
  By definition, it is the integral closure of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 

The properties of the quadratic integers (and more generally of algebraic integers) has been a long standing problem, which has motivated the elaboration of the notions of ring and ideal. In particular the fundamental theorem of arithmetic is not true in many rings of quadratic integers. However there is a unique factorization for ideals, which is expressed by the fact that every ring of algebraic integers is a Dedekind domain.
Quadratic integer rings and their associated quadratic fields are thus commonly the starting examples of most studies of algebraic number fields.
The quadratic integer rings divide in two classes depending on the sign of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , all elements of 
 
 
 
  are real, and the ring is a real quadratic integer ring. If 
 
 

Examples of complex quadratic integer rings
  For 
 
 
 
  \mathbf{Z}[\sqrt{-1}], the Gaussian integers, which was introduced by Carl Gauss around 1800 to state his biquadratic reciprocity law.3

The elements in 
 
 
 
  are called Eisenstein integers.

Both rings mentioned above are rings of integers of cyclotomic fields Q(ζ4) and Q(ζ3) correspondingly. In contrast, Z[
 
 
 
 ] is not even a Dedekind domain.
Both above examples are principal ideal rings and also Euclidean domains for the norm. This is not the case for


 
  which is not even a unique factorization domain. This can be shown as follows.
In 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  The factors 3, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are irreducible, as they have all a norm of 9, and if they were not irreducible, they would have a factor of norm 3, which is impossible, the norm of an element different of 
 
 
 
  being at least 4. Thus the factorization of 9 into irreducible factors is not unique.
The ideals

 
  and 
 
 
 
 are not principal, as a simple computation shows that their product is the ideal generated by 3, and, if they were principal, this would imply that 3 would not be irreducible.
Examples of real quadratic integer rings
 For 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a positive irrational real number, and the corresponding quadratic integer ring is a set of algebraic real numbers. The solutions of the Pell's equation , a Diophantine equation that has been widely studied, are the units of these rings, for 
 
 
 
 .

For 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the golden ratio. This ring was studied by Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet. Its invertible elements have the form , where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary integer. This ring also arises from studying 5-fold rotational symmetry on Euclidean plane, for example, Penrose tilings.4
Indian mathematician Brahmagupta treated the Pell's equation , corresponding to the ring is 
 
 
 
 . Some results were presented to European community by Pierre Fermat in 1657.

Principal rings of quadratic integers
Unique factorization property is not always verified for rings of quadratic integers, as seen above for the case of 
 
 
 
 . However, as for every Dedekind domain, a ring of quadratic integers is a unique factorization domain if and only if it is a principal ideal domain. This occurs if and only if the class number of the corresponding quadratic field is one.
The imaginary rings of quadratic integers that are principal ideal rings have been completely determined. These are 
 
 
 
  for



 
 .
 

This result was first conjectured by Gauss and proven by Kurt Heegner, although Heegner's proof was not believed until Harold Stark gave a later proof in 1967. (See Stark–Heegner theorem.) This is a special case of the famous class number problem.
There are many known positive integers 
 
 
 
 , for which the ring of quadratic integers is a principal ideal ring. However, the complete list is not known; it is not even known if the number of these principal ideal rings is finite or not.
Euclidean rings of quadratic integers
When a ring of quadratic integers is a principal ideal domain, it is interesting to know if it is a Euclidean domain. This problem has been completely solved as follows.
Equipped with the norm 
 
 
 
  as an Euclidean function, 
 
 
 
  is an Euclidean domain for negative 
 
 
 
  when



 
 , 5


and, for positive 
 
 
 
 , when

$ D = 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 29, 33, 37, 41, 57, 73$ .
 

There is no other ring of quadratic integers that is Euclidean with the norm as a Euclidean function.6
For negative $D$, a ring of quadratic integers is Euclidean if and only if the norm is a Euclidean function for it. It follows that, for

$ D = −19, −43, −67, −163$,
 

the four corresponding rings of quadratic integers are among the rare known examples of principal ideal domains that are not Euclidean domains.
On the other hand, the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that a ring of real quadratic integers that is a principal ideal domain is also a Euclidean domain for some Euclidean function.
Notes
References



. Retrieved 5. August 2009
Dummit, D. S., and Foote, R. M., 2004. Abstract Algebra, 3rd ed.
J.S. Milne. Algebraic Number Theory, Version 3.01, September 28, 2008. online lecture note

"
Category:Algebraic number theory Category:Ring theory



, Supplement X, p. 447
, p. 99
Dummit, pg. 229

Dummit, pg. 272





