


Gammoid




Gammoid

In matroid theory, a field within mathematics, a gammoid is a certain kind of matroid, describing sets of vertices that can be reached by vertex-disjoint paths in a directed graph.
The concept of a gammoid was introduced and shown to be a matroid by , based on considerations related to Menger's theorem characterizing the obstacles to the existence of systems of disjoint paths.1 Gammoids were studied in more detail and given their name by .2
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a directed graph, 
 
 
 
  be a set of starting vertices, and 
 
 
 
  be a set of destination vertices (not necessarily disjoint from 
 
 
 
 ). The gammoid 
 
 
 
  derived from this data has 
 
 
 
  as its set of elements. A subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is independent in 
 
 
 
  if there exists a set of vertex-disjoint paths whose starting points all belong to 
 
 
 
  and whose ending points are exactly 
 
 
 
 .3
A strict gammoid is a gammoid in which the set 
 
 
 
  of destination vertices consists of every vertex in 
 
 
 
 . Thus, a gammoid is a restriction of a strict gammoid, to a subset of its elements.45
Example
Consider the uniform matroid

 
  on a set of 
 
 
 
  elements, in which every set of 
 
 
 
  or fewer elements is independent. One way to represent this matroid as a gammoid would be to form a complete bipartite graph

 
  with a set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  vertices on one side of the bipartition, with a set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  vertices on the other side of the bipartition, and with every edge directed from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . In this graph, a subset of 
 
 
 
  is the set of endpoints of a set of disjoint paths if and only if it has 
 
 
 
  or fewer vertices, for otherwise there aren't enough vertices in 
 
 
 
  to start the paths. The special structure of this graph shows that the uniform matroid is a transversal matroid as well as being a gammoid.6
Alternatively, the same uniform matroid 
 
 
 
  may be represented as a gammoid on a smaller graph, with only 
 
 
 
  vertices, by choosing a subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  vertices and connecting each of the chosen vertices to every other vertex in the graph. Again, a subset of the vertices of the graph can be endpoints of disjoint paths if and only if it has 
 
 
 
  or fewer vertices, because otherwise there are not enough vertices that can be starts of paths. In this graph, every vertex corresponds to an element of the matroid, showing that the uniform matroid is a strict gammoid.7
Menger's theorem and gammoid rank
The rank of a set 
 
 
 
  in a gammoid defined from a graph 
 
 
 
  and vertex subsets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is, by definition, the maximum number of vertex-disjoint paths from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . By Menger's theorem, it also equals the minimum cardinality of a set 
 
 
 
  that intersects every path from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .8
Relation to transversal matroids
A transversal matroid is defined from a family of sets: its elements are the elements of the sets, and a set 
 
 
 
  of these elements is independent whenever there exists a one-to-one matching of the elements of 
 
 
 
  to disjoint sets containing them, called a system of distinct representatives. Equivalently, a tranversal matroid may be represented by a special kind of gammoid, defined from a directed bipartite graph

 
  that has a vertex in 
 
 
 
  for each set, a vertex in 
 
 
 
  for each element, and an edge from each set to each element contained in it.
Less trivially, the strict gammoids are exactly the dual matroids of the transversal matroids. To see that every strict gammoid is dual to a transversal matroid, let 
 
 
 
  be a strict gammoid defined from a directed graph 
 
 
 
  and starting vertex set 
 
 
 
 , and consider the transversal matroid for the family of sets 
 
 
 
  for each vertex 
 
 
 
 , where vertex 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
  if it equals 
 
 
 
  or it has an edge to 
 
 
 
 . Any basis of the strict gammoid, consisting of the endpoints of some set of 
 
 
 
  disjoint paths from 
 
 
 
 , is the complement of a basis of the transversal matroid, matching each 
 
 
 
  to the vertex 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a path edge (or 
 
 
 
  itself, if 
 
 
 
  does not participate in one of the paths). Conversely every basis of the transversal matroid, consisting of a representative 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 , gives rise to a complementary basis of the strict gammoid, consisting of the endpoints of the paths formed by the set of edges 
 
 
 
 .910
To see, conversely, that every transversal matroid is dual to a strict gammoid, find a subfamily of the sets defining the matroid such that the subfamily has a system of distinct representatives and defines the same matroid. Form a graph that has the union of the sets as its vertices and that has an edge to the representative element of each set from the other members of the same set. Then the sets 
 
 
 
  formed as above for each representative element 
 
 
 
  are exactly the sets defining the original transversal matroid, so the strict gammoid formed by this graph and by the set of representative elements is dual to the given transversal matroid.1112
Every gammoid is a contraction of a transversal matroid. The gammoids are the smallest class of matroids that includes the transversal matroids and is closed under duality and taking minors.131415
Representability
It is not true that every gammoid is regular, i.e., representable over every field. In particular, the uniform matroid 
 
 
 
  is not a binary matroid, and more generally the 
 
 
 
 -point line 
 
 
 
  can only be represented over fields with 
 
 
 
  or more elements. However, every gammoid may be represented over almost every finite field. More specifically, a gammoid with element set 
 
 
 
  may be represented over every field that has at least 
 
 
 
  elements.161718
References
"
Category:Matroid theory Category:Graph connectivity



.↩
.↩
.↩

↩
.↩
, p. 100.↩


.↩



↩
.↩

.↩
.↩




