


Compatibility (mechanics)




Compatibility (mechanics)

In continuum mechanics, a compatible deformation (or strain) tensor field in a body is that unique field that is obtained when the body is subjected to a continuous, single-valued, displacement field. Compatibility is the study of the conditions under which such a displacement field can be guaranteed. Compatibility conditions are particular cases of integrability conditions and were first derived for linear elasticity by Barré de Saint-Venant in 1864 and proved rigorously by Beltrami in 1886.1
In the continuum description of a solid body we imagine the body to be composed of a set of infinitesimal volumes or material points. Each volume is assumed to be connected to its neighbors without any gaps or overlaps. Certain mathematical conditions have to be satisfied to ensure that gaps/overlaps do not develop when a continuum body is deformed. A body that deforms without developing any gaps/overlaps is called a compatible body. Compatibility conditions are mathematical conditions that determine whether a particular deformation will leave a body in a compatible state.2
In the context of infinitesimal strain theory, these conditions are equivalent to stating that the displacements in a body can be obtained by integrating the strains. Such an integration is possible if the Saint-Venant's tensor (or incompatibility tensor) 
 
 
 
  vanishes in a simply-connected body3 where 
 
 
 
  is the infinitesimal strain tensor and


 
  For finite deformations the compatibility conditions take the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient.
Compatibility conditions for infinitesimal strains
The compatibility conditions in linear elasticity are obtained by observing that there are six strain-displacement relations that are functions of only three unknown displacements. This suggests that the three displacements may be removed from the system of equations without loss of information. The resulting expressions in terms of only the strains provide constraints on the possible forms of a strain field.
2-dimensions
For two-dimensional, plane strain problems the strain-displacement relations are



Combining these relations gives us the two-dimensional compatibility condition for strains



The only displacement field that is allowed by a compatible plane strain field is a plane displacement field, i.e., 
 
 
 
 .
3-dimensions
In three dimensions, in addition to two more equations of the form seen for two dimensions, there are three more equations of the form


 
  Therefore there are six different compatibility conditions. We can write these conditions in index notation as4


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the permutation symbol. In direct tensor notation


 
  where the curl operator can be expressed in an orthonormal coordinate system as 
 
 
 
 .
The second-order tensor


 
  is known as the incompatibility tensor, and is equivalent to the Saint-Venant compatibility tensor
Compatibility conditions for finite strains
For solids in which the deformations are not required to be small, the compatibility conditions take the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient. In terms of components with respect to a Cartesian coordinate system we can write these compatibility relations as


 
  This condition is necessary if the deformation is to be continuous and derived from the mapping 
 
 
 
  (see Finite strain theory). The same condition is also sufficient to ensure compatibility in a simply connected body.
Compatibility condition for the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor
The compatibility condition for the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Christoffel symbol of the second kind. The quantity 
 
 
 
  represents the mixed components of the Riemann-Christoffel curvature tensor.
The general compatibility problem
The problem of compatibility in continuum mechanics involves the determination of allowable single-valued continuous fields on simply connected bodies. More precisely, the problem may be stated in the following manner.5
 Consider the deformation of a body shown in Figure 1. If we express all vectors in terms of the reference coordinate system 
 
 
 
 , the displacement of a point in the body is given by


 
  Also



What conditions on a given second-order tensor field 
 
 
 
  on a body are necessary and sufficient so that there exists a unique vector field 
 
 
 
  that satisfies



Necessary conditions
For the necessary conditions we assume that the field 
 
 
 
  exists and satisfies 
 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  Since changing the order of differentiation does not affect the result we have


 
  Hence


 
  From the well known identity for the curl of a tensor we get the necessary condition



Sufficient conditions
 To prove that this condition is sufficient to guarantee existence of a compatible second-order tensor field, we start with the assumption that a field 
 
 
 
 
  exists such that 
 
 
 
 . We will integrate this field to find the vector field 
 
 
 
  along a line between points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (see Figure 2), i.e.,


 
  If the vector field 
 
 
 
  is to be single-valued then the value of the integral should be independent of the path taken to go from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
From Stokes theorem, the integral of a second order tensor along a closed path is given by


 
  Using the assumption that the curl of 
 
 
 
  is zero, we get


 
  Hence the integral is path independent and the compatibility condition is sufficient to ensure a unique 
 
 
 
  field, provided that the body is simply connected.
Compatibility of the deformation gradient
The compatibility condition for the deformation gradient is obtained directly from the above proof by observing that


 
  Then the necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a compatible 
 
 
 
  field over a simply connected body are



Compatibility of infinitesimal strains
The compatibility problem for small strains can be stated as follows.
Given a symmetric second order tensor field 
 
 
 
  when is it possible to construct a vector field 
 
 
 
  such that



Necessary conditions
Suppose that there exists 
 
 
 
  such that the expression for 
 
 
 
  holds. Now


 
  where


 
  Therefore, in index notation,


 
  If 
 
 
 
  is continuously differentiable we have 
 
 
 
 . Hence,


 
  In direct tensor notation


 
  The above are necessary conditions. If 
 
 
 
  is the infinitesimal rotation vector then 
 
 
 
 . Hence the necessary condition may also be written as 
 
 
 
 .
Sufficient conditions
Let us now assume that the condition 
 
 
 
  is satisfied in a portion of a body. Is this condition sufficient to guarantee the existence of a continuous, single-valued displacement field 
 
 
 
 ?
The first step in the process is to show that this condition implies that the infinitesimal rotation tensor

 
  is uniquely defined. To do that we integrate 
 
 
 
  along the path 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,


 
  Note that we need to know a reference 
 
 
 
  to fix the rigid body rotation. The field 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined only if the contour integral along a closed contour between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is zero, i.e.,


 
  But from Stokes' theorem for a simply-connected body and the necessary condition for compatibility


 
  Therefore the field 
 
 
 
  is uniquely defined which implies that the infinitesimal rotation tensor 
 
 
 
  is also uniquely defined, provided the body is simply connected.
In the next step of the process we will consider the uniqueness of the displacement field 
 
 
 
 . As before we integrate the displacement gradient


 
  From Stokes' theorem and using the relations 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  Hence the displacement field 
 
 
 
  is also determined uniquely. Hence the compatibility conditions are sufficient to guarantee the existence of a unique displacement field 
 
 
 
  in a simply-connected body.
Compatibility for Right Cauchy-Green Deformation field
The compatibility problem for the Right Cauchy-Green deformation field can be posed as follows.
' Problem:' Let 
 
 
 
  be a positive definite symmetric tensor field defined on the reference configuration. Under what conditions on 
 
 
 
  does there exist a deformed configuration marked by the position field 
 
 
 
  such that



Necessary conditions
Suppose that a field 
 
 
 
  exists that satisfies condition (1). In terms of components with respect to a rectangular Cartesian basis


 
  From finite strain theory we know that 
 
 
 
 . Hence we can write


 
  For two symmetric second-order tensor field that are mapped one-to-one we also have the relation


 
  From the relation between of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that 
 
 
 
 , we have


 
  Then, from the relation


 
  we have


 
  From finite strain theory we also have


 
  Therefore


 
  and we have


 
  Again, using the commutative nature of the order of differentiation, we have


 
  or


 
  After collecting terms we get


 
  From the definition of 
 
 
 
  we observe that it is invertible and hence cannot be zero. Therefore,


 
  We can show these are the mixed components of the Riemann-Christoffel curvature tensor. Therefore the necessary conditions for 
 
 
 
 -compatibility are that the Riemann-Christoffel curvature of the deformation is zero.
Sufficient conditions
The proof of sufficiency is a bit more involved.67 We start with the assumption that


 
  We have to show that there exist 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  From a theorem by T.Y.Thomas 8 we know that the system of equations


 
  has unique solutions 
 
 
 
  over simply connected domains if


 
  The first of these is true from the defining of 
 
 
 
  and the second is assumed. Hence the assumed condition gives us a unique 
 
 
 
  that is 
 
 
 
  continuous.
Next consider the system of equations


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  and the body is simply connected there exists some solution 
 
 
 
  to the above equations. We can show that the 
 
 
 
  also satisfy the property that


 
  We can also show that the relation


 
  implies that


 
  If we associate these quantities with tensor fields we can show that 
 
 
 
  is invertible and the constructed tensor field satisfies the expression for 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Saint-Venant's compatibility condition
Linear elasticity
Deformation (mechanics)
Infinitesimal strain theory
Finite strain theory
Tensor derivative (continuum mechanics)
Curvilinear coordinates

References


External links

Prof. Amit Acharya's notes on compatibility on iMechanica
Plasticity by J. Lubliner, sec. 1.2.4 p. 35

"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Elasticity (physics)



C Amrouche, PG Ciarlet, L Gratie, S Kesavan, On Saint Venant's compatibility conditions and Poincaré's lemma, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. I, 342 (2006), 887-891. 
Barber, J. R., 2002, Elasticity - 2nd Ed., Kluwer Academic Publications.
N.I. Muskhelishvili, Some Basic Problems of the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity. Leyden: Noordhoff Intern. Publ., 1975.
Slaughter, W. S., 2003, The linearized theory of elasticity, Birkhauser
Acharya, A., 1999, '' On Compatibility Conditions for the Left Cauchy–Green Deformation Field in Three Dimensions'', Journal of Elasticity, Volume 56, Number 2 , 95-105

Blume, J. A., 1989, "Compatibility conditions for a left Cauchy-Green strain field", J. Elasticity, v. 21, p. 271-308.
Thomas, T. Y., 1934, "Systems of total differential equations defined over simply connected domains", Annals of Mathematics, 35(4), p. 930-734




