


LOBPCG




LOBPCG

Locally Optimal Block Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient (LOBPCG) is a matrix-free method for finding the largest (or smallest) eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors of a symmetric positive definite generalized eigenvalue problem



for a given pair 
 
 
 
  of complex Hermitian or real symmetric matrices, where the matrix 
 
 
 
  is also assumed positive-definite.
Algorithm
The method performs an iterative maximization (or minimization) of the generalized Rayleigh quotient



which results in finding largest (or smallest) eigenpairs of 
 
 

The direction of the steepest ascent, which is the gradient, of the generalized Rayleigh quotient is positively proportional to the vector



called the eigenvector residual. If a preconditioner

 
  is available, it is applied to the residual giving vector



called the preconditioned residual. Without preconditioning, we set 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
 . An iterative method



or, in short,









is known as preconditioned steepest ascent (or descent), where the scalar 
 
 
 
  is called the step size. The optimal step size can be determined by maximizing the Rayleigh quotient, i.e.,



(or 
 
 
 
  in case of minimizing), in which case the method is called locally optimal. To further accelerate the convergence of the locally optimal preconditioned steepest ascent (or descent), one can add one extra vector to the two-term recurrence relation to make it three-term:



(use 
 
 
 
  in case of minimizing). The maximization/minimization of the Rayleigh quotient in a 3-dimensional subspace can be performed numerically by the Rayleigh–Ritz method. As the iterations converge, the vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  become nearly linearly dependent, making the Rayleigh–Ritz method numerically unstable in the presence of round-off errors. It is possible to substitute the vector 
 
 
 
  with an explicitly computed difference 
 
 
 
  making the Rayleigh–Ritz method more stable; see.1
This is a single-vector version of the LOBPCG method. It is one of possible generalization of the preconditioned conjugate gradient linear solvers to the case of symmetric eigenvalue problems. Even in the trivial case 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the resulting approximation with 
 
 
 
  will be different from that obtained by the Lanczos algorithm, although both approximations will belong to the same Krylov subspace.
Iterating several approximate eigenvectors together in a block in a similar locally optimal fashion, gives the full block version of the LOBPCG. It allows robust computation of eigenvectors corresponding to nearly-multiple eigenvalues.
Implementations
LOBPCG's inventor, Andrew Knyazev, published an implementation called Block Locally Optimal Preconditioned Eigenvalue Xolvers (BLOPEX) with interfaces to PETSc and hypre.2 Other implementations are available in Octave, MATLAB, ABINIT (including CUDA version), Octopus (software), PESCAN, Anasazi (Trilinos), SciPy, NGSolve, NVIDIA AmgX, and PYFEMax.
Applications
LOBPCG has been successfully used for multi-billion size matrices by Gordon Bell Prize finalists, on the Earth Simulator supercomputer in Japan.34
References


External links

LOBPCG code in MATLAB
LOBPCG code in Octave
LOBPCG code in SciPy
LOBPCG code in Java at Google Code
LOBPCG in Block Locally Optimal Preconditioned Eigenvalue Xolvers (BLOPEX) at Bitbucket
LOBPCG in Block Locally Optimal Preconditioned Eigenvalue Xolvers (BLOPEX) at Google Code (retiring)

"
Category:Numerical linear algebra Category:Scientific simulation software



↩
↩
↩
↩




