


Spherium




Spherium

The "spherium" model consists of two electrons trapped on the surface of a sphere of radius 
 
 
 
 . It has been used by Berry and collaborators 1 to understand both weakly and strongly correlated systems and to suggest an "alternating" version of Hund's rule. Seidl studies this system in the context of density functional theory (DFT) to develop new correlation functionals within the adiabatic connection.2
The electronic Hamiltonian in atomic units is



where 
 
 
 
  is the interelectronic distance. For the singlet S states, it can be then shown3 that the wave function

 
  satisfies the Schrödinger equation



By introducing the dimensionless variable 
 
 
 
 , this becomes a Heun equation with singular points at 
 
 
 
 . Based on the known solutions of the Heun equation, we seek wave functions of the form



and substitution into the previous equation yields the recurrence relation



with the starting values 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the Kato cusp condition is


 
 .
The wave function reduces to the polynomial



(where 
 
 
 
  the number of roots between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) if, and only if, 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the energy 
 
 
 
  is a root of the polynomial equation 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
 ) and the corresponding radius 
 
 
 
  is found from the previous equation which yields



 
  is the exact wave function of the 
 
 
 
 -th excited state of singlet S symmetry for the radius 
 
 
 
 .
We know from the work of Loos and Gill 4 that the HF energy of the lowest singlet S state is 
 
 
 
 . It follows that the exact correlation energy for 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  which is much larger than the limiting correlation energies of the helium-like ions (
 
 
 
 ) or Hooke's atoms (
 
 
 
 ). This confirms the view that electron correlation on the surface of a sphere is qualitatively different from that in three-dimensional physical space.
Spherium on a 3-Sphere
Recent work by Loos et al.5 considered the case of two electrons confined to a 3-sphere repelling Coulombically. They report a ground state energy of (
 
 
 
 ).
See also

List of quantum-mechanical systems with analytical solutions

References
Further reading



"
Category:Quantum chemistry Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum models












