


Lagrangian system




Lagrangian system

In mathematics, a Lagrangian system is a pair 
 
 
 
  of a smooth fiber bundle

 
 
  and a Lagrangian density 
 
 
 
  which yields the Euler–Lagrange differential operator acting on sections of 
 
 
 
 .
In classical mechanics, many dynamical systems are Lagrangian systems. The configuration space of such a Lagrangian system is a fiber bundle 
 
 
 
  over the time axis 
 
 
 
 . In particular, 
 
 
 
 
  if a reference frame is fixed. In classical field theory, all field systems are the Lagrangian ones.
Lagrangians and Euler–Lagrange operators
A Lagrangian density

 
  (or, simply, a Lagrangian) of order 
 
 
 
  is defined as an 

 
 -form, 
 
 
 
 , on the 
 
 
 
 
 -order jet manifold  of 
 
 
 
 .
A Lagrangian 
 
 
 
  can be introduced as an element of the variational bicomplex of the differential graded algebra  of exterior forms on jet manifolds of 
 
 
 
 . The coboundary operator of this bicomplex contains the variational operator 
 
 
 
  which, acting on 
 
 
 
 
 , defines the associated Euler–Lagrange operator 
 
 
 
 .
In coordinates
Given bundle coordinates  on a fiber bundle 
 
 
 
  and the adapted coordinates , , 
 
 
 
 ) on jet manifolds , a Lagrangian 
 
 
 
  and its Euler–Lagrange operator read






where



denote the total derivatives.
For instance, a first-order Lagrangian and its second-order Euler–Lagrange operator take the form



Euler–Lagrange equations
The kernel of an Euler–Lagrange operator provides the Euler–Lagrange equations

 
 
 .
Cohomology and Noether's theorems
Cohomology of the variational bicomplex leads to the so-called variational formula



where



is the total differential and  is a Lepage equivalent of 
 
 
 
 . Noether's first theorem and Noether's second theorem are corollaries of this variational formula.
Graded manifolds
Extended to graded manifolds, the variational bicomplex provides description of graded Lagrangian systems of even and odd variables.1
Alternative formulations
In a different way, Lagrangians, Euler–Lagrange operators and Euler–Lagrange equations are introduced in the framework of the calculus of variations.
Classical mechanics
In classical mechanics equations of motion are first and second order differential equations on a manifold 
 
 
 
  or various fiber bundles 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . A solution of the equations of motion is called a motion.23 
See also

Lagrangian
Calculus of variations
Noether's theorem
Noether identities
Jet bundle
Jet (mathematics)
Variational bicomplex

References















External links



"
Category:Differential operators Category:Calculus of variations Category:Dynamical systems Category:Lagrangian mechanics



↩
↩
↩




