


Margin Infused Relaxed Algorithm




Margin Infused Relaxed Algorithm

Margin-infused relaxed algorithm (MIRA)1 is a machine learning algorithm, an online algorithm for multiclass classification problems. It is designed to learn a set of parameters (vector or matrix) by processing all the given training examples one-by-one and updating the parameters according to each training example, so that the current training example is classified correctly with a margin against incorrect classifications at least as large as their loss.2 The change of the parameters is kept as small as possible.
A two-class version called binary MIRA3 simplifies the algorithm by not requiring the solution of a quadratic programming problem (see below). When used in a one-vs.-all configuration, binary MIRA can be extended to a multiclass learner that approximates full MIRA, but may be faster to train.
The flow of the algorithm45 looks as follows:
  Input: Training examples 


  Output: Set of parameters 




 
  ← 0, 
 
 
 
 
  ← 0
  for 

 ← 1 to 


    for 

 ← 1 to 




 
 
  ← update 
 
 
 
  according to 
 
 

 
  ← 
 
 

    end for
  end for
  return 


The update step is then formalized as a quadratic programming6 problem: Find 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the score of the current correct training 
 
 
 
  must be greater than the score of any other possible 
 
 
 
  by at least the loss (number of errors) of that 
 
 
 
 
  in comparison to 
 
 
 
 .
References
External links

adMIRAble - MIRA implementation in C++
Miralium - MIRA implementation in Java
MIRA implementation for Mahout in Hadoop

"
Category:Classification algorithms






Watanabe, T. et al (2007): "Online Large Margin Training for Statistical Machine Translation". In: Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning, 764–773.
Bohnet, B. (2009): Efficient Parsing of Syntactic and Semantic Dependency Structures. Proceedings of Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), Boulder, 67–72.





