


Wrapped distribution




Wrapped distribution

In probability theory and directional statistics, a wrapped probability distribution is a continuous probability distribution that describes data points that lie on a unit n-sphere. In one dimension, a wrapped distribution will consist of points on the unit circle.
Any probability density function (pdf) 
 
 
 
  on the line can be "wrapped" around the circumference of a circle of unit radius.1 That is, the pdf of the wrapped variable


 
  in some interval of length 
 
 

is



which is a periodic sum of period 
 
 
 
 . The preferred interval is generally 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 

Theory
In most situations, a process involving circular statistics produces angles (
 
 
 
 ) which lie in the interval from negative infinity to positive infinity, and are described by an "unwrapped" probability density function 
 
 
 
 . However, a measurement will yield a "measured" angle 
 
 
 
  which lies in some interval of length 
 
 
 
  (for example 
 
 
 
 ). In other words, a measurement cannot tell if the "true" angle 
 
 
 
  has been measured or whether a "wrapped" angle 
 
 
 
  has been measured where a is some unknown integer. That is:



If we wish to calculate the expected value of some function of the measured angle it will be:



We can express the integral as a sum of integrals over periods of 
 
 
 
  (e.g. 0 to 
 
 
 
 ):



Changing the variable of integration to 
 
 
 
  and exchanging the order of integration and summation, we have



where 
 
 
 
  is the pdf of the "wrapped" distribution and ''a' '' is another unknown integer (a'=a+k). It can be seen that the unknown integer ''a' '' introduces an ambiguity into the expectation value of 
 
 
 
 . A particular instance of this problem is encountered when attempting to take the mean of a set of measured angles. If, instead of the measured angles, we introduce the parameter 
 
 
 
  it is seen that z has an unambiguous relationship to the "true" angle 
 
 
 
  since:



Calculating the expectation value of a function of z will yield unambiguous answers:



and it is for this reason that the z parameter is the preferred statistical variable to use in circular statistical analysis rather than the measured angles 
 
 
 
 . This suggests, and it is shown below, that the wrapped distribution function may itself be expressed as a function of z so that:



where 
 
 
 
  is defined such that 
 
 
 
 . This concept can be extended to the multivariate context by an extension of the simple sum to a number of 
 
 
 
  sums that cover all dimensions in the feature space:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 th Euclidean basis vector.
Expression in terms of characteristic functions
A fundamental wrapped distribution is the Dirac comb which is a wrapped delta function:



Using the delta function, a general wrapped distribution can be written



Exchanging the order of summation and integration, any wrapped distribution can be written as the convolution of the "unwrapped" distribution and a Dirac comb:



The Dirac comb may also be expressed as a sum of exponentials, so we may write:



again exchanging the order of summation and integration,



using the definition of 
 
 
 
 , the characteristic function of 
 
 
 
  yields a Laurent series about zero for the wrapped distribution in terms of the characteristic function of the unwrapped distribution:2



or



By analogy with linear distributions, the 
 
 
 
  are referred to as the characteristic function of the wrapped distribution3 (or perhaps more accurately, the characteristic sequence). This is an instance of the Poisson summation formula and it can be seen that the Fourier coefficients of the Fourier series for the wrapped distribution are just the Fourier coefficients of the Fourier transform of the unwrapped distribution at integer values.
Moments
The moments of the wrapped distribution 
 
 
 
  are defined as:



Expressing 
 
 
 
  in terms of the characteristic function and exchanging the order of integration and summation yields:



From the theory of residues we have



where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta function. It follows that the moments are simply equal to the characteristic function of the unwrapped distribution for integer arguments:



Entropy
The information entropy of a circular distribution with probability density 
 
 
 
  is defined as:4



where 
 
 
 
  is any interval of length 
 
 
 
 . If both the probability density and its logarithm can be expressed as a Fourier series (or more generally, any integral transform on the circle) then the orthogonality property may be used to obtain a series representation for the entropy which may reduce to a closed form.
The moments of the distribution 
 
 
 
  are the Fourier coefficients for the Fourier series expansion of the probability density:



If the logarithm of the probability density can also be expressed as a Fourier series:



where



Then, exchanging the order of integration and summation, the entropy may be written as:



Using the orthogonality of the Fourier basis, the integral may be reduced to:



For the particular case when the probability density is symmetric about the mean, 
 
 
 
  and the logarithm may be written:



and



and, since normalization requires that 
 
 
 
 , the entropy may be written:



See also

Wrapped normal distribution
Wrapped Cauchy distribution
Wrapped exponential distribution

References






External links

Circular Values Math and Statistics with C++11, A C++11 infrastructure for circular values (angles, time-of-day, etc.) mathematics and statistics

"
Category:Types of probability distributions Category:Directional statistics











