


Circular ensemble




Circular ensemble

In the theory of random matrices, the circular ensembles are measures on spaces of unitary matrices introduced by Freeman Dyson as modifications of the Gaussian matrix ensembles.1 The three main examples are the circular orthogonal ensemble (COE) on symmetric unitary matrices, the circular unitary ensemble (CUE) on unitary matrices, and the circular symplectic ensemble (CSE) on self dual unitary quaternionic matrices.
Probability distributions
The distribution of the unitary circular ensemble CUE(n) is the Haar measure on the unitary group U(n). If U is a random element of CUE(n), then UTU is a random element of COE(n); if U is a random element of CUE(2n), then URU is a random element of CSE(n), where



Each element of a circular ensemble is a unitary matrix, so it has eigenvalues on the unit circle
 
 
 
  with 0 k k is given by


 
  where β=1 for COE, β=2 for CUE, and β=4 for CSE. The normalisation constant Zn,β is given by



Generalizations
Generalizations of the circular ensemble restrict the matrix elements of U to real numbers [so that U is in the orthogonal group O(n)] or to real quaternion numbers [so that U is in the symplectic group Sp(2n). The Haar measure on the orthogonal group produces the circular real ensemble (CRE) and the Haar measure on the symplectic group produces the circular quaternion ensemble (CQE).
The eigenvalues of orthogonal matrices come in complex conjugate pairs 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , possibly complemented by eigenvalues fixed at +1 or -1. For n=2m even and det U=1, there are no fixed eigenvalues and the phases θk have probability distribution 2


 
  with C an unspecified normalization constant. For n=2m+1 odd there is one fixed eigenvalue σ=det U equal to ±1. The phases have distribution


 
  For n=2m+2 even and det U=-1 there is a pair of eigenvalues fixed at +1 and -1, while the phases have distribution


 
  This is also the distribution of the eigenvalues of a matrix in Sp(2m).
These probability density functions are referred to as Jacobi distributions in the theory of random matrices, because correlation functions can be expressed in terms of Jacobi polynomials.
Calculations
Averages of products of matrix elements in the circular ensembles can be calculated using Weingarten functions. For large dimension of the matrix these calculations become impractical, and a numerical method is advantageous. There exist efficient algorithms to generate random matrices in the circular ensembles.3
References
External links




"
Category:Random matrices Category:Mathematical physics Category:Freeman Dyson



↩
↩
↩




