


Gell-Mann–Okubo mass formula




Gell-Mann–Okubo mass formula

In physics, the Gell-Mann–Okubo mass formula provides a sum rule for the masses of hadrons within a specific multiplet, determined by their isospin (I) and strangeness (or alternatively, hypercharge)


 
  where a0, a1, and a2 are free parameters.
The rule was first formulated by Murray Gell-Mann in 19611 and independently proposed by Susumu Okubo in 1962.23 Isospin and hypercharge are generated by SU(3), which can be represented by eight hermitian and traceless matrices corresponding to the "components" of isospin and hypercharge. Six of the matrices correspond to flavor change, and the final two correspond to the third-component of isospin projection, and hypercharge.
Theory
The mass formula was obtained by considering the representations of the Lie algebra su(3). In particular, the meson octet corresponds to the root system of the adjoint representation. However, the simplest, lowest-dimensional representation of su(3) is the fundamental representation, which is three-dimensional, and is now understood to describe the approximate flavor symmetry of the three quarks u, d, and s. Thus, the discovery of not only an su(3) symmetry, but also of this workable formula for the mass spectrum was one of the earliest indicators for the existence of quarks.
This formula is phenomenological, describing an approximate relation between meson and baryon masses, and may be superseded as theoretical work in quantum chromodynamics advances.
Baryons




Baryon properties {{cite journal

author=J. Beringer et al. (Particle Data Group)

coauthors=

year=2012

title=Review of Particle Physics

journal=Physical Review D

volume=86 |issue=1 |page=010001

bibcode=2012PhRvD..86a0001B

doi=10.1103/PhysRevD.86.010001

postscript= }} and 2013 partial update for the 2014 edition.



Octet



Name

Symbol

Isospin

Strangeness

Mass (MeV/c2)



Nucleons

N





0

939



Lambda baryons

Λ

0

−1

1116



Sigma baryons

Σ

1

−1

1193



Xi baryons

Ξ





−2

1318



Decuplet



Delta baryons

Δ





0

1232



Sigma baryons

Σ*

1

−1

1385



Xi baryons

Ξ*





−2

1533



Omega baryon

Ω

0

−3

1672





Using the values of relevant I and S for baryons, the Gell-Mann–Okubo formula can be rewritten for the baryon octet,


 
  where N, Λ, Σ, and Ξ represent the average mass of corresponding baryons. Using the current mass of baryons,4 this yields:


 
  and


 
  meaning that the Gell-Mann–Okubo formula reproduces the mass of octet baryons within ~0.5% of measured values.
For the baryon decuplet, the Gell-Mann–Okubo formula can be rewritten as the "equal-spacing" rule


 
  where Δ, Σ*, Ξ*, and Ω represent the average mass of corresponding baryons.
The baryon decuplet formula famously allowed Gell-Mann to predict the mass of the then undiscovered Ω−.56
Mesons
The same mass relation can be found for the meson octet,


 
  Using the current mass of mesons,7 this yields


 
  and



Because of this large discrepancy, several people attempted to find a way to understand the failure of the GMO formula in mesons, when it worked so well in baryons. In particular, people noticed that using the square of the average masses yielded much better results:8


 
  This now yields


 
  and


 
  which fall within 5% of each other.
For a while, the GMO formula involving the square of masses was simply an empirical relationship, but later a justification for using the square of masses was found.910
See also

Gell-Mann–Nishijima formula
Eightfold Way
Quark model
SU(3)

References
Further reading
The following book contains most (if not all) historical papers on the Eightfold Way and related topics, including the Gell-Mann–Okubo mass formula.



"
Category:Hadrons Category:Quantum chromodynamics



↩
↩
↩

↩
↩

↩
↩
↩




