


Standard translation




Standard translation

In modal logic, standard translation is a way of transforming formulas of modal logic into formulas of first-order logic which capture the meaning of the modal formulas. Standard translation is defined inductively on the structure of the formula. In short, atomic formulas are mapped onto unary predicates and the objects in the first-order language are the accessible worlds. The logical connectives from propositional logic remain untouched and the modal operators are transformed into first-order formulas according to their semantics.
Definition
Standard translation is defined as follows:



 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an atomic formula; P(x) is true when 
 
 
 
  holds in world 
 
 
 
 .

























In the above, 
 
 
 
  is the world from which the formula is evaluated. Initially, a free variable

 
  is used and whenever a modal operator needs to be translated, a fresh variable is introduced to indicate that the remainder of the formula needs to be evaluated from that world. Here, the subscript 
 
 
 
  refers to the accessibility relation that should be used: normally, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  refer to a relation 
 
 
 
  of the Kripke model but more than one accessibility relation can exist (a multimodal logic) in which case subscripts are used. For example, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  refer to an accessibility relation 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  in the model. Alternatively, it can also be placed inside the modal symbol.
Example
As an example, when standard translation is applied to 
 
 
 
 , we expand the outer box to get



meaning that we have now moved from 
 
 
 
  to an accessible world 
 
 
 
  and we now evaluate the remainder of the formula, 
 
 
 
 , in each of those accessible worlds.
The whole standard translation of this example becomes



which precisely captures the semantics of two boxes in modal logic. The formula 
 
 
 
  holds in 
 
 
 
  when for all accessible worlds 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  and for all accessible worlds 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 , the predicate 
 
 
 
  is true for 
 
 
 
 . Note that the formula is also true when no such accessible worlds exist. In case 
 
 
 
  has no accessible worlds then 
 
 
 
  is false but the whole formula is vacuously true: an implication is also true when the antecedent is false.
Standard translation and modal depth
The modal depth of a formula also becomes apparent in the translation to first-order logic. When the modal depth of a formula is k, then the first-order logic formula contains a 'chain' of k transitions from the starting world 
 
 
 
 . The worlds are 'chained' in the sense that these worlds are visited by going from accessible to accessible world. Informally, the number of transitions in the 'longest chain' of transitions in the first-order formula is the modal depth of the formula.
The modal depth of the formula used in the example above is two. The first-order formula indicates that the transitions from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  are needed to verify the validity of the formula. This is also the modal depth of the formula as each modal operator increases the modal depth by one.
References

Modal Logic: A Semantic Perspective, Patrick Blackburn and Johan van Benthem

"
Category:Modal logic Category:Predicate logic


