


Lieb–Liniger model




Lieb–Liniger model

The Lieb–Liniger model describes a gas of particles moving in one dimension and satisfying Bose–Einstein statistics.
Introduction
A model of a gas of particles moving in one dimension and satisfying Bose–Einstein statistics was introduced in 1963 12 in order to study whether the available approximate theories of such gases, specifically Bogolubov's theory, would conform to the actual properties of the model gas. The model is based on a well defined Schrödinger Hamiltonian for particles interacting with each other via a two-body potential, and all the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian can, in principle, be calculated exactly. Sometimes it is called one dimensional Bose gas with delta interaction. It also can be considered as quantum non-linear Schroedinger equation.
The ground state as well as the low-lying excited states were computed and found to be in agreement with Bogolubov's theory when the potential is small, except for the fact that there are actually two types of elementary excitations instead of one, as predicted by Bogolubov's and other theories.
The model seemed to be only of academic interest until, with the sophisticated experimental techniques developed in the first decade of the 21st century, it became possible to produce this kind of gas using real atoms as particles.
Definition and solution of the model
There are 
 
 
 
  particles with coordinates 
 
 
 
  on the line 
 
 
 
 , with periodic boundary conditions. Thus, an allowed wave function 
 
 
 
  is symmetric, i.e., 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . The Hamiltonian, in appropriate units, is



where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac delta function, i.e., the interaction is a contact interaction. The constant 
 
 
 
  denotes its strength. The delta function gives rise to a boundary condition when two coordinates, say 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are equal; this condition is that as 
 
 
 
 , the derivative satisfies 
 
 
 
 . The hard core limit 
 
 
 
  is known as the Tonks–Girardeau gas.3
Schrödinger's time independent equation, 
 
 
 
  is solved by explicit construction of 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is symmetric it is completely determined by its values in the simplex 
 
 
 
 , defined by the condition that 
 
 
 
 . In this region one looks for a 
 
 
 
  of the form considered by H.A. Bethe in 1931 in the context of magnetic spin systems—the Bethe ansatz. That is, for certain real numbers 
 
 

where the sum is over all 
 
 
 
  permutations, 
 
 
 
 , of the integers 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The coefficients 
 
 
 
 , as well as the 
 
 
 
 's are determined by the condition 
 
 
 
 , and this leads to





 
  are of this form.4
These equations determine 
 
 
 
  in terms of the 
 
 
 
 's, which, in turn, are determined by the periodic boundary conditions. These lead to 
 
 
 
  equations:



where 
 
 
 
  are integers when 
 
 
 
  is odd and, when 
 
 
 
  is even, they take values 
 
 
 
  . For the ground state the 
 
 
 
 's satisfy


 
  as before, but increasing 
 
 
 
  by an amount 
 
 
 
  (or decreasing 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 ). The momentum of this state is 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ).
For the second kind, choose some 
 
 
 
  and increase 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . The momentum of this state is 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, there is a state with 
 
 
 
 . The momentum of this type of excitation is limited to 
 
 

These excitations can be combined and repeated many times. Thus, they are bosonic-like. If we denote the ground state (= lowest) energy by 
 
 
 
  and the energies of the states mentioned above by 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the excitation energies of the two modes. Later the model was also solved by Quantum inverse scattering method. This help to calculate correlation functions and to find conservation laws. The Hamiltonian of the model has a family of commuting operators: conservation laws. An explicit expression for higher conservation laws can be found in Davies and Korepin (1989).5
Thermodynamic limit
(Figure)
F1| Fig. 1: The ground state energy, from.6 See text.

To discuss a gas we take a limit 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to infinity with the density 
 
 
 
  fixed. The ground state energy per particle 
 
 
 
 , and the 
 
 
 
 
  all have limits as 
 
 
 
 . While there are two parameters, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , simple length scaling 
 
 
 
  shows that there is really only one, namely 
 
 
 
 
 .
To evaluate 
 
 
 
  we assume that the N

 
 's lie between numbers 
 
 
 
  and −K, to be determined, and with a density 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
  is found to satisfy the equation (in the interval 
 
 
 
 )



which has a unique positive solution. An excitation distorts this density 
 
 
 
  and similar integral equations determine these distortions. The ground state energy per particle is given by



Figure 1 shows how 
 
 
 
  depends on 
 
 
 
  and also shows Bogolubov's approximation to 
 
 
 
 . The latter is asymptotically exact to second order in 
 
 
 
 , namely, 
 
 
 
 . At 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
(Figure)
F2| Fig. 2: The energies of the two types of excitations, from.7 See text.

Figure 2 shows the two excitation energies 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for a small value of 
 
 
 
 . The two curves are similar to these for all values of 
 
 
 
 , but the Bogolubov approximation (dashed) becomes worse as 
 
 
 
  increases.
Correlation function (statistical mechanics) of the model was evaluated in the book entitled of Quantum Inverse Scattering Method and Correlation Functions by V.E. Korepin, N.M. Bogoliubov and A.G. Izergin (Cambridge University Press, 1993). 8 Quantum entanglement of the model was calculated in Physical Review Letters, vol 92, issue 9, electronic identifier 096402, 5 March 2004 .
From three to one dimension.
This one-dimensional gas can be made using real, three-dimensional atoms as particles. One can prove, mathematically, from the Schrödinger equation for three-dimensional particles in a long cylindrical container, that the low energy states are described by the one-dimensional Lieb–Liniger model. This was done for the ground state9 and for excited states.10 The cylinder does not have to be as narrow as the atomic diameter; it can be much wider if the excitation energy in the direction perpendicular to the axis is large compared to the energy per particle 
 
 
 
 .
References
External links

See also Elliott H. Lieb (2008), Scholarpedia, 3(12):8712.1
See also V.E. Korepin, N.M. Bogoliubov and A.G. Izergin, Quantum Inverse Scattering Method and Correlation Functions, Cambridge University Press, 1993.[http://books.google.com/books?id=kaZ0pKIHhxAC&dq;;=quantum+inverse+scattering+method&printsec;=frontcover&source;=bl&ots;=4AaoICh4Q3&sig;=8RoPelCcAOLTG1vY21DDLCulNGY&hl;=en&ei;=I6zuScSBE5a-M9q1pOwP&sa;=X&oi;=book_result&ct;=result&resnum;=8#v=onepage&q;&f;=false]

"
Category:Statistical mechanics



Elliott H. Lieb and Werner Liniger, Exact Analysis of an Interacting Bose Gas. I. The General Solution and the Ground State, Physical Review 130: 1605–1616, 1963
Elliott H. Lieb, Exact Analysis of an Interacting Bose Gas. II. The Excitation Spectrum, Physical Review 130:1616–1624,1963


http://insti.physics.sunysb.edu/~korepin/davis.pdf


V.E. Korepin, N.M. Bogoliubov and A.G. Izergin, Quantum Inverse Scattering Method and Correlation Functions, Cambridge University Press, 1993






