


Overcompleteness




Overcompleteness

A subset 
 
 
 
  of a Banach space

 
 , sometimes called a "system", is complete if every element in 
 
 
 
  can be approximated arbitrarily well in norm by finite linear combinations of elements in 
 
 
 
 
 .1 Such a complete system is overcomplete if removal of a 
 
 
 
  from the system results in a complete system (i.e., 
 
 
 
  is still complete). In different research, such as signal processing and function approximation, overcompleteness can help researchers to achieve a more stable, more robust, or more compact decomposition than using a basis.2 Overcomplete frames are widely used in mathematics, computer science, engineering, and statistics.
Relation between overcompleteness and frames
Overcompleteness is usually discussed as a property of overcomplete frames. The theory of frame originates in a paper by Duffin and Schaeffer on non-harmonic Fourier series.3 The frame is defined to be a set of non-zero vectors 
 
 
 
  such that for an arbitrary 
 
 
 
 ,



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the inner product, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are positive constants called bounds of the frame. When 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  can be chosen such that 
 
 
 
 , the frame is called a tight frame.4
It can be seen that 
 
 
 
 . An example of frame can be given as follows. Let each of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be an orthonormal basis of 
 
 
 
 
 , then



is a frame of 
 
 
 
  with bounds 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be the frame operator,



A frame that is not a Riesz basis, in which case it consists of a set of functions more than a basis, is said to be overcomplete. In this case, given 
 
 
 
 , it can have different decompositions based on the frame. The frame given in the example above is an overcomplete frame.
When frames are used for function estimation, one may want to compare the performance of different frames. The parsimony of the approximating functions by different frames may be considered as one way to compare their performances.5
Given a tolerance 
 
 
 
  and a frame 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , for any function 
 
 
 
 
 , define the set of all approximating functions that satisfy 
 
 




Then let



 
  indicates the parsimony of utilizing frame 
 
 
 
 
  to approximate 
 
 
 
 . Different 
 
 
 
  may have different 
 
 
 
  based on the hardness to be approximated with elements in the frame. The worst case to estimate a function in 
 
 
 
  is defined as



For another frame 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  is better than frame 
 
 
 
  at level 
 
 
 
 . And if there exists a 
 
 
 
 
  that for each 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
  is better than 
 
 
 
  broadly.
Overcomplete frames are usually constructed in three ways.

Combine a set of bases, such as wavelet basis and Fourier basis, to obtain an overcomplete frame.
Enlarge the range of parameters in some frame, such as in Gabor frame and wavelet frame, to have an overcomplete frame.
Add some other functions to an existing complete basis to achieve an overcomplete frame.

An example of an overcomplete frame is shown below. The collected data is in a two-dimensional space, and in this case a basis with two elements should be able to explain all the data. However, when noise is included in the data, a basis may not be able to express the properties of the data. If an overcomplete frame with four elements corresponding to the four axes in the figure is used to express the data, each point would be able to have a good expression by the overcomplete frame.
Image:OvercompleteframeGuoxian.jpg|An example of an overcomplete frame
The flexibility of the overcomplete frame is one of its key advantages when used in expressing a signal or approximating a function. However, because of this redundancy, a function can have multiple expressions under an overcomplete frame.6 When the frame is finite, the decomposition can be expressed as



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the function one wants to approximate, 
 
 
 
  is the matrix containing all the elements in the frame, and 
 
 
 
  is the coefficients of 
 
 
 
  under the representation of 
 
 
 
 . Without any other constraint, the frame will choose to give 
 
 
 
 
  with minimal norm in 
 
 
 
 . Based on this, some other properties may also be considered when solving the equation, such as sparsity. So different researchers have been working on solving this equation by adding other constraints in the objective function. For example, a constraint minimizing 
 
 
 
 's norm in 
 
 
 
  may be used in solving this equation. This should be equivalent to the Lasso regression in statistics community. Bayesian approach is also used to eliminate the redundancy in an overcompete frame. Lweicki and Sejnowski proposed an algorithm for overcomplete frame by viewing it as a probabilistic model of the observed data.7 Recently, the overcomplete Gabor frame has been combined with bayesian variable selection method to achieve both small norm expansion coefficients in 
 
 
 
  and sparsity in elements.8
Examples of overcomplete frames
In modern analysis in signal processing and other engineering field, various overcomplete frames are proposed and used. Here two common used frames, Gabor frames and wavelet frames, are introduced and discussed.
Gabor frames
In usual Fourier transformation, the function in time domain is transformed to the frequency domain. However, the transformation only shows the frequency property of this function and loses its information in the time domain. If a window function 
 
 
 
 , which only has nonzero value in a small interval, is multiplied with the original function before operating the Fourier transformation, both the information in time and frequency domains may remain at the chosen interval. When a sequence of translation of 
 
 
 
  is used in the transformation, the information of the function in time domain are kept after the transformation.
Let operators









A Gabor frame (named after Dennis Gabor and also called Weyl-Heisenberg frame) in 
 
 
 
  is defined as the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a fixed function.9 However, not for every 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

 
  forms a frame on 
 
 
 
 . For example, when 
 
 
 
 , it is not a frame for 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is possible to be a frame, in which case it is a Riesz basis. So the possible situation for 
 
 
 
  being an overcomplete frame is 
 
 
 
 . The Gabor family 
 
 
 
  is also a frame and sharing the same frame bounds as 
 
 

Different kinds of window function 
 
 
 
  may be used in Gabor frame. Here examples of three window functions are shown, and the condition for the corresponding Gabor system being a frame is shown as follows.
Image:WindowfunctionsGuoxian.jpg|Three window functions used in Gabor frame generation.
(1) 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a frame when 
 
 

(2) 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a frame when 
 
 

(3) 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function. The situation for 
 
 
 
  to be a frame stands as follows.
1) 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , not a frame
2) 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , not a frame
3) 
 
 
 
 , is a frame
4) 
 
 
 
  and is an irrational, and 
 
 
 
 , is a frame
5) 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are relatively primes, 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and be a natural number, not a frame
7) 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the biggest integer not exceeding 
 
 
 
 , is a frame.
The above discussion is a summary of chapter 8 in.10
Wavelet frames
A collection of wavelet usually refers to a set of functions based on 
 
 




This forms an orthonormal basis for 
 
 
 
 . However, when 
 
 
 
  can take values in 
 
 
 
 , the set represents an overcomplete frame and called undecimated wavelet basis. In general case, a wavelet frame is defined as a frame for 
 
 
 
  of the form



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . The upper and lower bound of this frame can be computed as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  be the Fourier transform for 
 
 




When 
 
 
 
  are fixed, define






Then






Furthermore, when



$$\sum_{j=0}^\infty \hat{\psi}(2^j\gamma)\overline{\hat{\psi}(2^j(\gamma+q))}=0$$, for all odd integers $q$
the generated frame $\{\psi_{j,k}\}_{j,k\in Z}$ is a tight frame.
The discussion in this section is based on chapter 11 in.11
Applications
Overcomplete Gabor frames and Wavelet frames have been used in various research area including signal detection, image representation, object recognition, noise reduction, sampling theory, operator theory, harmonic analysis, nonlinear sparse approximation, pseudodifferential operators, wireless communications, geophysics, quantum computing, and filter banks.1213
References
"
Category:Linear algebra



C. Heil, A Basis Theory Primer: Expanded Edition. Boston, MA: Birkhauser, 2010.↩
R. Balan, P. Casazza, C. Heil, and Z. Landau, Density, overcompleteness, and localization of frames. I. theory, The Journal of Fourier Analysis and Applications, vol. 12, no. 2, 2006.↩
R. J. Duffin and A. C. Schaeffer, A class of nonharmonic fourier series, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 341{366, 1952. [Online]. Available: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1990760↩
K. Grochenig, Foundations of time-frequency analysis. Boston, MA: Birkhauser, 2000.↩
1, STA218, Data Mining Class Note at Duke University↩
M. S. Lewicki and T. J. Sejnowski, Learning overcomplete representations, Neural Computation, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 337{365, 2000.↩

P. Wolfe, S. Godsill, and W. Ng, Bayesian variable selection and regularization for time-frequency surface estimation, J. R. Statist. Soc. B, vol. 66, no. 3, 2004.↩
O. Christensen, An Introduction to Frames and Riesz Bases. Boston, MA: Birkhauser, 2003.↩








