


Complex normal distribution




Complex normal distribution

In probability theory, the family of complex normal distributions characterizes complex random variables whose real and imaginary parts are jointly normal.1 The complex normal family has three parameters: location parameter μ, covariance matrix Γ, and the relation matrix C. The standard complex normal is the univariate distribution with μ = 0, Γ = 1, and C = 0.
An important subclass of complex normal family is called the circularly-symmetric complex normal and corresponds to the case of zero relation matrix and zero mean
 
 
 
 .2 Circular symmetric complex normal random variables are used extensively in signal processing, and are sometimes referred to as just complex normal in signal processing literature.
Definition
Suppose X and Y are random vectors in Rk such that vec[X Y] is a 2k-dimensional normal random vector. Then we say that the complex random vector


 
  has the complex normal distribution. This distribution can be described with 3 parameters:3


 
  where Z ′ denotes matrix transpose, and Z denotes complex conjugate. Here the location parameter μ can be an arbitrary k-dimensional complex vector; the covariance matrix Γ must be Hermitian and non-negative definite; the relation matrix C should be symmetric. Moreover, matrices Γ and C are such that the matrix


 
  is also non-negative definite.4
Matrices Γ and C can be related to the covariance matrices of X and Y via expressions


 
 
  and conversely



Density function
The probability density function for complex normal distribution can be computed as



where R = C′ Γ −1 and P = Γ − RC.
Characteristic function
The characteristic function of complex normal distribution is given by 5


 
  where the argument 
 
 
 
  is a k-dimensional complex vector.
Properties

If Z is a complex normal k-vector, A an ℓ×k matrix, and b a constant '' ℓ''-vector, then the linear transform  will be distributed also complex-normally:





If Z is a complex normal k-vector, then





Central limit theorem. If z1, …, zT are independent and identically distributed complex random variables, then



 
  where Γ = E[ zz′ ] and C = E[ zz′ ].
Circularly-symmetric and zero mean complex normal distribution
The circularly-symmetric and zero mean complex normal distribution 6 corresponds to the case of zero mean and zero relation matrix, μ=0, C=0. If  is circularly-symmetric complex normal, then the vector vec[X Y] is multivariate normal with covariance structure


 
  where  and . This is usually denoted


 
  and its distribution can also be simplified as



Therefore, if the non-zero mean 
 
 
 
  and covariance matrix 
 
 
 
  are unknown, a suitable log likelihood function for a single observation vector 
 
 
 
 
  would be



The standard complex normal corresponds to the distribution of a scalar random variable with μ = 0, C = 0 and Γ = 1. Thus, the standard complex normal distribution has density



This expression demonstrates why the case C = 0, μ = 0 is called “circularly-symmetric”. The density function depends only on the magnitude of z but not on its argument. As such, the magnitude |z| of standard complex normal random variable will have the Rayleigh distribution and the squared magnitude |z|2 will have the Exponential distribution, whereas the argument will be distributed uniformly on [−π, π].
If {z1, …, zn} are independent and identically distributed k-dimensional circular complex normal random variables with μ = 0, then random squared norm


 
  has the Generalized chi-squared distribution and the random matrix


 
  has the complex Wishart distribution with n degrees of freedom. This distribution can be described by density function


 
  where n ≥ k, and w is a k×k nonnegative-definite matrix.
See also

Directional statistics#Distribution of the mean
Normal distribution
Multivariate normal distribution
Generalized chi-squared distribution
Wishart distribution

References




"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Multivariate continuous distributions Category:Complex numbers Category:Probability distributions



↩
bookchapter, Gallager.R, pg9.↩
↩


bookchapter, Gallager.R↩




