


True arithmetic




True arithmetic

In mathematical logic, true arithmetic is the set of all true statements about the arithmetic of natural numbers (Boolos, Burgess, and Jeffrey 2002:295). This is the theory associated with the standard model of the Peano axioms in the language of the first-order Peano axioms. True arithmetic is occasionally called Skolem arithmetic, though this term usually refers to the different theory of natural numbers with multiplication.
Definition
The signature of Peano arithmetic includes the addition, multiplication, and successor function symbols, the equality and less-than relation symbols, and a constant symbol for 0. The (well-formed) formulas of the language of first-order arithmetic are built up from these symbols together with the logical symbols in the usual manner of first-order logic.
The structure

 
  is defined to be a model of Peano arithmetic as follows.

The domain of discourse is the set 
 
 
 
  of natural numbers.
The symbol 0 is interpreted as the number 0.
The function symbols are interpreted as the usual arithmetical operations on 
 
 

The equality and less-than relation symbols are interpreted as the usual equality and order relation on 
 
 


This structure is known as the standard model or intended interpretation of first-order arithmetic.
A sentence in the language of first-order arithmetic is said to be true in 
 
 
 
  if it is true in the structure just defined. The notation 
 
 
 
  is used to indicate that the sentence φ is true in 
 
 

True arithmetic is defined to be the set of all sentences in the language of first-order arithmetic that are true in 
 
 
 
 , written . This set is, equivalently, the (complete) theory of the structure 
 
 
 
  (see theories associated with a structure).
Arithmetic indefinability
The central result on true arithmetic is the indefinability theorem of Alfred Tarski (1936). It states that the set  is not arithmetically definable. This means that there is no formula 
 
 
 
  in the language of first-order arithmetic such that, for every sentence θ in this language,


 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  Here 
 
 
 
  is the numeral of the canonical Gödel number of the sentence θ.
Post's theorem is a sharper version of the indefinability theorem that shows a relationship between the definability of  and the Turing degrees, using the arithmetical hierarchy. For each natural number n, let  be the subset of  consisting of only sentences that are 
 
 
 
  or lower in the arithmetical hierarchy. Post's theorem shows that, for each n,  is arithmetically definable, but only by a formula of complexity higher than 
 
 
 
 . Thus no single formula can define , because


 
  but no single formula can define  for arbitrarily large n.
Computability properties
As discussed above,  is not arithmetically definable, by Tarski's theorem. A corollary of Post's theorem establishes that the Turing degree of  is 0(ω), and so  is not decidable nor recursively enumerable.
is closely related to the theory  of the recursively enumerable Turing degrees, in the signature of partial orders (Shore 1999:184). In particular, there are computable functions S and T such that:

For each sentence φ in the signature of first order arithmetic, φ is in  if and only if S(φ) is in 
For each sentence ψ in the signature of partial orders, ψ is in  if and only if T(ψ) is in .

Model-theoretic properties
True arithmetic is an unstable theory, and so has 
 
 
 
  models for each uncountable cardinal 
 
 
 
 . As there are continuum many types over the empty set, true arithmetic also has 
 
 
 
  countable models. Since the theory is complete, all of its models are elementarily equivalent.
True theory of second-order arithmetic
The true theory of second-order arithmetic consists of all the sentences in the language of second-order arithmetic that are satisfied by the standard model of second-order arithmetic, whose first-order part is the structure 
 
 
 
  and whose second-order part consists of every subset of 
 
 
 
 .
The true theory of first-order arithmetic, , is a subset of the true theory of second order arithmetic, and  is definable in second-order arithmetic. However, the generalization of Post's theorem to the analytical hierarchy shows that the true theory of second-order arithmetic is not definable by any single formula in second-order arithmetic.
Simpson (1977) has shown that the true theory of second-order arithmetic is computably interpretable with the theory of the partial order of all Turing degrees, in the signature of partial orders, and vice versa.
References


.

.

.

Tarski, Alfred (1936), "Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen". An English translation "The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages" appears in Corcoran, J., (ed.), Logic, Semantics and Metamathematics, 1983.

"
Category:Model theory Category:Formal theories of arithmetic


