


Weingarten function




Weingarten function

In mathematics, Weingarten functions are rational functions indexed by partitions of integers that can be used to calculate integrals of products of matrix coefficients over classical groups. They were first studied by  who found their asymptotic behavior, and named by , who evaluated them explicitly for the unitary group.
Unitary groups
Weingarten functions are used for evaluating integrals over the unitary group Ud of products of matrix coefficients of the form


 
  (Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the conjugate transpose of 
 
 
 
 , alternatively denoted as 
 
 
 
 .)
This integral is equal to


 
  where Wg is the Weingarten function, given by


 
  where the sum is over all partitions λ of q . Here χλ is the character if Sq corresponding to the partition λ and s is the Schur polynomial of λ, so that sλd(1) is the dimension of the representation of Ud corresponding to λ.
The Weingarten functions are rational functions in d. They can have poles for small values of d, which cancel out in the formula above. There is an alternative inequivalent definition of Weingarten functions, where one only sums over partitions with at most d parts. This is no longer a rational function of d, but is finite for all positive integers d. The two sorts of Weingarten functions coincide for d larger than q, and either can be used in the formula for the integral.
Examples
The first few Weingarten functions Wg(σd) are


 
  (The trivial case where q = 0)

















 
  where permutations σ are denoted by their cycle shapes.
There exists a computer algebra program to produce these expressions.1
Asymptotic behavior
For large d, the Weingarten function Wg has the asymptotic behavior



where the permutation σ is a product of cycles of lengths Ci, and cn = (2n)!/n!(n + 1)! is a Catalan number, and |σ| is the smallest number of transpositions that σ is a product of. There exists a diagrammatic method2 to systematically calculate the integrals over the unitary group as a power series in 1/d.
Orthogonal and symplectic groups
For orthogonal and symplectic groups the Weingarten functions were evaluated by . Their theory is similar to the case of the unitary group. They are parameterized by partitions such that all parts have even size.
External links





References


"
Category:Random matrices Category:Mathematical physics



Z. Puchała and J.A. Miszczak, Symbolic integration with respect to the Haar measure on the unitary group in Mathematica., arXiv:1109.4244 (2011).↩
P.W. Brouwer and C.W.J. Beenakker, Diagrammatic method of integration over the unitary group, with applications to quantum transport in mesoscopic systems, J. Math. Phys. 37, 4904 (1996), arXiv:cond-mat/9604059.↩




