


Hitchin–Thorpe inequality




Hitchin–Thorpe inequality

In differential geometry the Hitchin–Thorpe inequality is a relation which restricts the topology of 4-manifolds that carry an Einstein metric.
Statement of the Hitchin–Thorpe inequality
Let M be a compact, oriented, smooth four-dimensional manifold. If there exists a Riemannian metric on M which is an Einstein metric, then following inequality holds



where 
 
 
 
  is the Euler characteristic of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the signature of 
 
 
 
 . This inequality was first stated by John Thorpe1 in a footnote to a 1969 paper focusing on manifolds of higher dimension. Nigel Hitchin then rediscovered the inequality, and gave a complete characterization 2 of the equality case in 1974; he found that if 
 
 
 
  is an Einstein manifold with 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  must be a flat torus, a Calabi–Yau manifold, or a quotient thereof.
Idea of the proof
The main ingredients in the proof of the Hitchin–Thorpe inequality are the decomposition of the Riemann curvature tensor and the Generalized Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
Failure of the converse
A natural question to ask is whether the Hitchin–Thorpe inequality provides a sufficient condition for the existence of Einstein metrics. In 1995, Claude LeBrun and Andrea Sambusetti independently showed that the answer is no: there exist infinitely many non-homeomorphic compact, smooth, oriented 4-manifolds M that carry no Einstein metrics but nevertheless satisfy



LeBrun's examples 3 are actually simply connected, and the relevant obstruction depends on the smooth structure of the manifold. By contrast, Sambusetti's obstruction 4 only applies to 4-manifolds with infinite fundamental group, but the volume-entropy estimate he uses to prove non-existence only depends on the homotopy type of the manifold.
Footnotes


References



"
Einstein manifolds Category:Geometric inequalities Einstein manifold



J. Thorpe, Some remarks on the Gauss-Bonnet formula, J. Math. Mech. 18 (1969) pp. 779--786.
N. Hitchin, On compact four-dimensional Einstein manifolds, J. Diff. Geom. 9 (1974) pp. 435--442.
C. LeBrun, Four-manifolds without Einstein Metrics, Math. Res. Letters 3 (1996) pp. 133--147.
A. Sambusetti, An obstruction to the existence of Einstein metrics on 4-manifolds, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 322 (1996) pp. 1213--1218.




