


Indefinite product




Indefinite product

In mathematics, the indefinite product operator is the inverse operator of 
 
 
 
 . It is like a discrete version of the indefinite product integral. Some authors use term discrete multiplicative integration1
Thus



More explicitly, if 
 
 
 
 , then



If F(x) is a solution of this functional equation for a given f(x), then so is CF(x) for any constant C. Therefore each indefinite product actually represents a family of functions, differing by a multiplicative constant.
Period rule
If 
 
 
 
  is a period of function 
 
 
 
  then



Connection to indefinite sum
Indefinite product can be expressed in terms of indefinite sum:



Alternative usage
Some authors use the phrase "indefinite product" in a slightly different but related way to describe a product in which the numerical value of the upper limit is not given.2 e.g.


 
 .
Rules









List of indefinite products
This is a list of indefinite products 
 
 
 
 . Not all functions have an indefinite product which can be expressed in elementary functions.




























(see K-function)
 





(see Barnes G-function)
 





(see super-exponential function)
 




























See also

Indefinite sum
Product integral
List of derivatives and integrals in alternative calculi

References
Further reading

http://reference.wolfram.com/mathematica/ref/Product.html -Indefinite products with Mathematica
http://www.math.rwth-aachen.de/MapleAnswers/660.html - bug in Maple V to Maple 8 handling of indefinite product
Markus Müller. How to Add a Non-Integer Number of Terms, and How to Produce Unusual Infinite Summations
Markus Mueller, Dierk Schleicher. Fractional Sums and Euler-like Identities

"
Category:Mathematical analysis Indefinite sums Indefinite sums Category:Non-Newtonian calculus



N. Aliev, N. Azizi and M. Jahanshahi (2007) "Invariant functions for discrete derivatives and their applications to solve non-homogenous linear and non-linear difference equations".↩
Algorithms for Nonlinear Higher Order Difference Equations, Manuel Kauers↩




