


Sethi model




Sethi model

The Sethi model was developed by Suresh P. Sethi and describes the process of how sales evolve over time in response to advertising.1 The rate of change in sales depend on three effects: response to advertising that acts positively on the unsold portion of the market, the loss due to forgetting or possibly due to competitive factors that act negatively on the sold portion of the market, and a random effect that can go either way.
Suresh Sethi published his paper "Deterministic and Stochastic Optimization of a Dynamic Advertising Model" in 1983.2 The Sethi model is a modification as well as a stochastic extension of the Vidale-Wolfe advertising model.3 The model and its competitive extensions have been used extensively in the literature.456789101112 Moreover, some of these extensions have been also tested empirically.13141516
Model
The Sethi advertising model or simply the Sethi model provides a sales-advertising dynamics in the form of the following stochastic differential equation:


 
 .
Where:



 
  is the market share at time 
 
 



 
 
  is the rate of advertising at time 
 
 



 
  is the coefficient of the effectiveness of advertising


 
  is the decay constant


 
  is the diffusion coefficient


 
 
  is the Wiener process (Standard Brownian motion); 
 
 
 
  is known as White noise.

Explanation
The rate of change in sales depend on three effects: response to advertising that acts positively on the unsold portion of the market via 
 
 
 
 , the loss due to forgetting or possibly due to competitive factors that act negatively on the sold portion of the market via 
 
 
 
 , and a random effect using a diffusion or White noise term that can go either way.

The coefficient 
 
 
 
  is the coefficient of the effectiveness of advertising innovation.
The coefficient 
 
 
 
 
  is the decay constant.
The square-root term brings in the so-called word-of-mouth effect at least at low sales levels.1718


The diffusion term 
 
 
 
  brings in the random effect.

Example of an optimal advertising problem
Subject to the Sethi model above with the initial market share 
 
 
 
 , consider the following objective function:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the sales revenue corresponding to the total market, i.e., when 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  denotes the discount rate.
The function 
 
 
 
  is known as the value function for this problem, and it is shown to be19



where



The optimal control for this problem is20



where



and



Extensions of the Sethi model

Competitive extensions-Nash differential games212223242526
Empirical testing of the Sethi model and extensions27282930
Stackelberg differential games 3132


The Sethi durable goods model3334

See also

Bass diffusion model
differential games
Stochastic differential equation
Diffusion of innovations
Stackleberg competition
Nash equilibrium

References
"
Category:Advertising Category:Mathematical economics Category:Optimal control Category:Stochastic processes





















Sethi, S.P., Thompson, G.L. (2000). Optimal Control Theory: Applications to Management Science and Economics. Second Edition. Springer. ISBN 0-387-28092-8 and ISBN 0-7923-8608-6, pp. 352-355. Slides are available at http://www.utdallas.edu/~sethi/OPRE7320presentation.html














Krishnamoorthy, A., Prasad, A., Sethi, S.P. (2009). Optimal Pricing and Advertising in a Durable-Good Duopoly. European Journal of Operations Research.




