


Real-valued function




Real-valued function

  In mathematics, a real-valued function or real function is a function whose values are real numbers. In other words, it is a function that assigns a real number to each member of its domain.
Many important function spaces are defined to consist of real functions.
In general
Let 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary set. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of all functions from 
 
 
 
  to real numbers 
 
 
 
 
 . Because 
 
 
 
  is a field, 
 
 
 
  is a vector space and a commutative algebra (structure) over reals:



 
  – vector addition


 
  – additive identity


 
 
  – scalar multiplication


 
  – pointwise multiplication

Also, since 
 
 
 
  is an ordered set, there is a partial order on 
 
 
 
 :



 
 .



 
 
  is a partially ordered ring.
Measurable
The σ-algebra of Borel sets is an important structure on real numbers. If 
 
 
 
  has its σ-algebra and a function 
 
 
 
  is such that the preimage  of any Borel set 
 
 
 
  belongs to that σ-algebra, then 
 
 
 
  is said to be measurable. Measurable functions also form a vector space and an algebra as explained above.
Moreover, a set (family) of real-valued functions on 
 
 
 
 
  can actually define a σ-algebra on 
 
 
 
  generated by all preimages of all Borel sets (or of intervals only, it is not important). This is the way how σ-algebras arise in (Kolmogorov's) probability theory, where real-valued functions on the sample space

 
  are real-valued random variables.
Continuous
Real numbers form a topological space and a complete metric space. Continuous real-valued functions (which implies that 
 
 
 
  is a topological space) are important in theories of topological spaces and of metric spaces. The extreme value theorem states that for any real continuous function on a compact space its global maximum and minimum exist.
The concept of metric space itself is defined with a real-valued function of two variables, the metric, which is continuous. The space of continuous functions on a compact Hausdorff space has a particular importance. Convergent sequences also can be considered as real-valued continuous functions on a special topological space.
Continuous functions also form a vector space and an algebra as explained above, and are a subclass of measurable functions because any topological space has the σ-algebra generated by open (or closed) sets.
Smooth
Real numbers are used as the codomain to define smooth functions. A domain of a real smooth function can be the real coordinate space (which yields a real multivariable function), a topological vector space,1 an open subset of them, or a smooth manifold.
Spaces of smooth functions also are vector spaces and algebras as explained above, and are a subclass of continuous functions.
Appearances in measure theory
A measure on a set is a non-negative real-valued functional on a σ-algebra of subsets.2 Lp spaces on sets with a measure are defined from aforementioned real-valued measurable functions, although they are actually quotient spaces. More precisely, whereas a function satisfying an appropriate summability condition defines an element of Lp space, in the opposite direction for any  and 
 
 
 
  which is not an atom, the value 
 
 
 
 
  is undefined. Though, real-valued Lp spaces still have some of the structure explicated above. Each of Lp spaces is a vector space and have a partial order, and there exists a pointwise multiplication of "functions" which changes 
 
 
 
 , namely


 
  For example, pointwise product of two L2 functions belongs to L1.
Other appearances
Other contexts where real-valued functions and their special properties are used include monotonic functions (on ordered sets), convex functions (on vector and affine spaces), harmonic and subharmonic functions (on Riemannian manifolds), analytic functions (usually of one or more real variables), algebraic functions (on real algebraic varieties), and polynomials (of one or more real variables).
See also

Real analysis
Partial differential equations, a major user of real-valued functions
Norm (mathematics)
Scalar (mathematics)

Footnotes
External links
"
Category:Mathematical analysis Category:Types of functions Category:General topology Category:Metric geometry Category:Vector spaces Category:Measure theory



Different definitions of derivative exist in general, but for finite dimensions they result in equivalent definitions of classes of smooth functions.
Actually, a measure may have values in 
 
 
 
 : see extended real number line.




