


Indefinite sum




Indefinite sum
In [[mathematics]] the '''indefinit
 e sum''' operator (also known as the antidifference operator), denoted by 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ,123 is the linear operator, inverse of the forward difference operator

 
 . It relates to the forward difference operator as the indefinite integral relates to the derivative. Thus



More explicitly, if 
 
 
 
 , then



If F(x) is a solution of this functional equation for a given f(x), then so is F(x)+C(x) for any periodic function C(x) with period 1. Therefore each indefinite sum actually represents a family of functions. However the solution equal to its Newton series expansion is unique up to an additive constant C.
Fundamental theorem of discrete calculus
Indefinite sums can be used to calculate definite sums with the formula:4



Definitions
Laplace summation formula




where 
 
 
 
 
  are the Bernoulli numbers of the second kind.5


Newton's formula




where 
 
 
 
  is the falling factorial.
 

Faulhaber's formula



provided that the right-hand side of the equation converges.
Mueller's formula
If 
 
 
 
  then6



Euler–Maclaurin formula



Choice of the constant term
Often the constant C in indefinite sum is fixed from the following condition.
Let



Then the constant C is fixed from the condition



or



Alternatively, Ramanujan's sum can be used:



or at 1



respectively78
Summation by parts
Indefinite summation by parts:






Definite summation by parts:



Period rules
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a period of function 
 
 
 
  then



If 
 
 
 
  is an antiperiod of function 
 
 
 
 , that is 
 
 
 
 
  then



Alternative usage
Some authors use the phrase "indefinite sum" to describe a sum in which the numerical value of the upper limit is not given. e.g.



In this case a closed form expression F(k) for the sum is a solution of


 
  which is called the telescoping equation.9 It is inverse to backward difference

 
  operator. It is related to the forward antidifference operator using the fundamental theorem of discrete calculus described earlier.
List of indefinite sums
This is a list of indefinite sums of various functions. Not every function has an indefinite sum that can be expressed in terms of elementary functions.
Antidifferences of rational functions










where 
 
 
 
 , the generalized to real order Bernoulli polynomials.
 





where 
 
 
 
 
  is the polygamma function.
 





where 
 
 
 
  is the digamma function.
 

Antidifferences of exponential functions



Particularly,



Antidifferences of logarithmic functions






Antidifferences of hyperbolic functions










where 
 
 
 
 
  is the q-digamma function.
 

Antidifferences of trigonometric functions
















where 
 
 
 
  is the q-digamma function.
 







Antidifferences of inverse hyperbolic functions



Antidifferences of inverse trigonometric functions



Antidifferences of special functions







where 
 
 
 
  is the incomplete gamma function.
 





where 
 
 
 
 
  is the falling factorial.
 





(see super-exponential function)
 

See also

Indefinite product
Time scale calculus
List of derivatives and integrals in alternative calculi

References
Further reading

"Difference Equations: An Introduction with Applications", Walter G. Kelley, Allan C. Peterson, Academic Press, 2001, ISBN 0-12-403330-X
Markus Müller. How to Add a Non-Integer Number of Terms, and How to Produce Unusual Infinite Summations
Markus Mueller, Dierk Schleicher. Fractional Sums and Euler-like Identities
S. P. Polyakov. Indefinite summation of rational functions with additional minimization of the summable part. Programmirovanie, 2008, Vol. 34, No. 2.
"Finite-Difference Equations And Simulations", Francis B. Hildebrand, Prenctice-Hall, 1968

"
Category:Mathematical analysis Indefinite sums Category:Finite differences Category:Linear operators in calculus




On Computing Closed Forms for Indefinite Summations. Yiu-Kwong Man. J. Symbolic Computation (1993), 16, 355-376
"If Y is a function whose first difference is the function y, then Y is called an indefinite sum of y and denoted Δ−1y" [http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=5rFOeE0zvY4C&pg;;=PA41&dq;=%22indefinite+sum%22 Introduction to Difference Equations], Samuel Goldberg
"Handbook of discrete and combinatorial mathematics", Kenneth H. Rosen, John G. Michaels, CRC Press, 1999, ISBN 0-8493-0149-1
Bernoulli numbers of the second kind on Mathworld
Markus Müller. How to Add a Non-Integer Number of Terms, and How to Produce Unusual Infinite Summations (note that he uses a slightly alternative definition of fractional sum in his work, i.e. inverse to backwards difference, hence 1 as the lower limit in his formula)
Bruce C. Berndt, Ramanujan's Notebooks, Ramanujan's Theory of Divergent Series, Chapter 6, Springer-Verlag (ed.), (1939), pp. 133–149.
Éric Delabaere, Ramanujan's Summation, Algorithms Seminar 2001–2002, F. Chyzak (ed.), INRIA, (2003), pp. 83–88.
Algorithms for Nonlinear Higher Order Difference Equations, Manuel Kauers




