


Birman–Wenzl algebra




Birman–Wenzl algebra

In mathematics, the Birman-Murakami-Wenzl (BMW) algebra, introduced by  and , is a two-parameter family of algebras Cn(ℓ, m) of dimension 1·3·5 ··· (2n − 1) having the Hecke algebra of the symmetric group as a quotient. It is related to the Kauffman polynomial of a link. It is a deformation of the Brauer algebra in much the same way that Hecke algebras are deformations of the group algebra of the symmetric group.
Definition
For each natural number n, the BMW algebra Cn(ℓ, m) is generated by G1,G2,...,Gn-1,E1,E2,...,En-1 and relations:





 
          
 
 






 
       
 
 



 
       
 
 



 
      
 
 

These relations imply the further relations:






This is the original definition given by Birman & Wenzl. However a slight change by the introduction of some minus signs is sometimes made, in accordance with Kauffman's 'Dubrovnik' version of his link invariant. In that way, the fourth relation in Birman & Wenzl's original version is changed to
 (1) (Kauffman skein relation)









Given invertibility of m, the rest of the relations in Birman & Wenzl's original version can be reduced to


(2) (Idempotent relation)









(3) (Braid relations)









(4) (Tangle relations)









(5) (Delooping relations)








Properties

The dimension of Cn(ℓ, m) is 
 
 
 
 .
Iwahori-Hecke algebra associated with the symmetric group

 
  is a quotient of the Birman-Murakami-Wenzl algebra Cn.
The Braid group embeds in the BMW algebra 
 
 
 
 .

Isomorphism between the BMW algebras and Kauffman's tangle algebras
It is proved by  that the BMW algebra Cn(ℓ, m) is isomorphic to the Kauffman's tangle algebra KTn, the isomorphism

 
  is defined by
  and 
Baxterisation of Birman-Murakami-Wenzl algebra
Define the face operator as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are determined by


 
  and


 
 .
Then the face operator satisfies the Yang-Baxter equation.


 
  Now 
 
 
 
  with


 
 . In the limits

 
 , the braids

 
  can be recovered up to a scale factor.
History
In 1984, Vaughan Jones introduced a new polynomial invariant of link isotopy types which is called the Jones polynomial. The invariants are related to the traces of irreducible representations of Hecke algebras associated with the symmetric groups. In 1986,  showed that the Kauffman polynomial can also be interpreted as a function 
 
 
 
  on a certain associative algebra. In 1989,  constructed a two-parameter family of algebras Cn(ℓ, m) with the Kauffman polynomial Kn(ℓ, m) as trace after appropriate renormalization.
References





"
Category:Representation theory Category:Knot theory Category:Diagram algebras


