


Magnus expansion




Magnus expansion

In mathematics and physics, the Magnus expansion, named after Wilhelm Magnus (1907–1990), provides an exponential representation of the solution of a first order homogeneous linear differential equation for a linear operator. In particular it furnishes the fundamental matrix of a system of linear ordinary differential equations of order 
 
 
 
  with varying coefficients. The exponent is built up as an infinite series whose terms involve multiple integrals and nested commutators.
Magnus approach and its interpretation
Given the 
 
 
 
  coefficient matrix 
 
 
 
 , one wishes to solve the initial value problem associated with the linear ordinary differential equation



for the unknown 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector function 
 
 
 
 .
When n = 1, the solution simply reads



This is still valid for n > 1 if the matrix 
 
 
 
  satisfies  A(t2) A(t1)}} for any pair of values of t, t1 and t2. In particular, this is the case if the matrix 
 
 
 
  is independent of 
 
 
 
 . In the general case, however, the expression above is no longer the solution of the problem.
The approach introduced by Magnus to solve the matrix initial value problem is to express the solution by means of the exponential of a certain 
 
 
 
  matrix function ,


 
  which is subsequently constructed as a series expansion,








where, for simplicity, it is customary to write 
 
 
 
  for  and to take t0 = 0.
Magnus appreciated that, since  A(t)}}, using a Poincaré−Hausdorff matrix identity, he could relate the time-derivative of 
 
 
 
  to the generating function of Bernoulli numbers and the adjoint endomorphism of 
 
 
 
 ,








to solve for 
 
 
 
  recursively in terms of 
 
 
 
 , "in a continuous analog of the CBH expansion", as outlined in a subsequent section.
The equation above constitutes the Magnus expansion or Magnus series for the solution of matrix linear initial value problem. The first four terms of this series read


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the matrix commutator of A and B.
These equations may be interpreted as follows:  coincides exactly with the exponent in the scalar (
 
 
 
  = 1) case, but this equation cannot give the whole solution. If one insists in having an exponential representation (Lie group), the exponent needs to be corrected. The rest of the Magnus series provides that correction systematically: 
 
 
 
  or parts of it are in the Lie algebra of the Lie group of the evolution.
In applications, one can rarely sum exactly the Magnus series and one has to truncate it to get approximate solutions. The main advantage of the Magnus proposal is that, very often, the truncated series still shares with the exact solution important qualitative properties, at variance with other conventional perturbation theories. For instance, in classical mechanics the symplectic character of the time evolution is preserved at every order of approximation. Similarly the unitary character of the time evolution operator in quantum mechanics is also preserved (in contrast, e.g., to the Dyson series solving the same problem).
Convergence of the expansion
From a mathematical point of view, the convergence problem is the following: given a certain matrix 
 
 
 
 , when can the exponent 
 
 
 
  be obtained as the sum of the Magnus series?
A sufficient condition for this series to converge for 
 
 
 
  is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes a matrix norm. This result is generic, in the sense that one may construct specific matrices 
 
 
 
  for which the series diverges for any 
 
 
 
 .
Magnus generator
A recursive procedure to generate all the terms in the Magnus expansion utilizes the matrices , defined recursively through





 
  which then furnish






Here, adkΩ is a shorthand for an iterated commutator, (see adjoint endomorphism),


 
  while  are the Bernoulli numbers.
Finally, when this recursion is worked out explicitly, it is possible to express  as a linear combination of n-fold integrals of n−1 nested commutators involving 
 
 
 
  matrices 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  an expression which becomes increasingly intricate with 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
Since the 1960s, the Magnus expansion has been successfully applied as a perturbative tool in numerous areas of physics and chemistry, from atomic and molecular physics to nuclear magnetic resonance1 and quantum electrodynamics. It has been also used since 1998 as a tool to construct practical algorithms for the numerical integration of matrix linear differential equations. As they inherit from the Magnus expansion the preservation of qualitative traits of the problem, the corresponding schemes are prototypical examples of geometric numerical integrators.
See also

Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula
Derivative of the exponential map

References






"
Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Lie algebras Category:Recursion schemes Category:Mathematical physics



1.Haeberlen, U. & Waugh, J. S. Coherent Averaging Effects in Magnetic Resonance. Phys. Rev. 175, 453–467 (1968).




