


Partially ordered ring




Partially ordered ring

In abstract algebra, a partially ordered ring is a ring (A, +, · ), together with a compatible partial order, i.e. a partial order

 
  on the underlying set A that is compatible with the ring operations in the sense that it satisfies:


 
  implies 
 
 
 
  and


 
  and 
 
 
 
  imply that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .1 Various extensions of this definition exist that constrain the ring, the partial order, or both. For example, an Archimedean partially ordered ring is a partially ordered ring 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 's partially ordered additive group is Archimedean.2
An ordered ring, also called a totally ordered ring, is a partially ordered ring 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is additionally a total order.34
An l-ring, or lattice-ordered ring, is a partially ordered ring 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is additionally a lattice order.
Properties
The additive group of a partially ordered ring is always a partially ordered group.
The set of non-negative elements of a partially ordered ring (the set of elements x for which 
 
 
 
 , also called the positive cone of the ring) is closed under addition and multiplication, i.e., if P is the set of non-negative elements of a partially ordered ring, then 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
 .
The mapping of the compatible partial order on a ring A to the set of its non-negative elements is one-to-one;5 that is, the compatible partial order uniquely determines the set of non-negative elements, and a set of elements uniquely determines the compatible partial order if one exists.
If S is a subset of a ring A, and:














then the relation 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
iff

 
  defines a compatible partial order on A (ie.

 
  is a partially ordered ring).6
In any l-ring, the absolute value

 
  of an element x can be defined to be 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the maximal element. For any x and y,


 
  holds.7
f-rings
An f-ring, or Pierce–Birkhoff ring, is a lattice-ordered ring 
 
 
 
  in which 
 
 
8 and 
 
 
 
  imply that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . They were first introduced by Garrett Birkhoff and Richard S. Pierce in 1956, in a paper titled "Lattice-ordered rings", in an attempt to restrict the class of l-rings so as to eliminate a number of pathological examples. For example, Birkhoff and Pierce demonstrated an l-ring with 1 in which 1 is negative, even though being a square.9 The additional hypothesis required of f-rings eliminates this possibility.
Example
Let X be a Hausdorff space, and 
 
 
 
  be the space of all continuous, real-valued functions on X. 
 
 
 
  is an Archimedean f-ring with 1 under the following point-wise operations:








10
From an algebraic point of view the rings 
 
 
 
  are fairly rigid. For example localisations, residue rings or limits of rings of the form 
 
 
 
  are not of this form in general. A much more flexible class of f-rings containing all rings of continuous functions and resembling many of the properties of these rings, is the class of real closed rings.
Properties
A direct product of f-rings is an f-ring, an l-subring of an f-ring is an f-ring, and an l-homomorphic image of an f-ring is an f-ring.11

 
  in an f-ring.12
The category Arf consists of the Archimedean f-rings with 1 and the l-homomorphisms that preserve the identity.13
Every ordered ring is an f-ring, so every subdirect union of ordered rings is also an f-ring. Assuming the axiom of choice, a theorem of Birkhoff shows the converse, and that an l-ring is an f-ring if and only if it is l-isomorphic to a subdirect union of ordered rings.14 Some mathematicians take this to be the definition of an f-ring.15
Formally verified results for commutative ordered rings
IsarMathLib, a library for the Isabelle theorem prover, has formal verifications of a few fundamental results on commutative ordered rings. The results are proved in the ring1 context.16
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a commutative ordered ring, and 
 
 
 
 . Then:





by





The additive group of A is an ordered group

OrdRing_ZF_1_L4





 
  iff 
 
 


OrdRing_ZF_1_L7





 
  and 
 
 
 
  imply

 
  and 
 
 


OrdRing_ZF_1_L9







ordring_one_is_nonneg







OrdRing_ZF_2_L5







ord_ring_triangle_ineq



x is either in the positive set, equal to 0, or in minus the positive set.

OrdRing_ZF_3_L2



The set of positive elements of 
 
 
 
  is closed under multiplication iff A has no zero divisors.

OrdRing_ZF_3_L3



If A is non-trivial (
 
 
 
 ), then it is infinite.

ord_ring_infinite



References


Further reading


Gillman, Leonard; Jerison, Meyer Rings of continuous functions. Reprint of the 1960 edition. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, No. 43. Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1976. xiii+300 pp

External links




"
Category:Ring theory Category:Ordered algebraic structures



↩
↩




↩


 
  denotes infimum.↩




↩


↩




