


Quasi-homogeneous polynomial




Quasi-homogeneous polynomial

In algebra, a multivariate polynomial


 
  is quasi-homogeneous or weighted homogeneous, if there exists r integers 
 
 
 
 , called weights of the variables, such that the sum 
 
 
 
  is the same for all nonzero terms of f. This sum w is the weight or the degree of the polynomial.
The term quasi-homogeneous comes form the fact that a polynomial f is quasi-homogeneous if and only if


 
  for every 
 
 
 
  in any field containing the coefficients.
A polynomial 
 
 
 
  is quasi-homogeneous with weights 
 
 
 
  if and only if


 
  is a homogeneous polynomial in the 
 
 
 
 
 . In particular, a homogeneous polynomial is always quasi-homogeneous, with all weights equal to 1.
In other words, a polynomial is quasi-homogeneous if all the 
 
 
 
  belong to the same affine hyperplane. As the Newton polygon of the polynomial is the convex hull of the set 
 
 
 
  the quasi-homogeneous polynomials may also be defined as the polynomials that have a degenerate Newton polynomial (here "degenerate" means "contained in some affine hyperplane").
Introduction
Consider the polynomial 
 
 
 
 . This one has no chance of being a homogeneous polynomial; however if instead of considering 
 
 
 
  we use the pair 
 
 
 
 
  to test homogeneity, then



We say that 
 
 
 
  is a quasi-homogeneous polynomial of type (3,1), because its three pairs (i1,i2) of exponents (3,3), (1,9) and (0,12) all satisfy the linear equation 
 
 
 
 . In particular, this says that the Newton polygon of 
 
 
 
  lies in the affine space with equation 
 
 
 
 
  inside 
 
 
 
 .
The above equation is equivalent to this new one
 
 
 
 . Some authors1 prefer to use this last condition and prefer to say that our polynomial is quasi-homogeneous of type (
 
 
 
 ).
As noted above, a homogeneous polynomial 
 
 
 
  of degree d is just a quasi-homogeneous polynomial of type (1,1); in this case all its pairs of exponents will satisfy the equation 
 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a polynomial in r variables 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in a commutative ring R. We express it as a finite sum



We say that f is quasi-homogeneous of type

 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  if there exists some 
 
 
 
  such that



whenever 
 
 
 
 .
References


"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Algebraic geometry



J. Steenbrink (1977). Compositio Mathematica, tome 34, n° 2. Noordhoff International Publishing. p. 211 (Available on-line at Numdam)




