


Froda's theorem




Froda's theorem

In mathematics, Darboux-Froda's theorem, named after Alexandru Froda, a Romanian mathematician, describes the set of discontinuities of a (monotone) real-valued function of a real variable. Usually, this theorem appears in literature without a name. It was written in A. Froda' thesis in 1929 .12. As it is acknowledged in the thesis, it is in fact due Jean Gaston Darboux 3
Definitions

Consider a function 
 
 
 
  of real variable 
 
 
 
  with real values defined in a neighborhood of a point 
 
 
 
  and the function 
 
 
 
  is discontinuous at the point on the real axis 
 
 
 
 . We will call a removable discontinuity or a jump discontinuity a discontinuity of the first kind.4
Denote 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are finite we will call the difference 
 
 
 
  the ' jump'5 of f at 
 
 
 
 .

If the function is continuous at 
 
 
 
  then the jump at 
 
 
 
  is zero. Moreover, if 
 
 
 
  is not continuous at 
 
 
 
 , the jump can be zero at 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 .
Precise statement
Let f be a real-valued monotone function defined on an interval I. Then the set of discontinuities of the first kind is at most countable.
Proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be an interval and 
 
 
 
  defined on 
 
 
 
  an increasing function. We have



for any 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  points inside 
 
 
 
  at which the jump of 
 
 
 
  is greater or equal to 
 
 
 
 :



We have 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . Then






and hence
 
 
 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
  we have that the number of points at which the jump is greater than 
 
 
 
  is finite or zero.
We define the following sets:


 
 ,



We have that each set 
 
 
 
  is finite or the empty set. The union 
 
 
 
  contains all points at which the jump is positive and hence contains all points of discontinuity. Since every 
 
 
 
  is at most countable, we have that 
 
 
 
  is at most countable.
If 
 
 
 
  is decreasing the proof is similar.
If the interval 
 
 
 
  is not closed and bounded (and hence by Heine–Borel theorem not compact) then the interval can be written as a countable union of closed and bounded intervals 
 
 
 
  with the property that any two consecutive intervals have an endpoint in common
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a strictly decreasing sequence such that 
 
 
 
  In a similar way if $I=[a,b),\ b\leq+\infty\$ or if $I=(a,b)\ -\infty\leq a.
 
 In any interval  we have at most countable many points of discontinuity, and since a countable union of at most countable sets is at most countable, it follows that the set of all discontinuities is at most countable.
Remark
One can prove67 that all points of discontinuity of a monotone real-valued function defined on an interval are jump discontinuities and hence, by our definition, of the first kind. With this remark Froda's theorem takes the stronger form:
Let f be a monotone function defined on an interval $I$. Then the set of discontinuities is at most countable.
See also

Continuous function
Classification of discontinuities

Notes


References

Bernard R. Gelbaum, John M. H. Olmsted, Counterexamples in Analysis, Holden–Day, Inc., 1964. (18. Page 28)
John M. H. Olmsted, Real Variables, Appleton–Century–Crofts, Inc., New York (1956), (Page 59, Ex. 29).

"
Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in real analysis



Alexandru Froda, Sur la Distribution des Propriétés de Voisinage des Fonctions de Variables Réelles, These, Harmann, Paris, 3 December 1929
Alexandru Froda – Collected Papers (Opera Matematica), Vol.1, Ed. Academ. Romane, 2000
Jean Gaston Darboux Mémoire sur les fonctions discontinues, Annales de l'École Normale supérieure, 2-ème série, t. IV, 1875, Chap VI.
Walter Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis, McGraw-Hill 1964, (Def. 4.26, pp. 81–82)
M. Nicolescu, N. Dinculeanu, S. Marcus, Mathematical Anlaysis (Bucharest 1971), Vol.1, Pg.213, [in Romanian]
W. Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis, McGraw–Hill 1964 (Corollary, p.83)
M. Nicolescu, N. Dinculeanu, S. Marcus, Mathematical Anlaysis (Bucharest 1971), Vol.1, Pg.213, [in Romanian]




