


Pseudo-determinant




Pseudo-determinant

In linear algebra and statistics, the pseudo-determinant1 is the product of all non-zero eigenvalues of a square matrix. It coincides with the regular determinant when the matrix is non-singular.
Definition
The pseudo-determinant of a square n-by-n matrix A may be defined as:


 
  where |A| denotes the usual determinant, I denotes the identity matrix and rank(A) denotes the  rank of A.
Definition of pseudo determinant using Vahlen Matrix
The Vahlen matrix of a conformal transformation, the Möbius transformation (i.e. 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 )) is defined as 
 
 
 
 . By the pseudo determinant of the Vahlen matrix for the conformal transformation, we mean



If 
 
 
 
 , the transformation is sense-preserving (rotation) whereas if the 
 
 
 
 , the transformation is sense-preserving (reflection).
Computation for positive semi-definite case
If 
 
 
 
  is  positive semi-definite, then the  singular values and eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  coincide. In this case, if the singular value decomposition (SVD) is available, then 
 
 
 
  may be computed as the product of the non-zero singular values. If all singular values are zero, then the pseudo-determinant is 1.
Application in statistics
If a statistical procedure ordinarily compares distributions in terms of the determinants of variance-covariance matrices then, in the case of singular matrices, this comparison can be undertaken by using a combination of the ranks of the matrices and their pseudo-determinants, with the matrix of higher rank being counted as "largest" and the pseudo-determinants only being used if the ranks are equal.2 Thus pseudo-determinants are sometime presented in the outputs of statistical programs in cases where covariance matrices are singular.3
See also

Matrix determinant
Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse, which can also be obtained in terms of the non-zero singular values.

References


"
Category:Multivariate statistics Category:Matrices



 PDF
SAS documentation on "Robust Distance"
Bohling, Geoffrey C. (1997) "GSLIB-style programs for discriminant analysis and regionalized classification", Computers & Geosciences, 23 (7), 739–761 




