   Symbiocom      Symbiocom   Symbiocom is a first person  3D game developed by Istvan Pely in 1998 and is the predecessor to Zero Critical (1999).  Plot and gameplay  The player is a crew member aboard I.S.T. Rident, a class B space-faring passenger liner in the delta quadrant. Implanted into his/her brain is a "sym" (synthetic symbiont), a symbiotic  artificial intelligence . As a maintenance engineer, the player was assigned to fix    G  1     subscript  G  1    G_{1}   gravity arrays, when Rident was experiencing a problem with its artificial gravity generators. As a safety measure the captain disabled the ship's worm-drive while the gravity generator is being worked on. Disabling the worm-drive reduced the speed and altitude of the vessel. Rident is then attacked by two war ships, the Rident shakes violently knocking the passengers off balance and alarms start going off. The captain orders an SOS distress signal to be sent and hollers to prepare the lifeboats. Player falls unconscious while busy fixing ship’s gravitomagnetism.  The game starts when the player wakes up to the sound of his symplant hollering at him. I.S.T. Rident is left adrift in the depths of space and the player finds himself aboard a deserted spacecraft . The player’s objective is not only to rescue himself from the crippled transport but also to find out who destroyed the ship and what happened to the ~163 passengers aboard.  The puzzles are inventory and logic types. Each location is displayed with 3D pre-rendered graphics, with a 360 degree view and "move along a rail" videos from location to location. There are five chapters in Symbiocom, each taking place in a different location. The locales are generally unpopulated. There are no character interactions in the game, it's just the player and his symplant. However player does encounters some drones and an entertainment robot throughout the game.  External links   Symbiocom at Sentex  Symbiocom review at Gameboomers  Symbiocom at Gameboomers   "  Category:1998 video games  Category:Adventure games  Category:Bethesda Softworks games  Category:First-person adventure games  Category:Mac OS games  Category:Point-and-click adventure games  Category:Science fiction video games  Category:Windows games   