


Alan M. Frieze




Alan M. Frieze

Alan M. Frieze (born 25 October 1945 in London, England) is a professor in the Department of Mathematical Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United States. He graduated from the University of Oxford in 1966, and obtained his PhD from the University of London in 1975. His research interests lie in combinatorics, discrete optimisation and theoretical computer science. Currently, he focuses on the probabilistic aspects of these areas; in particular, the study of the asymptotic properties of random graphs, the average case analysis of algorithms, and randomised algorithms. His recent work has included approximate counting and volume computation via random walks; finding edge disjoint paths in expander graphs, and exploring anti-Ramsey theory and the stability of routing algorithms.
Key contributions
Two key contributions made by Alan Frieze are:
(1) polynomial time algorithm for approximating the volume of convex bodies
(2) algorithmic version for Szemerédi regularity lemma
Both these algorithms will be described briefly here.
Polynomial time algorithm for approximating the volume of convex bodies
The paper 1 is a joint work by Martin Dyer, Alan Frieze and Ravindran Kannan.
The main result of the paper is a randomised algorithm for finding an 
 
 
 
  approximation to the volume of a convex body 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space by assume the existence of a membership oracle. The algorithm takes time bounded by a polynomial in 
 
 
 
 , the dimension of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The algorithm is a sophisticated usage of the so-called Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method. The basic scheme of the algorithm is a nearly uniform sampling from within 
 
 
 
  by placing a grid consisting n-dimensional cubes and doing a random walk over these cubes. By using the theory of rapidly mixing Markov chains, they show that it takes a polynomial time for the random walk to settle down to being a nearly uniform distribution.
Algorithmic version for Szemerédi regularity partition
This paper 2 is a combined work by Alan Frieze and Ravindran Kannan. They use two lemmas to derive the algorithmic version of the Szemerédi regularity lemma to find an 
 
 
 
 -regular partition.

Lemma 1:
 Fix k and 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be a graph with 
 
 
 
  vertices. Let 
 
 
 
  be an equitable partition of 
 
 
 
  in classes 
 
 
 
 . Assume 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Given proofs that more than 
 
 
 
  pairs 
 
 
 
  are not 
 
 
 
 -regular, it is possible to find in O(n) time an equitable partition 
 
 
 
  (which is a refinement of 
 
 
 
 ) into 
 
 
 
  classes, with an exceptional class of cardinality at most 
 
 
 
  and such that 
 
 

Lemma 2:
 Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
  matrix with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be a positive real.
 (a) If there exist 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

 (b) If 
 
 
 
 , then there exist 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  can be constructed in polynomial time.

 These two lemmas are combined in the following algorithmic construction of the Szemerédi regularity lemma.

[Step 1] Arbitrarily divide the vertices of 
 
 
 
  into an equitable partition 
 
 
 
  with classes 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
 .
[Step 2] For every pair 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , compute 
 
 
 
 . If the pair 
 
 
 
  are not 
 
 
 
 regular then by Lemma 2 we obtain a proof that they are not 
 
 
 
 regular.
[Step 3] If there are at most 
 
 
 
  pairs that produce proofs of non 
 
 
 
 regularity that halt. 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 regular.
[Step 4] Apply Lemma 1 where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and obtain 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  classes
[Step 5] Let 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , $i=i+1$ and go to Step 2.
Awards and honours

In 1991, Frieze received (jointly with Martin Dyer and Ravi Kannan) the Fulkerson Prize in Discrete Mathematics awarded by the American Mathematical Society and the Mathematical Programming Society. The award was for the paper "A random polynomial time algorithm for approximating the volume of convex bodies" in the Journal of the ACM).
In 1997 he was a Guggenheim Fellow.
In 2000, he received the IBM Faculty Partnership Award.
In 2006 he jointly received (with Michael Krivelevich) the Professor Pazy Memorial Research Award from the United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation.
In 2011 he was selected as a SIAM Fellow.3
In 2012 he was selected as an AMS Fellow.4
In 2014 he gave a plenary talk at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Seoul, South Korea.
In 2015 he was selected as a Simons Fellow.

References and external links



Alan Frieze's web page
Fulkerson prize-winning paper
Carol Frieze's web page
[http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/indices/a-tree/f/Frieze:Alan_M=.html Alan Frieze's publications at DBLP]
[https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/browse?type=authorℴ=ASC&rpp;;=20&value;=Frieze%2C+A. Certain self-archived works are available here]

"
Category:1945 births Category:Living people Category:Alumni of the University of Oxford Category:Alumni of University College London Category:Carnegie Mellon University faculty Category:Theoretical computer scientists Category:Fellows of the American Mathematical Society Category:Guggenheim Fellows Category:English mathematicians Category:Fellows of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics



↩
↩
[http://fellows.siam.org/index.php?sort=year&value;;=2011#Alan_M._Frieze Siam Fellows Class of 2011]↩
List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society, retrieved 29 December 2012.↩




