   I-bundle      I-bundle     (Figure)  This image represents the twisted I-bundle over the 2-torus, which is also fibered as a Möbius strip times the circle. So, this space is also a circle bundle |200px   In mathematics, an I-bundle is a fiber bundle whose fiber is an interval and whose base is a manifold . Any kind of interval, open, closed, semi-open, semi-closed, open-bounded, compact, even rays , can be the fiber.  Two simple examples of I-bundles are the annulus and the Möbius band , the only two possible I-bundles over the circle    S  1     superscript  S  1    \scriptstyle S^{1}   . The annulus is a trivial or untwisted bundle because it corresponds to the Cartesian product      S  1   ×  I       superscript  S  1   I    \scriptstyle S^{1}\times I   , and the Möbius band is a non-trivial or twisted bundle. Both bundles are 2-manifolds , but the annulus is an orientable manifold while the Möbius band is a non-orientable manifold .  Curiously, there are only two kinds of I-bundles when the base manifold is any surface but the Klein bottle    K   K   \scriptstyle K   . That surface has three I-bundles: the trivial bundle    K  ×  I      K  I    \scriptstyle K\times I   and two twisted bundles.  Together with the Seifert fiber spaces , I-bundles are fundamental elementary building blocks for the description of three-dimensional spaces. These observations are simple well known facts on elementary 3-manifolds .  Line bundles are both I-bundles and vector bundles of rank one. When considering I-bundles , one is interested mostly in their topological properties and not their possible vector properties, as we might be for line bundles .  References   Scott, Peter, "The geometries of 3-manifolds". Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society 15 (1983), number 5, 401–487.  Hempel, John, "3-manifolds", Annals of Mathematics Studies , number 86, Princeton University Press (1976).   External links   Example of use of I-bundles , nice pdf-slide presentation by Jeff Boerner at Dept. of Math, University of Iowa.  I-bundles over the Klein-Bottle , "elementary" work on the orientable I-bundle over K , by Maria Rita Casali, Dipartimento di Matematica Pura e Applicata, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia.   "  Category:Fiber bundles  Category:Geometric topology  Category:3-manifolds   