


List of production functions




List of production functions

The production functions listed below, and their properties are shown for the case of two factors of production, capital (K), and labor (L), mostly for heuristic purposes. These functions and their properties are easily generalizable to include additional factors of production (like land, natural resources, entrepreneurship, etc.)
A production function can also be seen as the dynamics of national output/national income. This list is to collect production functions & the dynamics of national output/income that have been used in literature & textbooks.
Technology
There are three common ways to incorporate technology (or the efficiency with which factors of production are used) into a production function:

Hicks-neutral technology, or "factor augmenting"
 
 

Harrod-neutral technology, or "labor augmenting"
 
 

Solow-neutral technology, or "capital augmenting"
 
 


Elasticity of substitution
The elasticity of substitution between factors of production is a measure of how easily one factor can be substituted for another. With two factors of production, say, K and L, it is a measure of the curvature of a production isoquant. The mathematical definition is:



where "slope" denotes the slope of the isoquant, given by:



Returns to scale
Returns to scale can be

Increasing returns to scale: doubling all input usages more than doubles output.
Decreasing returns to scale: doubling all input usages less than doubles output.
Constant returns to scale: doubling all input usages exactly doubles output.

Some Famous forms

Constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function:



 
 , with 
 
 
 
  which includes the special cases of:
::*Linear production (or perfect substitutes)




 
  when 
 
 




::*Cobb-Douglas (or imperfect complements)




 
  when 
 
 




::*Leontief production function (or perfect complements)




 
  when 
 
 





Translog, a generealization of Cobb-Douglas, though not of CES




Factors
Some authors also propose "indirect" production function. Production function can be assumed to have more factors in play, and with some factors refined. For instance, 
 
 
 
  while 
 
 
 
  is the fixed capital, 
 
 
 
  is the working capital, 
 
 
 
  is the working labor, 
 
 
 
  is the management labor.
See also

Constant elasticity of substitution

'
Category:Production economics Category:Microeconomics Category:Production and manufacturing Category:Economics lists


