


Bloch-Siegert shift




Bloch-Siegert shift

(Figure)
The pot lid is rotating around an axis along the surface of the table that is quickly rotating. This results in a secondary rotation which is perpendicular to the table.

 This is equivalent to the Bloch-Siegert shift and can be seen by watching the motion of the red dot. 

The Bloch-Siegert shift is a phenomenon in quantum physics that becomes important for driven two-level systems when the driving gets strong (e.g. atoms driven by a strong laser drive or nuclear spins in NMR, driven by a strong oscillating magnetic field).
When the rotating wave approximation(RWA) is invoked, the resonance between the driving field and a pseudospin occurs when the field frequency 
 
 
 
  is identical to the spin's transition frequency 
 
 
 
 . The RWA is, however, an approximation. In 1940 Bloch and Siegert showed that the dropped parts oscillating rapidly can give rise to a shift in the true resonance frequency of the dipoles.
Rotating wave approximation
In RWA, when the perturbation to the two level system is 
 
 
 
 , a linearly polarized field is considered as a superposition of two circularly polarized fields of the same amplitude rotating in opposite directions with frequencies 
 
 
 
 . Then, in the rotating frame(
 
 
 
 ), we can neglect the counter-rotating field and the Rabi frequency is



Bloch-Siegert shift
Consider the effect due to the counter-rotating field. In the counter-rotating frame(
 
 
 
 ), the effective precession frequency is


 
  Then the resonance frequency is given by


 
  and there are two solutions


 
  and


 
  The shift from the RWA of the first solution is dominant, and the correction to 
 
 
 
  is known as the Bloch-Siegert shift:



References

J. J. Sakurai, Modern Quantum Mechanics, Revised Edition,1994.
David J. Griffiths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Second Edition, 2004.
L. Allen and J. H. Eberly, Optical Resonance and Two-level Atoms, Dover Publications, 1987.

"
Category:Wave mechanics


