


Hasse–Arf theorem




Hasse–Arf theorem

In mathematics, specifically in local class field theory, the Hasse–Arf theorem is a result concerning jumps of the upper numbering filtration of the Galois group of a finite Galois extension. A special case of it was originally proved by Helmut Hasse,12 and the general result was proved by Cahit Arf.34
Statement
Higher ramification groups
The theorem deals with the upper numbered higher ramification groups of a finite abelian extension L/K. So assume L/K is a finite Galois extension, and that vK is a discrete normalised valuation of K, whose residue field has characteristic p > 0, and which admits a unique extension to L, say w. Denote by vL the associated normalised valuation ew of L and let 
 
 
 
  be the valuation ring of L under vL. Let L/K have Galois group G and define the s-th ramification group of L/K for any real s ≥ −1 by



So, for example, G−1 is the Galois group G. To pass to the upper numbering one has to define the function ψL/K which in turn is the inverse of the function ηL/K defined by



The upper numbering of the ramification groups is then defined by Gt(L/K) = Gs(L/K) where s = ψL/K(t).
These higher ramification groups Gt(L/K) are defined for any real t ≥ −1, but since vL is a discrete valuation, the groups will change in discrete jumps and not continuously. Thus we say that t is a jump of the filtration {Gt(L/K) : t ≥ −1} if Gt(L/K) ≠ Gu(L/K) for any u > t. The Hasse–Arf theorem tells us the arithmetic nature of these jumps
Statement of the theorem
With the above set up, the theorem states that the jumps of the filtration {Gt(L/K) : t ≥ −1} are all rational integers.56
Example
Suppose G is cyclic of order 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  residue characteristic and 
 
 
 
  be the subgroup of 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
 . The theorem says that there exist positive integers 
 
 
 
  such that










...
 


7


Notes
References




"
Category:Galois theory Category:Theorems in algebraic number theory



H. Hasse, Führer, Diskriminante und Verzweigunsgskörper relativ Abelscher Zahlkörper, J. Reine Angew. Math. 162 (1930), pp.169–184.↩
H. Hasse, Normenresttheorie galoisscher Zahlkörper mit Anwendungen auf Führer und Diskriminante abelscher Zahlkörper, J. Fac. Sci. Tokyo 2 (1934), pp.477–498.↩
↩


Neukirch (1999) Theorem 8.9, p.68↩
Serre (1979) IV.3, p.76↩




