


Transversality theorem




Transversality theorem
In [[dif
 ferential topology]], the transversality theorem, also known as the Thom Transversality Theorem, is a major result that describes the transverse intersection properties of a smooth family of smooth maps. It says that transversality is a generic property: any smooth map 
 
 
 
 , may be deformed by an arbitrary small amount into a map that is transverse to a given submanifold 
 
 
 
 . Together with the Pontryagin-Thom construction, it is the technical heart of cobordism theory, and the starting point for surgery theory. The finite-dimensional version of the transversality theorem is also a very useful tool for establishing the genericity of a property which is dependent on a finite number of real parameters and which is expressible using a system of nonlinear equations. This can be extended to an infinite-dimensional parametrization using the infinite-dimensional version of the transversality theorem.
Finite-dimensional version
Previous definitions
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth map between manifolds, and let 
 
 
 
  be a submanifold of 
 
 
 
 . We say that 
 
 
 
  is transverse to 
 
 
 
 , denoted as 
 
 
 
 , if and only if for every 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
 .
An important result about transversality states that if a smooth map 
 
 
 
  is transverse to 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a regular submanifold of 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a manifold with boundary, then we can define the restriction of the map 
 
 
 
  to the boundary, as 
 
 
 
 . The map 
 
 
 
  is smooth, and it allow us to state an extension of the previous result: if both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a regular submanifold of 
 
 
 
  with boundary, and 
 
 
 
 .
Parametric transversality theorem
Consider the map 
 
 
 
  and define 
 
 
 
 . This generates a family of mappings 
 
 
 
 . We require that the family vary smoothly by assuming 
 
 
 
  to be a manifold and 
 
 
 
  to be smooth.
The statement of the parametric transversality theorem is:
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a smooth map of manifolds, where only 
 
 
 
  has boundary, and let 
 
 
 
  be any submanifold of 
 
 
 
  without boundary. If both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are transverse to 
 
 
 
 , then for almost every 
 
 
 
 , both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are transverse to 
 
 
 
 .
More general transversality theorems
The parametric transversality theorem above is sufficient for many elementary applications (see the book by Guillemin and Pollack).
There are more powerful statements (collectively known as transversality theorems) that imply the parametric transversality theorem and are needed for more advanced applications.
Informally, the "transversality theorem" states that the set of mappings that are transverse to a given submanifold is a dense open (or, in some cases, only a dense 
 
 
 
 ) subset of the set of mappings. To make such a statement precise, it is necessary to define the space of mappings under consideration, and what is the topology in it. There are several possibilities; see the book by Hirsch.
What is usually understood by Thom's transversality theorem is a more powerful statement about jet transversality. See the books by Hirsch and by Golubitsky and Guillemin. The original reference is Thom, Bol. Soc. Mat. Mexicana (2) 1 (1956), pp. 59–71.
John Mather proved in the 1970s an even more general result called the multijet transversality theorem. See the book by Golubitsky and Guillemin.
Infinite-dimensional version
The infinite-dimensional version of the transversality theorem takes into account that the manifolds may be modeled in Banach spaces.
Formal statement
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  map of 
 
 
 
 -Banach manifolds. Assume that
i) 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are nonempty, metrizable 
 
 
 
 -Banach manifolds with chart spaces over a field 
 
 
 
 .
ii) The 
 
 
 
 -map 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  as a regular value.
iii) For each parameter 
 
 
 
 , the map 
 
 
 
  is a Fredholm map, where 
 
 
 
 .
iv) The convergence 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  implies the existence of a convergent subsequence 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 .
If Assumptions i-iv hold, then there exists an open, dense subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a regular value of 
 
 
 
  for each parameter 
 
 
 
 .
Now, fix an element 
 
 
 
 . If there exists a number 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  for all solutions 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , then the solution set 
 
 
 
  consists of an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional 
 
 
 
 -Banach manifold or the solution set is empty.
Note that if 
 
 
 
  for all the solutions of 
 
 
 
 , then there exists an open dense subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that there are at most finitely many solutions for each fixed parameter $s\in S_0$. In addition, all these solutions are regular.
References









"
Category:Theorems in differential topology Category:Differential geometry


