


Variance-stabilizing transformation




Variance-stabilizing transformation

In applied statistics, a variance-stabilizing transformation is a data transformation that is specifically chosen either to simplify considerations in graphical exploratory data analysis or to allow the application of simple regression-based or analysis of variance techniques.1
The aim behind the choice of a variance-stabilizing transformation is to find a simple function ƒ to apply to values x in a data set to create new values y = ƒ(x) such that the variability of the values y is not related to their mean value. For example, suppose that the values x are realizations from different Poisson distributions: i.e. the distributions each have different mean values μ. Then, because for the Poisson distribution the variance is identical to the mean, the variance varies with the mean. However, if the simple variance-stabilizing transformation



is applied, the sampling variance associated with observation will be nearly constant: see Anscombe transform for details and some alternative transformations.
While variance-stabilizing transformations are well known for certain parametric families of distributions, such as the Poisson and the binomial distribution, some types of data analysis proceed more empirically: for example by searching among power transformations to find a suitable fixed transformation. Alternatively, if data analysis suggests a functional form for the relation between variance and mean, this can be used to deduce a variance-stabilizing transformation.2 Thus if, for a mean μ,



a suitable basis for a variance stabilizing transformation would be



where the arbitrary constant of integration can be chosen for convenience.
Relationship to the delta method
Here, the delta method is presented in a rough way, but it is enough to see the relation with the variance-stabilizing transformations. To see a more formal approach see delta method.
Let 
 
 
 
  a random variable, with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a regular function. A first order Taylor approximation for 
 
 
 
  is:







From the equation above, we obtain:






 
  and 
 
 
 
  This approximation method is called delta method.
Consider now a random variable 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Notice the relation between the variance and the mean, which implies, for example, heteroscedasticy in a linear model. Therefore, the goal is to find a function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  has a variance independent (at least approximately) of its expectation.
Imposing the condition 
 
 
 
 , this equality implies the differential equation:







This ordinary differential equation has, by separation of variables, the following solution:







This last expression appeared for the first time in a M. S. Bartlett paper.3
References


"
Category:Statistical terminology Category:Data analysis Category:Transforms



Everitt, B.S. (2002) The Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics (2nd Edition), CUP. ISBN 0-521-81099-X↩
Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms, OUP. ISBN 0-19-920613-9↩
Bartlett, M.S. (1947) The use of transformations. Biometrics, 3, 39-52. doi:10.2307/3001536↩




