   Perfect ring      Perfect ring   In the area of abstract algebra known as ring theory , a left perfect ring is a type of ring in which all left modules have projective covers . The right case is defined by analogy, and the condition is not left-right symmetric, that is, there exist rings which are perfect on one side but not the other. Perfect rings were introduced in .  A semiperfect ring is a ring over which every finitely generated left module has a projective cover. This property is left-right symmetric.  Perfect ring  Definitions  The following equivalent definitions of a left perfect ring R are found in :   Every left R module has a projective cover.  R /J( R ) is semisimple and J( R ) is left T-nilpotent (that is, for every infinite sequence of elements of J( R ) there is an n such that the product of first n terms are zero), where J( R ) is the Jacobson radical of R .  ( Bass' Theorem P ) R satisfies the descending chain condition on principal right ideals. (There is no mistake, this condition on right principal ideals is equivalent to the ring being left perfect.)  Every flat left R -module is projective .  R /J( R ) is semisimple and every non-zero left R module contains a maximal submodule .  R contains no infinite orthogonal set of idempotents , and every non-zero right R module contains a minimal submodule.   Examples   Right or left Artinian rings , and semiprimary rings are known to be right-and-left perfect.  The following is an example (due to Bass) of a local ring which is right but not left perfect. Let F be a field, and consider a certain ring of infinite matrices over F .    Take the set of infinite matrices with entries indexed by ℕ× ℕ, and which only have finitely many nonzero entries above the diagonal, and denote this set by J . Also take the matrix    I    I   I\,   with all 1's on the diagonal, and form the set      R  =   {    f  ⋅  I   +  j   ∣    f  ∈  F   ,   j  ∈  J    }       R   conditional-set     normal-⋅  f  I   j    formulae-sequence    f  F     j  J       R=\{f\cdot I+j\mid f\in F,j\in J\}\,     It can be shown that R is a ring with identity, whose Jacobson radical is J . Furthermore R / J is a field, so that R is local, and R is right but not left perfect.   Properties  For a left perfect ring R :   From the equivalences above, every left R module has a maximal submodule and a projective cover, and the flat left R modules coincide with the projective left modules.  An analogue of the Baer's criterion holds for projective modules.   Semiperfect ring  Definition  Let R be ring. Then R is semiperfect if any of the following equivalent conditions hold:   R /J( R ) is semisimple and idempotents lift modulo J( R ), where J( R ) is the Jacobson radical of R .  R has a complete orthogonal set e 1 , ..., e n of idempotents with each e i  R e i a local ring .  Every simple left (right) R -module has a projective cover .  Every finitely generated left (right) R -module has a projective cover.  The category of finitely generated projective   R   R   R   -modules is Krull-Schmidt .   Examples  Examples of semiperfect rings include:   Left (right) perfect rings.  Local rings .  Left (right) Artinian rings .  Finite dimensional  k -algebras .   Properties  Since a ring R is semiperfect iff every simple left R -module has a projective cover, every ring Morita equivalent to a semiperfect ring is also semiperfect.  References       "  Category:Ring theory   