


Analytical regularization




Analytical regularization

In physics and applied mathematics, analytical regularization is a technique used to convert boundary value problems which can be written as Fredholm integral equations of the first kind involving  singular operators into equivalent Fredholm integral equations of the second kind which may be easier to solve analytically and which can be studied with discretization schemes like the finite element method or the finite difference method because they are  pointwise convergent. In computational electromagnetics, it is known as the method of analytical regularization. It was first used in mathematics during the development of operator theory before acquiring a name.1
Method
Analytical regularization proceeds as follows. First, the boundary value problem is formulated as an integral equation. Written as an operator equation, this will take the form


 
  with 
 
 
 
  representing boundary conditions and  inhomogeneities, 
 
 
 
  representing the field of interest, and 
 
 
 
  the integral operator describing how Y is given from X based on the physics of the problem. Next, 
 
 
 
  is split into 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is invertible and contains all the singularities of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is regular. After splitting the operator and multiplying by the inverse of 
 
 
 
 , the equation becomes


 
  or


 
  which is now a Fredholm equation of the second type because by construction 
 
 
 
  is  compact on the Hilbert space of which 
 
 
 
  is a member.
In general, several choices for 
 
 
 
  will be possible for each problem.2
References



Analytical regularization for confined quantum fields between parallel surfaces F C Santos et al. 2006 J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39 6725-6732 doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/39/21/S73.
Regularization of the Dirichlet Problem for Laplace's Equation: Surfaces of Revolution Authors: Sergey B. Panin ab; Paul D. Smith a; Elena D. Vinogradova a; Yury A. Tuchkin bc; Sergey S. Vinogradov d
, Paperpack ISBN 978-981-02-4659-4 (also available [http://users.physik.fu-berlin.de/~kleinert/kleinert/?p=booklist&details;;=6 online]). Read Chapter 8 for Analytic Regularization.

External links

E-Polarized Wave Scattering from Infinitely Thin and Finitely Width Strip Systems
Yu. A. Tuchkin Analytical Regularization Method for Wave Diffraction by Bowl-Shaped Screen of Revolution

"
Category:Diffraction Category:Electromagnetism



Nosich, Alexander I. 'The Method of Analytic Regularization in Wave-Scattering and Eigenvalue Problems: Foundations and Review of Solutions' IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine. Vol 41, No. 3. June 1999





