


Packing in a hypergraph




Packing in a hypergraph

In mathematics, a packing in a hypergraph is a partition of the set of the hypergraph's edges into a number of disjoint subsets such that no pair of edges in each subset share any vertex. There are two famous algorithms to achieve asymptotically optimal packing in k-uniform hypergraphs. One of them is a random greedy algorithm which was proposed by Joel Spencer. He used a branching process to formally prove the optimal achievable bound under some side conditions. The other algorithm is called the Rödl nibble and was proposed by Vojtěch Rödl et al. They showed that the achievable packing by the Rödl nibble is in some sense close to that of the random greedy algorithm.
History
The problem of finding the number of such subsets in a k-uniform hypergraph was originally motivated through a conjecture by Paul Erdős and Haim Hanani in 1963. Vojtěch Rödl proved their conjecture asymptotically under certain conditions in 1985. Pippenger and Joel Spencer generalized Rödl's results using a random greedy algorithm in 1989.
Definition and terminology
In the following definitions, the hypergraph is denoted by H=(V,E). H is called a k-uniform hypergraph if every edge in E consists of exactly k vertices.


 
  is a hypergraph packing if it is a subset of edges in H such that there is no pair of distinct edges with a common vertex.


 
  is a (
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
 )-good hypergraph if there exists a 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and both of the following conditions hold.






where the degree deg(x) of a vertex x is the number of edges that contain x and the codegree codeg(x, y) of two distinct vertices x and y is the number of edges that contain both vertices.
Theorem
There exists an asymptotic packing P of size at least 
 
 
 
  for a 
 
 
 
 -uniform hypergraph under the following two conditions,

All vertices have the degree of 
 
 
 
  in which 
 
 
 
  tends to infinity.
For every pair of vertices shares only 
 
 
 
  common edges.

where n is the total number of vertices. This result was shown by Pippenger and was later proved by Joel Spencer. To address the asymptotic hypergraph packing problem, Joel Spencer proposed a random greedy algorithm. In this algorithm, a branching process is used as the basis and it was shown that it almost always achieves an asymptotically optimal packing under the above side conditions.
Asymptotic packing algorithms
There are two famous algorithms for asymptotic packing of k-uniform hypegraphs: the random greedy algorithm via branching process, and the Rödl nibble.
Random greedy algorithm via branching process
Every edge 
 
 
 
  is independently and uniformly assigned a distinct real "birthtime" 
 
 
 
 . The edges are taken one by one in the order of their birthtimes. The edge 
 
 
 
  is accepted and included in 
 
 
 
  if it does not overlap any previously accepted edges. Obviously, the subset 
 
 
 
  is a packing and it can be shown that its size is 
 
 
 
  almost surely. To show that, let stop the process of adding new edges at time 
 
 
 
 . For an arbitrary 
 
 
 
 , pick 
 
 
 
  such that for any 
 
 
 
 -good hypergraph 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the probability of vertex 
 
 
 
  survival (a vertex survives if it is not in any edges in 
 
 
 
 ) until time 
 
 
 
 . Obviously, in such a situation the expected number of 
 
 
 
  surviving at time 
 
 
 
  is less than 
 
 
 
 . As a result, the probability of 
 
 
 
  surviving being less than 
 
 
 
  is higher than 
 
 
 
 . In other words, 
 
 
 
  must include at least 
 
 
 
  vertices which means that 
 
 
 
 .
To complete the proof, it must be shown that 
 
 
 
 . For that, the asymptotic behavior of 
 
 
 
  surviving is modeled by a continuous branching process. Fix 
 
 
 
  and begin with Eve with the birthdate of 
 
 
 
 . Assume time goes backward so Eve gives birth in the interval of 
 
 
 
  with a unit density Poisson distribution. The probability of Eve having 
 
 
 
  birth is 
 
 
 
 . By conditioning on 
 
 
 
  the birthtimes 
 
 
 
  are independently and uniformly distributed on 
 
 
 
 . Every birth given by Eve consists of 
 
 
 
  offspring all with the same birth time say 
 
 
 
 . The process is iterated for each offspring. It can be shown that for all 
 
 
 
  there exists a 
 
 
 
  so that with a probability higher than 
 
 
 
 , Eve has at most 
 
 
 
  descendants.
A rooted tree with the notions of parent, child, root, birthorder and wombmate shall be called a broodtree. Given a finite broodtree 
 
 
 
  we say for each vertex that it survives or dies. A childless vertex survives. A vertex dies if and only if it has at least one brood all of whom survive. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the probability that Eve survives in the broodtree 
 
 
 
  given by the above process. The objective is to show 
 
 
 
  and then for any fixed 
 
 
 
 , it can be shown that 
 
 
 
 . These two relations complete our argument.
To show 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
  small, 
 
 
 
  as, roughly, an Eve starting at time 
 
 
 
  might have a birth in time interval 
 
 
 
  all of whose children survive while Eve has no births in 
 
 
 
  all of whose children survive. Letting 
 
 
 
  yields the differential equation 
 
 
 
 . The initial value 
 
 
 
  gives a unique solution 
 
 
 
 . Note that indeed 
 
 
 
 .
To prove 
 
 
 
 , consider a proceture we call History which either aborts or produces a broodtree. History contains a set 
 
 
 
  of vertices, initially 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  will have a broodtree structure with 
 
 
 
  the root. The 
 
 
 
  are either processed or unprocessed, 
 
 
 
  is initially unprocessed. To each 
 
 
 
  is assigned a birthtime 
 
 
 
 , we initialize 
 
 
 
 . History is to take an unprocessed 
 
 
 
  and process it as follows. For the value of all 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  but with no 
 
 
 
  that has already been processed, if either some 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  or some 
 
 
 
  have 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then History is aborted. Otherwise for each 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  as wombmates with parent 
 
 
 
  and common birthdate 
 
 
 
 . Now 
 
 
 
  is considered processed. History halts, if not aborted, when all 
 
 
 
  are processed. If History does not abort then root 
 
 
 
  survives broodtree 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  survives at time 
 
 
 
 . For a fixed broodtree, let 
 
 
 
  denote the probability that the branching process yields broodtree 
 
 
 
 . Then the probability that History does not abort is 
 
 
 
 . By the finiteness of the branching process, 
 
 
 
 , the summation over all broodtrees 
 
 
 
  and History does not abort. The 
 
 
 
  distribution of its broodtree approaches the branching process distribution. Thus 
 
 
 
 .
The Rödl nibble
In 1985, Rödl proved Paul Erdős’s conjecture by a method called the Rödl nibble. Rödl's result can be formulated in form of either packing or covering problem. For 
 
 
 
  shows the minimal size of a family 
 
 
 
  of k-element subsets of 
 
 
 
  which have the property that every l-element set is contained in at least one 
 
 
 
 . Paul Erdős et al. conjecture was


 
 .
where 
 
 
 
  as the maximal size of a family 
 
 
 
  of k-element subsets of 
 
 
 
  having the property that every l-element set is contained in at most one 
 
 
 
 .
Packing under the stronger condition
In 1997, Noga Alon, Jeong Han Kim, and Joel Spencer also supply a good bound for $\gamma$ under the stronger codegree condition that every distinct pair $v, v'\in V$ has at most one edge in common.
For a k-uniform, D-regular hypergraph on n vertices, if k > 3, there exists a packing P covering all vertices but at most $O(nD^{-1/(k-1)})$. If k = 3 there exists a packing P covering all vertices but at most $O(nD^{-1/2}\ln^{3/2}D)$.
This bound is desirable in various applications, such as Steiner triple system. A Steiner Triple System is a 3-uniform, simple hypergraph in which every pair of vertices is contained in precisely one edge. Since a Steiner Triple System is clearly d=(n-1)/2-regular, the above bound supplies the following asymptotic improvement.
Any Steiner Triple System on n vertices contains a packing covering all vertices but at most $O(n^{1/2}\ln^{3/2}n)$.
See also

Branching process
Independent set
Graph coloring
Covering number
Set packing
Ramsey's theorem
Set cover problem
Sphere packing
Steiner system

References


.

.

.

.

.

.

"
Category:Hypergraphs


