


Bose–Mesner algebra




Bose–Mesner algebra

In mathematics, a Bose–Mesner algebra is a special set of matrices which arise from a combinatorial structure known as an association scheme, together with the usual set of rules for combining (forming the products of) those matrices, such that they form an associative algebra, or, more precisely, a unitary commutative algebra. Among these rules are:
:*the result of a product is also within the set of matrices,
:*there is an identity matrix in the set, and
:*such that taking products is commutative.
Bose–Mesner algebras have applications in physics to spin models, and in statistics to the design of experiments. They are named for R. C. Bose and Dale Marsh Mesner.1
Definition
Let X be a set of v elements. Consider a partition of the 2-element subsets of X into n non-empty subsets, R1, ..., Rn such that:

given an 
 
 
 
 , the number of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  depends only on i (and not on x). This number will be denoted by vi, and
given 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , the number of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  depends only on i,j and k (and not on x and y). This number will be denoted by 
 
 
 
 .

This structure is enhanced by adding all pairs of repeated elements of X and collecting them in a subset R0. This enhancement permits the parameters i, j, and k to take on the value of zero, and lets some of x,y or z be equal.
A set with such an enhanced partition is called an Association scheme.2 One may view an association scheme as a partition of the edges of a complete graph (with vertex set X) into n classes, often thought of as color classes. In this representation, there is a loop at each vertex and all the loops receive the same 0th color.
The association scheme can also be represented algebraically. Consider the matrices Di defined by:



Let 
 
 
 
  be the vector space consisting of all matrices

 
 , with 
 
 
 
  complex.34
The definition of an association scheme is equivalent to saying that the 
 
 
 
  are v × v (0,1)-matrices which satisfy



 
  is symmetric,


 
  (the all-ones matrix),







The (x,y)-th entry of the left side of 4. is the number of two colored paths of length two joining x and y (using "colors" i and j) in the graph. Note that the rows and columns of 
 
 
 
  contain 
 
 
 
  1s:



From 1., these matrices are symmetric. From 2., 
 
 
 
  are linearly independent, and the dimension of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . From 4., 
 
 
 
  is closed under multiplication, and multiplication is always associative. This associative commutative algebra

 
  is called the Bose–Mesner algebra of the association scheme. Since the matrices in 
 
 
 
  are symmetric and commute with each other, they can be simultaneously diagonalized. This means that there is a matrix

 
  such that to each 
 
 
 
  there is a diagonal matrix

 
  with 
 
 
 
 . This means that 
 
 
 
  is semi-simple and has a unique basis of primitive idempotents 
 
 
 
 . These are complex n × n matrices satisfying









The Bose–Mesner algebra has two distinguished bases: the basis consisting of the adjacency matrices

 
 , and the basis consisting of the irreducible idempotent matrices

 
 . By definition, there exist well-defined complex numbers such that



and



The p-numbers 
 
 
 
 , and the q-numbers 
 
 
 
 , play a prominent role in the theory.5 They satisfy well-defined orthogonality relations. The p-numbers are the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix

 
 .
Theorem
The eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , satisfy the orthogonality conditions:






Also



In matrix notation, these are






where 
 
 

Proof of theorem
The eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
  with multiplicities 
 
 
 
 . This implies that



which proves Equation 
 
 
 
  and Equation 
 
 
 
 ,



which gives Equations 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
 
 

There is an analogy between extensions of association schemes and extensions of finite fields. The cases we are most interested in are those where the extended schemes are defined on the 
 
 
 
 -th Cartesian power

 
  of a set 
 
 
 
  on which a basic association scheme

 
  is defined. A first association scheme defined on 
 
 
 
  is called the 
 
 
 
 -th Kronecker power

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Next the extension is defined on the same set 
 
 
 
  by gathering classes of 
 
 
 
 . The Kronecker power corresponds to the polynomial ring

 
  first defined on a field

 
 , while the extension scheme corresponds to the extension field obtained as a quotient. An example of such an extended scheme is the Hamming scheme.
Association schemes may be merged, but merging them leads to non-symmetric association schemes, whereas all usual codes are subgroups in symmetric Abelian schemes.678
See also

Association scheme

Notes
References







Bannai, Etsuko (2001) "Bose–Mesner algebras associated with four-weight spin models", Graphs and Combinatorics, 17 (4),589–598. 

















Nomura, K. (1997) "An algebra associated with a spin model", Journal of Algebraic Combinatorics, 6 (1), 53–58. 

"
Category:Algebraic combinatorics Category:Design of experiments Category:Analysis of variance Category:Representation theory Category:Algebra



Bose & Mesner (1959)











