


Capacitated minimum spanning tree




Capacitated minimum spanning tree

Capacitated minimum spanning tree is a minimal cost spanning tree of a graph that has a designated root node 
 
 
 
  and satisfies the capacity constraint 
 
 
 
 . The capacity constraint ensures that all subtrees (maximal subgraphs connected to the root by a single edge) incident on the root node 
 
 
 
  have no more than 
 
 
 
  nodes. If the tree nodes have weights, then the capacity constraint may be interpreted as follows: the sum of weights in any subtree should be no greater than 
 
 
 
 . The edges connecting the subgraphs to the root node are called gates. Finding the optimal solution is NP-hard.1
Algorithms
Suppose we have a graph 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  with a root 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be all other nodes in 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the edge cost between vertices

 
  and 
 
 
 
  which form a cost matrix 
 
 
 
 .
Esau-Williams heuristic2
Esau-Williams heuristic finds suboptimal CMST that are very close to the exact solutions, but on average EW produces better results than many other heuristics.
Initially, all nodes are connected to the root

 
  (star graph) and the network's cost is 
 
 
 
 ; each of these edges is a gate. At each iteration, we seek the closest neighbor 
 
 
 
  for every node in 
 
 
 
  and evaluate the tradeoff function
 
 
 
 . We look for the greatest 
 
 
 
  among the positive tradeoffs and, if the resulting subtree does not violate the capacity constraints, remove the gate 
 
 
 
  connecting the 
 
 
 
 -th subtree to 
 
 
 
  by an edge 
 
 
 
 . We repeat the iterations until we can not make any further improvements to the tree.
Esau-Williams heuristics for computing a suboptimal CMST:
function CMST(c,C,r):
    T = {

, 

, ..., 

}
    while have changes:
        for each node 




 
  = closest node in a different subtree
            

 = 

 - 


        t_max = max(

)
        k = i such that 

 = t_max
        if ( cost(i) + cost(j) g_{k}
            T = T union 


    return T
It is easy to see that EW finds a solution in polynomial time.
Sharma's heuristic
Sharma's heuristic.3
Applications
CMST problem is important in network design: when many terminal computers have to be connected to the central hub, the star configuration is usually not the minimum cost design. Finding a CMST that organizes the terminals into subnetworks can lower the cost of implementing a network.
Limitations
But CMST is still not provide the minimum cost for long situated nodes.overcome this drawback ESAU Williams has solved this problem.
References


"
Category:Spanning tree










