


Hardy–Littlewood tauberian theorem




Hardy–Littlewood tauberian theorem

In mathematical analysis, the Hardy–Littlewood tauberian theorem is a tauberian theorem relating the asymptotics of the partial sums of a series with the asymptotics of its Abel summation. In this form, the theorem asserts that if, as y ↓ 0, the non-negative sequence an is such that there is an asymptotic equivalence


 
  then there is also an asymptotic equivalence


 
  as n → ∞. The integral formulation of the theorem relates in an analogous manner the asymptotics of the cumulative distribution function of a function with the asymptotics of its Laplace transform.
The theorem was proved in 1914 by G. H. Hardy and J. E. Littlewood.1 In 1930 Jovan Karamata gave a new and much simpler proof.2
Statement of the theorem
Series formulation
This formulation is from Titchmarsh.3 Suppose an ≥ 0 for all n, and as x ↑1 we have


 
  Then as n goes to ∞ we have


 
  The theorem is sometimes quoted in equivalent forms, where instead of requiring an ≥ 0, we require an = O(1), or we require an ≥ −K for some constant K.4 The theorem is sometimes quoted in another equivalent formulation (through the change of variable x = 1/ey ).5 If, as y ↓ 0,


 
  then



Integral formulation
The following more general formulation is from Feller.6 Consider a real-valued function F : [0,∞) → R of bounded variation.7 The Laplace–Stieltjes transform of F is defined by the Stieltjes integral



The theorem relates the asymptotics of ω with those of F in the following way. If ρ is a non-negative real number, then the following are equivalent





 
  Here Γ denotes the Gamma function. One obtains the theorem for series as a special case by taking ρ = 1 and F(t) to be a piecewise constant function with value 
 
 
 
  between t=n and t=n+1.
A slight improvement is possible. A function L(x) is slowly varying at infinity if


 
  for every positive t. Let L be a function slowly varying at infinity and ρ a non-negative real number. Then the following are equivalent






Karamata's proof
found a short proof of the theorem by considering the functions g such that


 
  An easy calculation shows that all monomials g(x)=xk have this property, and therefore so do all polynomials g. This can be extended to a function g with simple (step) discontinuities by approximating it by polynomials from above and below (using the Weierstrass approximation theorem and a little extra fudging) and using the fact that the coefficients an are positive. In particular the function given by g(t)=1/t if 1/e−1/N the sum Σanxng(xn) is a0+...+aN, and the integral of g is 1, from which the Hardy–Littlewood theorem follows immediately.
Examples
Non-positive coefficients
The theorem can fail without the condition that the coefficients are non-negative. For example, the function


 
  is asymptotic to 1/4(1–x) as x tends to 1, but the partial sums of its coefficients are 1, 0, 2, 0, 3, 0, 4... and are not asymptotic to any linear function.
Littlewood's extension of Tauber's theorem
In 1911 Littlewood proved an extension of Tauber's converse of Abel's theorem. Littlewood showed the following: If an = O(1/n ), and as x ↑ 1 we have


 
  then


 
  This came historically before the Hardy–Littlewood tauberian theorem, but can be proved as a simple application of it.8
Prime number theorem
In 1915 Hardy and Littlewood developed a proof of the prime number theorem based on their tauberian theorem; they proved


 
  where Λ is the von Mangoldt function, and then conclude


 
  an equivalent form of the prime number theorem.910 Littlewood developed a simpler proof, still based on this tauberian theorem, in 1971.11
Notes
External links




"
Category:Tauberian theorems



↩


↩

↩
Bounded variation is only required locally: on every bounded subinterval of [0,∞). However, then more complicated additional assumptions on the convergence of the Laplace–Stieltjes transform are required. See ↩

↩
↩





