


Brownian model of financial markets




Brownian model of financial markets

The Brownian motion models for financial markets are based on the work of Robert C. Merton and Paul A. Samuelson, as extensions to the one-period market models of Harold Markowitz and William F. Sharpe, and are concerned with defining the concepts of financial assets and markets, portfolios, gains and wealth in terms of continuous-time stochastic processes.
Under this model, these assets have continuous prices evolving continuously in time and are driven by Brownian motion processes.1 This model requires an assumption of perfectly divisible assets and a frictionless market (i.e. that no transaction costs occur either for buying or selling). Another assumption is that asset prices have no jumps, that is there are no surprises in the market. This last assumption is removed in jump diffusion models.
Financial market processes
Consider a financial market consisting of 
 
 
 
  financial assets, where one of these assets, called a bond or money market, is risk free while the remaining 
 
 
 
  assets, called stocks, are risky.
Definition
A financial market is defined as 
 
 
 
 :

A probability space 
 
 

A time interval 
 
 

A 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Brownian process 
 
 
 
  adapted to the augmented filtration 
 
 

A measurable risk-free money market rate process 
 
 

A measurable mean rate of return process 
 
 
 
 .
A measurable dividend rate of return process 
 
 
 
 .
A measurable volatility process 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
A measurable, finite variation, singularly continuous stochastic 
 
 

The initial conditions given by 
 
 


The augmented filtration
Let 
 
 
 
  be a probability space, and a 
 
 
 
  be D-dimensional Brownian motion stochastic process, with the natural filtration:



If 
 
 
 
  are the measure 0 (i.e. null under measure 
 
 
 
 ) subsets of 
 
 
 
 , then define the augmented filtration:



The difference between 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is that the latter is both left-continuous, in the sense that:



while the former is only left-continuous.2
Bond
A share of a bond (money market) has price 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
 , is continuous, 
 
 
 
  adapted, and has finite variation. Because it has finite variation, it can be decomposed into an absolutely continuous part 
 
 
 
  and a singularly continuous part 
 
 
 
 , by Lebesgue's decomposition theorem. Define:


 
  and



resulting in the SDE:



which gives:



Thus, it can be easily seen that if 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ), then the price of the bond evolves like the value of a risk-free savings account with instantaneous interest rate 
 
 
 
 
 , which is random, time-dependent and 
 
 
 
  measurable.
Stocks
Stock prices are modeled as being similar to that of bonds, except with a randomly fluctuating component (called its volatility). As a premium for the risk originating from these random fluctuations, the mean rate of return of a stock is higher than that of a bond.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the strictly positive prices per share of the 
 
 
 
  stocks, which are continuous stochastic processes satisfying:



Here, 
 
 
 
 
  gives the volatility of the 
 
 
 
 -th stock, while 
 
 
 
  is its mean rate of return.
In order for an arbitrage-free pricing scenario, 
 
 
 
  must be as defined above. The solution to this is:



and the discounted stock prices are:



Note that the contribution due to the discontinuites in the bond price 
 
 
 
  does not appear in this equation.
Dividend rate
Each stock may have an associated dividend rate process 
 
 
 
  giving the rate of dividend payment per unit price of the stock at time 
 
 
 
 . Accounting for this in the model, gives the yield process 
 
 
 
 :



Portfolio and gain processes
Definition
Consider a financial market 
 
 
 
 .
A portfolio process

 
  for this market is an 
 
 
 
  measurable, 
 
 
 
  valued process such that:


 
 , almost surely,


 
 , almost surely, and


 
 , almost surely.
The gains process for this portfolio is:



We say that the portfolio is self-financed if:


 
 .
It turns out that for a self-financed portfolio, the appropriate value of 
 
 
 
 
  is determined from 
 
 
 
  and therefore sometimes 
 
 
 
  is referred to as the portfolio process. Also, 
 
 
 
  implies borrowing money from the money-market, while 
 
 
 
  implies taking a short position on the stock.
The term 
 
 
 
 
  in the SDE of 
 
 
 
  is the risk premium process, and it is the compensation received in return for investing in the 
 
 
 
 -th stock.
Motivation
Consider time intervals 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be the number of shares of asset 
 
 
 
 
 , held in a portfolio during time interval at time 
 
 
 
 . To avoid the case of insider trading (i.e. foreknowledge of the future), it is required that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  measurable.
Therefore, the incremental gains at each trading interval from such a portfolio is:






and 
 
 
 
  is the total gain over time 
 
 
 
 , while the total value of the portfolio is 
 
 
 
 .
Define 
 
 
 
 , let the time partition go to zero, and substitute for 
 
 
 
 
  as defined earlier, to get the corresponding SDE for the gains process. Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the dollar amount invested in asset 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
 , not the number of shares held.
Income and wealth processes
Definition
Given a financial market 
 
 
 
 , then a cumulative income process

 
 
  is a semimartingale and represents the income accumulated over time 
 
 
 
 , due to sources other than the investments in the 
 
 
 
  assets of the financial market.
A wealth process

 
  is then defined as:



and represents the total wealth of an investor at time 
 
 
 
 
 . The portfolio is said to be 

 
 -financed if:



The corresponding SDE for the wealth process, through appropriate substitutions, becomes:


 
 .
Note, that again in this case, the value of 
 
 
 
  can be determined from 
 
 
 
 
 .
Viable markets
The standard theory of mathematical finance is restricted to viable financial markets, i.e. those in which there are no opportunities for arbitrage. If such opportunities exists, it implies the possibility of making an arbitrarily large risk-free profit.
Definition
In a financial market 
 
 
 
 , a self-financed portfolio process 
 
 
 
  is considered to be an arbitrage opportunity if the associated gains process 
 
 
 
 , almost surely and 
 
 
 
  strictly. A market 
 
 
 
 
  in which no such portfolio exists is said to be viable.
Implications
In a viable market 
 
 
 
 , there exists a 
 
 
 
  adapted process 
 
 
 
  such that for almost every 
 
 
 
 :


 
 
 .
This 
 
 
 
  is called the market price of risk and relates the premium for the 
 
 
 
 -the stock with its volatility 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, if there exists a D-dimensional process 
 
 
 
  such that it satisfies the above requirement, and:





 
 ,
then the market is viable.
Also, a viable market 
 
 
 
  can have only one money-market (bond) and hence only one risk-free rate. Therefore, if the 
 
 
 
 -th stock entails no risk (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) and pays no dividend (i.e.
 
 
 
 
 ), then its rate of return is equal to the money market rate (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) and its price tracks that of the bond (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ).
Standard financial market
Definition
A financial market 
 
 
 
  is said to be standard if:

(i) It is viable.
 
(ii) The number of stocks 
 
 
 
  is not greater than the dimension 
 
 
 
 
  of the underlying Brownian motion process 
 
 
 
 .
 
(iii) The market price of risk process 
 
 
 
  satisfies:
 
 

 
 , almost surely.

(iv) The positive process 
 
 
 
  is a martingale.
 

Comments
In case the number of stocks 
 
 
 
 
  is greater than the dimension 
 
 
 
 , in violation of point (ii), from linear algebra, it can be seen that there are 
 
 
 
  stocks whose volatilies (given by the vector 
 
 
 
 ) are linear combination of the volatilities of 
 
 
 
  other stocks (because the rank of 
 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 ). Therefore, the 
 
 
 
  stocks can be replaced by 
 
 
 
  equivalent mutual funds.
The standard martingale measure

 
  on 
 
 
 
  for the standard market, is defined as:


 
 .
Note that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are absolutely continuous with respect to each other, i.e. they are equivalent. Also, according to Girsanov's theorem,


 
 ,
is a 
 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Brownian motion process on the filtration 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
 .
Complete financial markets
A complete financial market is one that allows effective hedging of the risk inherent in any investment strategy.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a standard financial market, and 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
 -measurable random variable, such that:


 
 .


 
 ,
The market 
 
 
 
  is said to be complete if every such 
 
 
 
  is financeable, i.e. if there is an 
 
 
 
 
 -financed portfolio process 
 
 
 
 , such that its associated wealth process 
 
 
 
  satisfies


 
 , almost surely.
Motivation
If a particular investment strategy calls for a payment 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
 
 , the amount of which is unknown at time 
 
 
 
 , then a conservative strategy would be to set aside an amount 
 
 
 
  in order to cover the payment. However, in a complete market it is possible to set aside less capital (viz. 
 
 
 
 ) and invest it so that at time 
 
 
 
  it has grown to match the size of 
 
 
 
 
 .
Corollary
A standard financial market 
 
 
 
  is complete if and only if 
 
 
 
 , and the 
 
 
 
  volalatily process 
 
 
 
  is non-singular for almost every $t \in [0,T]$, with respect to the Lebesgue measure.
Notes


See also

Black-Scholes model
Martingale pricing
Mathematical finance
Monte Carlo method

References
  "
Category:Finance theories Category:Monte Carlo methods in finance









