   Fence (mathematics)      Fence (mathematics)   In mathematics , a fence , also called a zigzag poset , is a partially ordered set in which the order relations form a path with alternating orientations:   a  c  e  h < i ...   or   a > b  d  f  i ...   A fence may be finite , or it may be formed by an infinite alternating sequence extending in both directions. The incidence posets of path graphs form examples of fences.  A linear extension of a fence is called an alternating permutation ; André's problem of counting the number of different linear extensions has been studied since the 19th century. 1 The solutions to this counting problem, the so-called Euler zigzag numbers or up/down numbers, are   1, 1, 2, 4, 10, 32, 122, 544, 2770, 15872, 101042 .   The number of antichains in a fence is a Fibonacci number ; the distributive lattice with this many elements, generated from a fence via Birkhoff's representation theorem , has as its graph the Fibonacci cube . 2  A partially ordered set is series-parallel if and only if it does not have four elements forming a fence. 3  Several authors have also investigated the number of order-preserving maps from fences to themselves, or to fences of other sizes. 4  An up-down poset  Q ( a , b ) is a generalization of a zigzag poset in which there are a downward orientations for every upward one and b total elements. 5 For instance, Q (2,9) has the elements and relations   a > b > c  e > f  h > i .   In this notation, a fence is a partially ordered set of the form Q (1, n ).  Equivalent conditions  The following conditions are equivalent for a poset P :   P is a disjoint union of zigzag posets.  If a ≤ b ≤ c in P , either a = b or b = c .  \circ \emptyset, i.e. it is never the case that a < b and b < c , so that < is vacuously transitive.  P has dimension at most one (defined analogously to the Krull dimension of a commutative ring ).  Every element of P is either maximal or minimal .  The slice category Pos / P is cartesian closed .   The prime ideals of a commutative ring R , ordered by inclusion, satisfy the equivalent conditions above if and only if R has Krull dimension at most one.  Notes  References    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   Exercise 3.23a, page 157.   .   External links     "  Category:Order theory  Category:Enumerative combinatorics     . ↩  calls the fact that this lattice has a Fibonacci number of elements a “well known fact,” while  asks for a description of it in an exercise. See also , , and . ↩  . ↩  ; ; ; ; . ↩  . ↩     