


Conic bundle




Conic bundle

In algebraic geometry, a conic bundle is an algebraic variety that appears as a solution of a Cartesian equation of the form



Theoretically, it can be considered as a Severi–Brauer surface, or more precisely as a Châtelet surface. This can be a double covering of a ruled surface. Through an isomorphism, it can be associated with a symbol 
 
 
 
  in the second Galois cohomology of the field 
 
 
 
 .
In fact, it is a surface with a well-understood divisor class group and simplest cases share with Del Pezzo surfaces the property of being a rational surface. But many problems of contemporary mathematics remain open, notably (for those examples which are not rational) the question of unirationality.
A naive point of view
To write correctly a conic bundle, one must first reduce the quadratic form of the left hand side. Thus, after a harmless change, it has a simple expression like



In a second step, it should be placed in a projective space in order to complete the surface "at infinity".
To do this, we write the equation in homogeneous coordinates and expresses the first visible part of the fiber



That is not enough to complete the fiber as non-singular (clean and smooth), and then glue it to infinity by a change of classical maps:
Seen from infinity, (i.e. through the change 
 
 
 
 ), the same fiber (excepted the fibers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ), written as the set of solutions 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  appears naturally as the reciprocal polynomial of 
 
 
 
 . Details are below about the map-change 
 
 
 
 .
The fiber c
Going a little further, while simplifying the issue, limit to cases where the field 
 
 
 
  is of characteristic zero and denote by 
 
 
 
  any integer except zero. Denote by P(T) a polynomial with coefficients in the field 
 
 
 
 , of degree 2m or 2m − 1, without multiple root. Consider the scalar a.
One defines the reciprocal polynomial by 
 
 
 
 , and the conic bundle Fa,P as follows :

Definition:



 
  is the surface obtained as "gluing" of the two surfaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of equations



and



along the open sets by isomorphisms


 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
One shows the following result :

Fundamental property:

The surface Fa,P is a k clean and smooth surface, the mapping defined by



by



and the same on 
 
 
 
  gives to Fa,P a structure of conic bundle over P1,k.
See also

Algebraic surface
Intersection number (algebraic geometry)
List of complex and algebraic surfaces

References





"
Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Algebraic varieties


