   Multiplicatively closed set      Multiplicatively closed set   In abstract algebra , a multiplicatively closed set (or multiplicative set ) is a subset S of a ring  R such that the following two conditions hold: 1 2       1  ∈  S      1  S    1\in S   .  For all x and y in S , the product xy is in S .   In other words, S is closed under taking finite products, including the empty product 1. 3 Equivalently, a multiplicative set is a submonoid of the multiplicative monoid of a ring.  Multiplicative sets are important especially in commutative algebra , where they are used to build localizations of commutative rings.  A subset S of a ring R is called saturated if it is closed under taking divisors : i.e., whenever a product xy is in S , the elements x and y are in S too.  Examples  Common examples of multiplicative sets include:   the set-theoretic complement of a prime ideal in a commutative ring;  the set    {  1  ,  x  ,   x  2   ,   x  3   ,  …  }     1  x   superscript  x  2    superscript  x  3   normal-…    \{1,x,x^{2},x^{3},\dots\}   , where x is a fixed element of the ring;  the set of units of the ring;  the set of non-zero-divisors of the ring;  1 + I for an ideal I .   Properties   An ideal P of a commutative ring R is prime if and only if its complement R \ P is multiplicatively closed.  A subset S is both saturated and multiplicatively closed if and only if S is the complement of a union of prime ideals. 4 In particular, the complement of a prime ideal is both saturated and multiplicatively closed.  The intersection of a family of multiplicative sets is a multiplicative set.  The intersection of a family of saturated sets is saturated.   See also   Localization of a ring  Right denominator set   Notes  References   M. F. Atiyah and I. G. Macdonald , Introduction to commutative algebra , Addison-Wesley, 1969.  David Eisenbud , Commutative algebra with a view toward algebraic geometry , Springer, 1995.   Serge Lang , Algebra 3rd ed., Springer, 2002.   "  Category:Commutative algebra     Atiyah and Macdonald, p. 36. ↩  Lang, p. 107. ↩  Eisenbud, p. 59. ↩  Kaplansky, p. 2, Theorem 2. ↩     