


Funk transform




Funk transform

In the mathematical field of integral geometry, the Funk transform (also called Minkowski–Funk transform, Funk–Radon transform or spherical Radon transform) is an integral transform defined by integrating a function on great circles of the sphere. It was introduced by Paul Funk in 1916, based on the work of . It is closely related to the Radon transform. The original motivation for studying the Funk transform was to describe Zoll metrics on the sphere.
Definition
Classically, the Funk transform is defined as follows. Let ƒ be a continuous function on the 2-sphere in R3. Then, for a unit vector x, let



where the integral is carried out with respect to the arclength ds of the great circle C(x) consisting of all unit vectors perpendicular to x:



Inversion
Clearly, the Funk transform annihilates all odd functions, and so it is natural to confine attention to the case when ƒ is even. In that case, the Funk transform takes even (continuous) functions to even continuous functions, and is furthermore invertible.
Spherical harmonics
Every square-integrable function 
 
 
 
  on the sphere can be decomposed into spherical harmonics



Then the Funk transform of f reads



where 
 
 
 
  for odd values and


 
  for even values. This result was shown by .
Inversion formula
As with the Radon transform, the inversion formula relies on the dual transform, defined by



This is the average value of the circle function ƒ over circles of arc distance p from the point x. The inverse transform is given by



Generalization
The classical formulation is invariant under the rotation group SO(3). It is also possible to formulate the Funk transform in a manner that makes it invariant under the special linear group SL(3,R), due to . Suppose that ƒ is a homogeneous function of degree −2 on R3. Then, for linearly independent vectors x and y, define a function φ by the line integral



taken over a simple closed curve encircling the origin once. The differential form



is closed, which follows by the homogeneity of ƒ. By a change of variables, φ satisfies



and so gives a homogeneous function of degree −1 on the exterior square of R3,



The function Fƒ : Λ2R3 → R agrees with the Funk transform when ƒ is the degree −2 homogeneous extension of a function on the sphere and the projective space associated to Λ2R3 is identified with the space of all circles on the sphere. Alternatively, Λ2R3 can be identified with R3 in an SL(3,R)-invariant manner, and so the Funk transform F maps smooth even homogeneous functions of degree −2 on R3\{0} to smooth even homogeneous functions of degree −1 on R3\{0}.
See also

Radon transform
Spherical mean

References




.

.

.

.


"
Category:Integral geometry Category:Integral transforms


