


Hartogs' extension theorem




Hartogs' extension theorem
In mathematics, precisely in the theory of functions of several complex variables, Hartogs' extension theorem is a statement about the singularities of holomorphic functions of several variables. Informally, it states that the support of the singularities of such functions cannot be compact, therefore the singular set of a function of several complex variables must (loosely speaking) 'go off to infinity' in some direction. More precisely, it shows that the concept of isolated singularity and removable singularity coincide for analytic functions of 
 
 
 
  complex variables. A first version of this theorem was proved by Friedrich Hartogs,1 and as such it is known also as Hartogs' lemma and Hartogs' principle: in earlier Soviet literature,2 it is also called Osgood-Brown theorem, acknowledging later work by Arthur Barton Brown and William Fogg Osgood.3 This property of holomorphic functions of several variables is also called Hartogs' phenomenon: however, the locution "Hartogs' phenomenon" is also used to identify the property of solutions of systems of partial differential or convolution equations satisfying Hartogs type theorems.4
Historical note
The original proof was given by Friedrich Hartogs in 1906, using Cauchy's integral formula for functions of several complex variables.5 Today, usual proofs rely on either Bochner–Martinelli–Koppelman formula or the solution of the inhomogeneous Cauchy–Riemann equations with compact support. The latter approach is due to Leon Ehrenpreis who initiated it in the paper . Yet another very simple proof of this result was given by Gaetano Fichera in the paper , by using his solution of the Dirichlet problem for holomorphic functions of several variables and the related concept of CR-function:6 later he extended the theorem to a certain class of partial differential operators in the paper , and his ideas were later further explored by Giuliano Bratti.7 Also the Japanese school of the theory of partial differential operators worked much on this topic, with notable contributions by Akira Kaneko.8 Their approach is to use Ehrenpreis' fundamental principle.
Hartogs' phenomenon
A phenomenon that holds in one variable but does not hold in several variables is called Hartogs' phenomenon, which lead to the notion of this Hartogs' extension theorem and the domain of holomorphy, hence the theory of several complex variables.
For example in two variables, consider the interior domain



in the two-dimensional polydisk 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  .
Theorem : any holomorphic functions 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  are analytically continued to 
 
 
 
  . Namely, there is a holomorphic function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  .
In fact, using the Cauchy integral formula we obtain the extended function 
 
 
 
  , All holomorphic functions are analytically continued to the polydisk, which is restrictly larger than the domain on which the original holomorphic function is defined. Such phenomenon never happen in the case of one variable.
Formal statement

Let 
 
 
 
  be a holomorphic function on a set

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an open subset of  (
 
 
 
 ) and 
 
 
 
  is a compact subset of 
 
 
 
 . If the relative complement

 
  is connected, then 
 
 
 
  can be extended to a unique holomorphic function on 
 
 
 
 .
 

Counterexamples in dimension one
The theorem does not hold when 
 
 
 
 . To see this, it suffices to consider the function  z−1}}, which is clearly holomorphic in  but cannot be continued as an holomorphic function on the whole 
 
 
 
 . Therefore the Hartogs' phenomenon constitutes one elementary phenomenon that emphasizes the difference between the theory of functions of one and several complex variables.
Notes
Historical references


.

.

. An historical paper correcting some inexact historical statements in the theory of holomorphic functions of several variables, particularly concerning contributions of Gaetano Fichera and Francesco Severi.

. This is the first paper where a general solution to the Dirichlet problem for pluriharmonic functions is solved for general real analyitic data on a real analytic hypersurface. A translation of the title reads as:-"Solution of the general Dirichlet problem for biharmonic functions".

. A translation of the title is:-"Lectures on analytic functions of several complex variables – Lectured in 1956–57 at the Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica in Rome". This book consist of lecture notes from a course held by Francesco Severi at the Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica (which at present bears his name), and includes appendices of Enzo Martinelli, Giovanni Battista Rizza and Mario Benedicty.

.

(Zentralblatt review of the original Russian edition). One of the first modern monographs on the theory of several complex variables, being different from other ones of the same period due to the extensive use of generalized functions.

References


.

.

. A translation of the title reads as:-"About an example of Fichera concerning Hartogs' phenomenon".

. An English translation of the title reads as:-"Extension of a theorem of Fichera for systems of P.D.E. with constant coefficients, concerning Hartogs' phenomenon".

. An English translation of the title reads as:-"On a theorem of Hartogs".


. A fundamental paper in the theory of Hartogs' phenomenon. The typographical error in the title is reproduced in as it is appears in the original version of the paper.

. An epoch-making paper in the theory of CR-functions, where the Dirichlet problem for analytic functions of several complex variables is solved for general data. A translation of the title reads as:-"Characterization of the trace, on the boundary of a domain, of an analytic function of several complex variables".

. An English translation of the title reads as:-"Hartogs phenomenon for certain linear partial differential operators".

. Available at the SEALS Portal. An English translation of the title reads as:-"On a theorem of Hartogs".

(see also , the cumulative review of several papers by E. Trost). Available at the SEALS Portal. An English translation of the title reads as:-"On a theorem of Hartogs in the theory of analytic functions of 
 
 
 
  complex variables".

.

. Available at the DigiZeitschriften.

.

, available at [http://projecteuclid.org/DPubS?Service=UI&version;;=1.0&verb;=Display&handle;=euclid Project Euclid].

. Available at the SEALS Portal. An English translation of the title reads as:-"On a proof by R. Fueter of a theorem of Hartogs".


. An English translation of the title reads as:-"A fundamental property of the domain of holomorphy of an analytic function of one real variable and one complex variable".

. Available at the SEALS Portal. An English translation of the title reads as:-"About a theorem of Hartogs".

External links






"
Category:Several complex variables Category:Theorems in complex analysis



See the original paper of  and its description in various historical surveys by ,  and . In particular, in this last reference on p. 132, the Author explicitly writes :-"As it is pointed out in the title of , and as the reader shall soon see, the key tool in the proof is the Cauchy integral formula".↩
See for example , which refers the reader to the book of  for a proof (however, in the former reference it is incorrectly stated that the proof is on page 324).↩
See  and .↩
See  and  .↩

Fichera's prof as well as his epoch making paper  seem to have been overlooked by many specialists of the theory of functions of several complex variables: see  for the correct attribution of many important theorems in this field.↩
See  .↩
See his paper  and the references therein.↩




