


Non-autonomous mechanics




Non-autonomous mechanics

Non-autonomous mechanics describe non-relativistic mechanical systems subject to time-dependent transformations. In particular, this is the case of mechanical systems whose Lagrangians and Hamiltonians depend on the time. The configuration space of non-autonomous mechanics is a fiber bundle

 
  over the time axis 
 
 
 
  coordinated by 
 
 
 
 .
This bundle is trivial, but its different trivializations 
 
 
 
  correspond to the choice of different non-relativistic reference frames. Such a reference frame also is represented by a connection

 
  on 
 
 
 
  which takes a form 
 
 
 
  with respect to this trivialization. The corresponding covariant differential 
 
 
 
  determines the relative velocity with respect to a reference frame 
 
 
 
 .
As a consequence, non-autonomous mechanics (in particular, non-autonomous Hamiltonian mechanics) can be formulated as a covariant classical field theory (in particular covariant Hamiltonian field theory) on 
 
 
 
 . Accordingly, the velocity phase space of non-autonomous mechanics is the jet manifold

 
  of 
 
 
 
  provided with the coordinates 
 
 
 
 . Its momentum phase space is the vertical cotangent bundle 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  coordinated by 
 
 
 
  and endowed with the canonical Poisson structure. The dynamics of Hamiltonian non-autonomous mechanics is defined by a Hamiltonian form 
 
 
 
 .
One can associate to any Hamiltonian non-autonomous system an equivalent Hamiltonian autonomous system on the cotangent bundle 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  coordinated by 
 
 
 
  and provided with the canonical symplectic form; its Hamiltonian is 
 
 
 
 .
References

De Leon, M., Rodrigues, P., Methods of Differential Geometry in Analytical Mechanics (North Holland, 1989).
Echeverria Enriquez, A., Munoz Lecanda, M., Roman Roy, N., Geometrical setting of time-dependent regular systems. Alternative models, Rev. Math. Phys. 3 (1991) 301.
Carinena, J., Fernandez-Nunez, J., Geometric theory of time-dependent singular Lagrangians, Fortschr. Phys., 41 (1993) 517.
Mangiarotti, L., Sardanashvily, G., Gauge Mechanics (World Scientific, 1998) ISBN 981-02-3603-4.
Giachetta, G., Mangiarotti, L., Sardanashvily, G., Geometric Formulation of Classical and Quantum Mechanics (World Scientific, 2010) ISBN 981-4313-72-6 (arXiv: 0911.0411).

See also

Analytical mechanics
Non-autonomous system (mathematics)
Hamiltonian mechanics
Symplectic manifold
Covariant Hamiltonian field theory
Free motion equation
Relativistic system (mathematics)

"
Category:Theoretical physics Category:Classical mechanics Category:Hamiltonian mechanics Category:Symplectic geometry


