


Non-uniform discrete Fourier transform




Non-uniform discrete Fourier transform

In applied mathematics, the non-uniform discrete Fourier transform (NDFT) of a signal is a type of Fourier transform, related to a discrete Fourier transform or discrete-time Fourier transform, but in which the input signal is not sampled at equally spaced intervals. As a result of this, the computed Discrete Fourier Transform can also consist of unevenly sampled frequency values. It is however also possible to compute uniformly sampled frequency values from an unevenly sampled input signal.
As a generalized approach for nonuniform sampling, NDFT can help us to get the information of a finite length signal in frequency domain at any frequency. It can also be used to design the FIR filters as the role of DFT, no matter if it's 1-D or 2-D.
One of the reasons to adopt NDFT is that most signals have their energy distributed nonuniformly in the frequency domain. Therefore, a nonuniform sampling scheme could be more convenient and useful in lots of applications of Digital Signal Processing (DSP). For example, NDFT provides a variable spectral resolution controlled by the users.
Note that NDFT reduces to DFT when the sampling points are located on the unit circle at equally spaced angles.
1-D NDFT
Definition
1-D NDFT of a sequence x[n] of length N is1



where 
 
 
 
  is the Z-transform of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are arbitrarily distinct points in the z-plane.
Expressing the above as matrix, we get



where



As we can see, the NDFT is characterized by 
 
 
 
  and hence the N 
 
 
 
  points. If we further factorize 
 
 
 
 , we can see that 
 
 
 
 
  is nonsingular provided the N 
 
 
 
  points are distinct. If 
 
 
 
  is nonsingular, we can get a unique inverse NDFT as following:



Given 
 
 
 
 , we can use Gaussian elimination to solve 
 
 
 
 
 . However, the complexity of this method is 
 
 
 
 . To solve this problem more efficiently, we first determine 
 
 
 
  directly by polynomial interpolation



then x[n] is the coefficients of the above interpolating polynomial which can be solved more efficiently. This is illustrated in the next subsection.
Solving The Inverse NDFT
Expressing 
 
 
 
  as the Lagrange polynomial of order N-1, we get



where 
 
 
 
  are the fundamental polynomials:



Expressing 
 
 
 
  by Newton interpolation method, we get



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the divided difference of the jth order of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
 :

















The disadvantage of Lagrange representation is that any additional point included will increase the order of the interpolating polynomial, leading to the need of recomputing all the fundamental polynomials. However, any additional point included in Newton representation only require one more term.
We can use a lower triangular system to solve 
 
 
 
 :



where



By the above equation, 
 
 
 
  can be computed within 
 
 
 
  operations. In this way Newton interpolation is more efficient than Lagrange Interpolation unless the latter is modified by



2-D NDFT
2-D NDFT of a sequence 
 
 
 
  of size 
 
 
 
  is2



where 
 
 
 
  is the 2-D z-transform of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are arbitrarily distinct 
 
 
 
  points in the 4-D 
 
 
 
  space.
As in the 1-D case, we can express the above equation as



and the matrix 
 
 
 
  is also depends only on the choice of those sampling points. However, even if those sampling points are distinct, 
 
 
 
  could still be singular. No rules for determining whether the matrix is nonsingular or not have been found. Therefore, for all implementation of 2-D NDFT, we just check 
 
 
 
  for a specific set of sampling points. In general, the complexity of 2-D NDFT 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
The applications of NDFT are:

Digital filter design
Spectral analysis
Antenna array design
Antenna pattern synthesis with prescribed nulls
Decoding of dual-tone multi-frequency(DTMF) signals
Dual-tone multi-frequency tone detection

See also

Spectral estimation

External links

Non-Uniform Fourier Transform: A Tutorial.

Notation, the NDFT and the NFFT
NFFT 3.0 – Tutorial

Notes
References

F. Marvasti, Nonuniform sampling: Theory and Practice. Plenum Publishers Co., 2001, pp. 325–360.

"
Category:Fourier analysis Category:Transforms Category:Digital signal processing



Marvasti 2001, p. 326.
Marvasti 2001, p. 334.




