


Superintegrable Hamiltonian system




Superintegrable Hamiltonian system

In mathematics, a superintegrable Hamiltonian system is a Hamiltonian system on a 2n-dimensional symplectic manifold for which the following conditions hold:
(i) There exist n ≤ k independent integrals F i of motion. Their level surfaces (invariant submanifolds) form a fibered manifold 
 
 
 
  over a connected open subset 
 
 
 
 .
(ii) There exist smooth real functions 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 
  such that the Poisson bracket of integrals of motion reads 
 
 
 
 .
(iii) The matrix function 
 
 
 
  is of constant corank 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
 
 , this is the case of a completely integrable Hamiltonian system. The Mishchenko-Fomenko theorem for superintegrable Hamiltonian systems generalizes the Liouville-Arnold theorem on action-angle coordinates of completely integrable Hamiltonian system as follows.
Let invariant submanifolds of a superintegrable Hamiltonian system be connected compact and mutually diffeomorphic. Then the fibered manifold 
 
 
 
  is a fiber bundle in tori 
 
 
 
 . Given its fiber 
 
 
 
 , there exists an open neighbourhood 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  which is a trivial fiber bundle provided with the bundle (generalized action-angle) coordinates 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  are coordinates on 
 
 
 
 
 . These coordinates are the Darboux coordinates on a symplectic manifold 
 
 
 
 . A Hamiltonian of a superintegrable system depends only on the action variables 
 
 
 
  which are the Casimir functions of the coinduced Poisson structure on 
 
 
 
 .
The Liouville-Arnold theorem for completely integrable systems and the Mishchenko-Fomenko theorem for the superintegrable ones are generalized to the case of non-compact invariant submanifolds. They are diffeomorphic to a toroidal cylinder 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Integrable system
Action-angle coordinates

References

Mishchenko, A., Fomenko,A., Generalized Liouville method of integration of Hamiltonian systems, Funct. Anal. Appl. 12 (1978) 113.
Bolsinov, A., Jovanovic, B., Noncommutative integrability, moment map and geodesic flows, Ann. Global Anal. Geom. 23 (2003) 305; .
Fasso, F., Superintegrable Hamiltonian systems: geometry and applications, Acta Appl. Math. 87(2005) 93.
Fiorani, E., Sardanashvily, G., Global action-angle coordinates for completely integrable systems with non-compact invariant manifolds, J. Math. Phys. 48 (2007) 032901; .
Giachetta, G., Mangiarotti, L., Sardanashvily, G., Geometric Methods in Classical and Quantum Mechanics (World Scientific, Singapore, 2010) ISBN 978-981-4313-72-8; arXiv: 1303.5363.

"
Category:Hamiltonian mechanics Category:Dynamical systems


