


FEE method




FEE method

In mathematics, the FEE method is the method of fast summation of series of a special form. It was constructed in 1990 by E. A. Karatsuba12 and was called FEE—Fast E-function Evaluation—because it makes it possible fast computations of the Siegel 

 
  -functions, and in particular, 


A class of functions, which are 'similar to the exponential function' was given the name 'E-functions' by Siegel.3 Among these functions are such special functions as the hypergeometric function, cylinder, spherical functions and so on.
Using the FEE, it is possible to prove the following theorem
Theorem: Let 
 
 
 
  be an elementary Transcendental function, that is the exponential function, or a trigonometric function, or an elementary algebraic function, or their superposition, or their inverse, or a superposition of the inverses. Then



Here 
 
 
 
  is the complexity of computation (bit) of the function 
 
 
 
  with accuracy up to 
 
 
 
  digits, 
 
 
 
  is the complexity of multiplication of two 
 
 
 
 -digit integers.
The algorithms based on the method FEE include the algorithms for fast calculation of any elementary Transcendental function for any value of the argument, the classical constants e, 

 the Euler constant

 
  the Catalan and the Apéry constants,4 such higher transcendental functions as the Euler gamma function and its derivatives, the hypergeometric,5 spherical, cylinder (including the Bessel)6 functions and some other functions for algebraic values of the argument and parameters, the Riemann zeta function for integer values of the argument78 and the Hurwitz zeta function for integer argument and algebraic values of the parameter,9 and also such special integrals as the integral of probability, the Fresnel integrals, the integral exponential function, the trigonometric integrals, and some other integrals10 for algebraic values of the argument with the complexity bound which is close to the optimal one, namely



At present, only the FEE makes it possible to calculate fast the values of the functions from the class of higher transcendental functions,11 certain special integrals of mathematical physics and such classical constants as Euler's, Catalan's12 and Apéry's constants. An additional advantage of the method FEE is the possibility of parallelizing the algorithms based on the FEE.
FEE-computation of classical constants
For fast evaluation of the constant 
 
 
 
  one can use the Euler formula 
 
 
 
  and apply the FEE to sum the Taylor series for






with the remainder terms 
 
 

 
  which satisfy the bounds






and for






To calculate 
 
 
 
  by the FEE it is possible to use also other approximations13 In all cases the complexity is



To compute the Euler constant gamma with accuracy up to 
 
 
 
  digits, it is necessary to sum by the FEE two series. Namely, for






The complexity is



To evaluate fast the constant 
 
 
 
  it is possible to apply the FEE to other approximations.14
FEE-computation of certain power series
By the FEE the two following series are calculated fast:






under the assumption that 
 
 
 
  are integers,



and 
 
 
 
  are constants, and 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic number. The complexity of the evaluation of the series is






The FEE details on the example of fast calculation of the classical constant e
For the evaluation of the constant 
 
 
 
  take 
 
 
 
 , terms of the Taylor series for 
 
 




Here we choose 
 
 
 
 
 , requiring that for the remainder 
 
 
 
  the inequality 
 
 
 
  is fulfilled. This is the case, for example, when 
 
 
 
  Thus, we take 
 
 
 
  such that the natural number 
 
 
 
 
  is determined by the inequalities:



We calculate the sum



in 
 
 
 
  steps of the following process.
Step 1. Combining in 
 
 
 
  the summands sequentially in pairs we carry out of the brackets the "obvious" common factor and obtain



We shall compute only integer values of the expressions in the parentheses, that is the values



Thus, at the first step the sum 
 
 
 
  is into






At the first step 
 
 
 
  integers of the form



are calculated. After that we act in a similar way: combining on each step the summands of the sum 
 
 
 
  sequentially in pairs, we take out of the brackets the 'obvious' common factor and compute only the integer values of the expressions in the brackets. Assume that the first 
 
 
 
  steps of this process are completed.
Step 
 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ).






we compute only 
 
 
 
  integers of the form






Here



is the product of 
 
 
 
  integers.
Etc.
Step 
 
 
 
 , the last one. We compute one integer value 
 
 
 
  we compute, using the fast algorithm described above the value 
 
 
 
  and make one division of the integer 
 
 
 
  by the integer 
 
 
 
  with accuracy up to 
 
 
 
  digits. The obtained result is the sum 
 
 
 
  or the constant 
 
 
 
  up to 
 
 
 
  digits. The complexity of all computations is



See also

Fast algorithms
AGM method
Computational complexity

References
External links

http://www.ccas.ru/personal/karatsuba/divcen.htm
http://www.ccas.ru/personal/karatsuba/algen.htm

"
Category:Numerical analysis Category:Computer arithmetic algorithms Category:Pi algorithms



E.A. Karatsuba, Fast evaluations of transcendental functions. Probl. Peredachi Informat., Vol. 27, N 4, (1991)
D.W. Lozier and F.W.J. Olver, Numerical Evaluation of Special Functions. Mathematics of Computation 1943-1993: A Half-Century of Computational Mathematics, W. Gautschi, eds., Proc. Sympos. Applied Mathematics, AMS, Vol.48 (1994).
C.L. Siegel, Transcendental numbers. Princeton University Press, Princeton (1949).
Karatsuba E. A., Fast evaluation of 
 
 
 
 , Probl. Peredachi Informat., Vol. 29, N 1 (1993)
Ekatharine A. Karatsuba, Fast evaluation of hypergeometric function by FEE. Computational Methods and Function Theory (CMFT'97), N. Papamichael, St. Ruscheweyh and E.B. Saff, eds., World Sc.Pub. (1999)
Catherine A. Karatsuba, Fast evaluation of Bessel functions. Integral Transforms and Special Functions, Vol. 1, N4 (1993)
E. A. Karatsuba, Fast Evaluation of Riemann zeta-function 
 
 
 
  for integer values of argument 
 
 
 
 . Probl. Peredachi Informat., Vol. 31, N 4 (1995).
J.M. Borwein, D.M. Bradley and R.E. Crandall, Computational strategies for the Riemann zeta function. J. of Comput. Appl. Math., Vol. 121 ,N 1-2 (2000).
E.A. Karatsuba, Fast evaluation of Hurwitz zeta function and Dirichlet 
 
 
 
 -series, Problem. Peredachi Informat., Vol. 34, N 4, pp. 342–353, (1998).
E.A. Karatsuba, Fast computation of some special integrals of mathematical physics. Scientific Computing, Validated Numerics, Interval Methods, W.Kramer, J.W.von Gudenberg, eds.(2001).
E. Bach, The complexity of number-theoretic constants. Info. Proc. Letters, N 62 (1997).
E.A. Karatsuba, Fast computation of $\zeta(3)$ and of some special integrals ,using the polylogarithms, the Ramanujan formula and its generalization. J. of Numerical Mathematics BIT, Vol. 41, N 4 (2001).
D.H. Bailey, P.B. Borwein and S. Plouffe, On the rapid computation of various polylogarithmic constants. Math. Comp.,Vol. 66 (1997).
R.P. Brent and E.M. McMillan, Some new algorithms for high-precision computation of Euler's constant. Math. Comp., Vol.34 (1980).




