


Dual matroid




Dual matroid

In matroid theory, the dual of a matroid 
 
 
 
  is another matroid 
 
 
 
  that has the same elements as 
 
 
 
 , and in which a set is independent if and only if 
 
 
 
  has a basis set disjoint from it.123
Matroid duals go back to the original paper by Hassler Whitney defining matroids.4 They generalize to matroids the notions of planar graph duality and of dual spaces in linear algebra.
Basic properties
Duality is an involution: for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .567
An alternative definition of the dual matroid is that its basis sets are the complements of the basis sets of 
 
 
 
 . The basis exchange axiom, used to define matroids from their bases, is self-complementary, so the dual of a matroid is necessarily a matroid.8
The flats of 
 
 
 
  are complementary to the cycles (unions of circuits) of 
 
 
 
 , and vice versa.9
If 
 
 
 
  is the rank function of a matroid 
 
 
 
  on ground set 
 
 
 
 , then the rank function of the dual matroid is 
 
 
 
 .101112
Minors
A matroid minor is formed from a larger matroid 
 
 
 
  by two operations: the restriction 
 
 
 
  deletes element 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  without changing the independence or rank of the remaining sets, and the contraction 
 
 
 
  deletes 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  after subtracting one from the rank of every set it belongs to. These two operations are dual
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus, a minor of a dual is the same thing as a dual of a minor.13
Self-dual matroids
An individual matroid is self-dual (generalizing e.g. the self-dual polyhedra for graphic matroids) if it is isomorphic to its own dual. The isomorphism may, but is not required to, leave the elements of the matroid fixed. Any algorithm that tests whether a given matroid is self-dual, given access to the matroid via an independence oracle, must perform an exponential number of oracle queries, and therefore cannot take polynomial time.14
Matroid families
Many important matroid families are self-dual, meaning that a matroid belongs to the family if and only if its dual does. Many other matroid families come in dual pairs. Examples of this phenomenon include:

The binary matroids (matroids representable over GF(2)), the matroids representable over any other field, and the regular matroids, are all self-dual families.15
The gammoids are self-dual. The strict gammoids are dual to the transversal matroids.16
The uniform matroids and partition matroids are self-dual. The dual to a uniform matroid 
 
 
 
  is the uniform matroid 
 
 
 
 .17
The dual of a graphic matroid is itself graphic if and only if the underlying graph is planar; the matroid of the dual of a planar graph is the same as the dual of the matroid of the graph. Thus, the graphic matroids of planar graphs are self-dual.18
Among the graphic matroids, and more generally among the binary matroids, the bipartite matroids (matroids in which every circuit is even) are dual to the Eulerian matroids (matroids that can be partitioned into disjoint circuits).1920

References
"
Category:Matroid theory Matroid



.
.
.
. Reprinted in , pp. 55–79. See in particular section 11, "Dual matroids", pp. 521–524.








, p. 653.
.
, Section 13, "Orthogonal hyperplanes and dual matroids".
, pp. 659–661; , pp. 222–223.
, pp. 77 & 111.
.
.
.




