


Difference algebra




Difference algebra

Difference algebra is a branch of mathematics concerned with the study of difference (or functional) equations from the algebraic point of view. Difference algebra is analogous to differential algebra but concerned with difference equations rather than differential equations. As an independent subject it was initiated by Joseph Ritt and his student Richard Cohn.
Difference rings, difference fields and difference algebras
A difference ring is a commutative ring

 
  together with a ring endomorphism 
 
 
 
 . Often it is assumed that 
 
 
 
  is injective. When 
 
 
 
  is a field one speaks of a difference field. A classical example of a difference field is the field 
 
 
 
  of rational functions with the difference operator 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
 . The role of difference rings in difference algebra is similar to the role of commutative rings in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. A morphism of difference rings is a morphism of rings that commutes with 
 
 
 
 . A difference algebra over a difference field 
 
 
 
  is a difference ring 
 
 
 
  with a 
 
 
 
 -algebra structure such that 
 
 
 
  is a morphism of difference rings, i.e. 
 
 
 
  extends 
 
 
 
 . A difference algebra which is a field is called a difference field extension.
Algebraic difference equations
The difference polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  over a difference field 
 
 
 
  in the (difference) variables 
 
 
 
  is the polynomial ring over 
 
 
 
  in the infinitely many variables 
 
 
 
 . It becomes a difference algebra over 
 
 
 
  by extending 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  as suggested by the naming of the variables.
By a system of algebraic difference equations over 
 
 
 
  one means any subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a difference algebra over 
 
 
 
  the solutions of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  are



Classically one is mainly interested in solutions in difference field extensions of 
 
 
 
 . For example, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the field of meromorphic functions on 
 
 
 
  with difference operator 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
 , then the fact that the gamma function

 
  satisfies the functional equation 
 
 
 
  can be restated abstractly as 
 
 
 
 .
Difference varieties
Intuitively, a difference variety over a difference field 
 
 
 
  is the set of solutions of a system of algebraic difference equations over 
 
 
 
 . This definition has to be made more precise by specifying where one is looking for the solutions. Usually one is looking for solutions in the so-called universal family of difference field extensions of 
 
 
 
 .12 Alternatively, one may define a difference variety as a functor from the category of difference field extensions of 
 
 
 
  to the category of sets, which is of the form 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 .
There is a one-to-one correspondence between the difference varieties defined by algebraic difference equations in the variables 
 
 
 
  and certain ideals in 
 
 
 
 , namely the perfect difference ideals of 
 
 
 
 .3 One of the basic theorems in difference algebra asserts that every ascending chain of perfect difference ideals in 
 
 
 
  is finite. This result can be seen as a difference analog of Hilbert's basis theorem.
Applications
Difference algebra is related to many other mathematical areas, such as discrete dynamical systems, combinatorics, number theory or model theory. While some real life problems, such as population dynamics, can be modeled by algebraic difference equations, difference algebra also has applications in pure mathematics. For example, there is a proof of the Manin-Mumford conjecture using methods of difference algebra.4 The model theory of difference fields has been studied.
Notes
References

Alexander Levin (2008), Difference algebra, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-6946-8
Richard M. Cohn (1979), [http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Fs8oAAAACAAJ& Difference algebra], R.E. Krieger Pub. Co., ISBN 978-0-88275-651-6

External links


The home page of Zoé Chatzidakis has several online surveys discussing (the model theory of) difference fields.

See also

Finite difference
Recurrence relation
Functional equation
Differential algebra

"
Category:Algebras



 Chapter 4
 Section 2.6
 Theorem 2.6.4





