


Gordan's lemma




Gordan's lemma

In convex geometry, Gordan's lemma states that the semigroup of integral points in the dual cone of a rational convex polyhedral cone is finitely generated.1 In algebraic geometry, the prime spectrum of the semigroup algebra of such a semigroup is, by definition, an affine toric variety; thus, the lemma says an affine toric variety is indeed an algebraic variety. The lemma is named after the German mathematician Paul Gordan (1837–1912).
Proof
There are topological and algebraic proofs.
Topological proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be the cone as given in the lemma. Let 
 
 
 
  be the integral vectors so that 
 
 
 
  Then the 
 
 
 
 
 's generate the dual cone 
 
 
 
 ; indeed, writting C for the cone generated by 
 
 
 
 's, we have
 
 
 
 , which must be the equality. Now, if x is in the semigroup



then it can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  are nonnegative integers and 
 
 
 
 . But since x and the first sum on the right-hand side are integral, the second sum is also integral and thus there can only be finitely many possibilities for the second sum (the topological reason). Hence, 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated.
Algebraic proof
The proof2 is based on a fact that a semigroup S is finitely generated if and only if its semigroup algebra 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated algebra over 
 
 
 
 
 . To prove Gordan's lemma, by induction (cf. the proof above), it is enough to prove the statement: for any unital subsemigroup S of 
 
 
 
 ,

If S is finitely generated, then 
 
 
 
 , v an integral vector, is finitely generated.
 

Put 
 
 
 
 , which has a basis 
 
 
 
 . It has 
 
 
 
 
 -grading given by


 
 . By assumption, A is finitely generated and thus is Noetherian. It follows from the algebraic lemma below that 
 
 
 
  is a finitely generated algebra over 
 
 
 
 . Now, the semigroup 
 
 
 
  is the image of S under a linear projection, thus finitely generated and so 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated. Hence, 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated then.
Lemma: Let A be a 
 
 
 
 -graded ring. If A is a Noetherian ring, then 
 
 
 
  is a finitely generated 
 
 
 
 -algebra.
Proof: Let I be the ideal of A generated by all homogeneous elements of A of positive degree. Since A is Noetherian, I is actually generated by finitely many 
 
 
 
 , homogeneous of positive degree. If f is homogeneous of positive degree, then we can write 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  homogeneous. If f has sufficieny large degree, then each 
 
 
 
  has degree positive and strictly less than that of f. Also, each degree piece 
 
 
 
  is a finitely generated 
 
 
 
 -module. (Proof: Let 
 
 
 
  be an increasing chain of finitely generated submodules of 
 
 
 
  with union 
 
 
 
 . Then the chain of the ideals 
 
 
 
  stabilizes in finite steps; so does the chain 
 
 
 
 ) Thus, by induction on degree, we see 
 
 
 
  is a finitely generated 
 
 
 
 -algebra.
References

D. Cox, Lectures on toric varieties
Winfried Bruns and Joseph Gubeladze, Polytopes, rings, and K-theory

See also

Dickson's lemma
Motzkin’s theorem

"
Category:Lemmas Category:Convex geometry Category:Algebraic geometry









