


Simple random sample




Simple random sample

In statistics, a simple random sample is a subset of individuals (a sample) chosen from a larger set (a population). Each individual is chosen randomly and entirely by chance, such that each individual has the same probability of being chosen at any stage during the sampling process, and each subset of k individuals has the same probability of being chosen for the sample as any other subset of k individuals.1 This process and technique is known as simple random sampling, and should not be confused with systematic random sampling. A simple random sample is an unbiased surveying technique.
Simple random sampling is a basic type of sampling, since it can be a component of other more complex sampling methods. The principle of simple random sampling is that every object has the same probability of being chosen. For example, suppose N college students want to get a ticket for a basketball game, but there are only X 2. A naive algorithm is the draw-by-draw algorithm where at each step we remove item from the set with equal probability and put in the sample. We continue until we have sample of desired size k. The drawback of this method is that it requires random access in the set.
The selection-rejection algorithm developed by Fan et al in 19623 requires single pass over data however its sequential algorithm and requires knowledge of total count of items n which is not available in streaming scenarios.
A very simple random sort algorithm was proved by Sunter in 19774 which simply assigns a random number drawn from uniform distribution (0, 1) as key to each item, sorts all items using the key and selects the smallest k items.
J. Vitter in 19855 proposed reservoir sampling algorithm which is often widely used. This algorithm does not require advance knowledge of n and uses constant space.
Distinction between a systematic random sample and a simple random sample
Consider a school with 1000 students, divided equally into boys and girls, and suppose that a researcher wants to select 100 of them for further study. All their names might be put in a bucket and then 100 names might be pulled out. Not only does each person have an equal chance of being selected, we can also easily calculate the probability P of a given person being chosen, since we know the sample size (n) and the population (N):
1. In the case that any given person can only be selected once (i.e., after selection a person is removed from the selection pool):



2. In the case that any selected person is returned to the selection pool (i.e., can be picked more than once):



This means that every student in the school has in any case approximately a 1 in 10 chance of being selected using this method. Further, all combinations of 100 students have the same probability of selection.
If a systematic pattern is introduced into random sampling, it is referred to as "systematic (random) sampling". An example would be if the students in the school had numbers attached to their names ranging from 0001 to 1000, and we chose a random starting point, e.g. 0533, and then picked every 10th name thereafter to give us our sample of 100 (starting over with 0003 after reaching 0993). In this sense, this technique is similar to cluster sampling, since the choice of the first unit will determine the remainder. This is no longer simple random sampling, because some combinations of 100 students have a larger selection probability than others – for instance, {3, 13, 23, ..., 993} has a 1/10 chance of selection, while {1, 2, 3, ..., 100} cannot be selected under this method.
Sampling a dichotomous population
If the members of the population come in three kinds, say "blue" "red" and "black", the number of red elements in a sample of given size will vary by sample and hence is a random variable whose distribution can be studied. That distribution depends on the numbers of red and black elements in the full population. For a simple random sample with replacement, the distribution is a binomial distribution. For a simple random sample without replacement, one obtains a hypergeometric distribution.

Multistage sampling
Nonprobability sampling
Opinion poll
Quantitative marketing research

References
"
Category:Market research Category:Sampling techniques












