


Samuelson's inequality




Samuelson's inequality

In statistics, Samuelson's inequality, named after the economist Paul Samuelson,1 also called the Laguerre–Samuelson inequality,2 after the mathematician Edmond Laguerre, states that every one of any collection x1, ..., xn, is within √(n − 1) sample standard deviations of their sample mean.
Definition
If we let



be the sample mean and



be the standard deviation of the sample, then


3
Equality holds on the left if and only if the n − 1 smallest of the n numbers are equal to each other, and on the right iff the n − 1 largest ones are equal.
Samuelson's inequality may be considered a reason why studentization of residuals should be done externally.
Relationship to polynomials
Samuelson was not the first to describe this relationship. The first to discover this relationship was probably Laguerre in 1880 while investigating the roots (zeros) of polynomials.45
Consider a polynomial with all roots real:



Without loss of generality let 
 
 
 
  and let


 
  and 
 
 

Then



and



In terms of the coefficients



Laguerre showed that the roots of this polynomial were bounded by



where



Inspection shows that 
 
 
 
  is the mean of the roots and that b is the standard deviation of the roots.
Laguerre failed to notice this relationship with the means and standard deviations of the roots being more interested in the bounds themselves. This relationship permits a rapid estimate of the bounds of the roots and may be of use in their location.
Note
When the coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both zero no information can be obtained about the location of the roots, because not all roots are real (as can be seen from Descartes' rule of signs) unless the constant term is also zero.
References
"
Category:Statistical inequalities



Paul Samuelson, "How Deviant Can You Be?", Journal of the American Statistical Association, volume 63, number 324 (December, 1968), pp. 1522–1525 
Jensen, Shane Tyler (1999) The Laguerre–Samuelson Inequality with Extensions and Applications in Statistics and Matrix Theory MSc Thesis. Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University.
Advances in Inequalities from Probability Theory and Statistics, by Neil S. Barnett and Sever Silvestru Dragomir, Nova Publishers, 2008, page 164
Jensen, Shane Tyler (1999) The Laguerre–Samuelson Inequality with Extensions and Applications in Statistics and Matrix Theory MSc Thesis. Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University
Laguerre E. (1880) Mémoire pour obtenir par approximation les racines d'une équation algébrique qui a toutes les racines réelles. Nouv Ann Math 2e série, 19, 161–172, 193–202




