


Averaging argument




Averaging argument

In computational complexity theory and cryptography, averaging argument is a standard argument for proving theorems. It usually allows us to convert probabilistic polynomial-time algorithms into non-uniform polynomial-size circuits.
Example
To simplify, let's first consider an example.
Example: If every person likes at least 1/3 of the books in a library, then, there exists a book, which at least 1/3 of people liked it.
Proof: Suppose there are 
 
 
 
  people and B books. Each person likes at least 
 
 
 
  of the books. Let people leave a mark on the book they like. Then, there will be at least 
 
 
 
  marks. The averaging argument claims that there exists a book with at least 
 
 
 
  marks on it. Assume, to the contradiction, that no such book exists. Then, every book has fewer than 
 
 
 
  marks. However, since there are 
 
 
 
  books, the total number of marks will be fewer than 
 
 
 
 , contradicting the fact that there are at least 
 
 
 
  marks. 
 
 

Formalized definition of averaging argument

Consider two sets: X and Y, a proposition 
 
 
 
 , and a fraction 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  ).
If for all 
 
 
 
  and at least a fraction 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the proposition 
 
 
 
  holds, then there exists a 
 
 
 
 , for which there exists a fraction 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  that the proposition 
 
 
 
  holds.

Another formal (and more complicated) definition is due to Barak:1

Let 
 
 
 
  be some function. The averaging argument is the following claim: if we have a circuit 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  with probability at least 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is chosen at random and 
 
 
 
  is chosen independently from some distribution

 
  over 
 
 
 
  (which might not even be efficiently sampleable) then there exists a single string 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
Indeed, for every 
 
 
 
  define 
 
 
 
  to be 
 
 
 
  then



and then this reduces to the claim that for every random variable 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  (this holds since 
 
 
 
  is the weighted average of 
 
 
 
  and clearly if the average of some values is at least 
 
 
 
  then one of the values must be at least 
 
 
 
 ).

Application
This argument has wide use in complexity theory (e.g. proving 
 
 
 
 ) and cryptography (e.g. proving that indistinguishable encryption results in semantic security). A plethora of such applications can be found in Goldreich's books.234
References
"
Category:Computational complexity theory Category:Circuit complexity Category:Probabilistic complexity theory Category:Theory of cryptography



Boaz Barak, "Note on the averaging and hybrid arguments and prediction vs. distinguishing.", COS522, Princeton University, March 2006.↩
Oded Goldreich, Foundations of Cryptography, Volume 1: Basic Tools, Cambridge University Press, 2001, ISBN 0-521-79172-3↩
Oded Goldreich, Foundations of Cryptography, Volume 2: Basic Applications, Cambridge University Press, 2004, ISBN 0-521-83084-2↩
Oded Goldreich, Computational Complexity: A Conceptual Perspective, Cambridge University Press, 2008, ISBN 0-521-88473-X↩




