


Extender (set theory)




Extender (set theory)

In set theory, an extender is a system of ultrafilters which represents an elementary embedding witnessing large cardinal properties. A nonprincipal ultrafilter is the most basic case of an extender.
A (κ, λ)-extender can be defined as an elementary embedding of some model M of ZFC− (ZFC minus the power set axiom) having critical point κ ε M, and which maps κ to an ordinal at least equal to λ. It can also be defined as a collection of ultrafilters, one for each n-tuple drawn from λ.
Formal definition of an extender
Let κ and λ be cardinals with κ≤λ. Then, a set 
 
 
 
  is called a (κ,λ)-extender if the following properties are satisfied:

each Ea is a κ-complete nonprincipal ultrafilter on [κ]<ω and furthermore
 
at least one Ea is not κ+-complete,
for each 
 
 
 
 , at least one Ea contains the set 
 
 
 
 .

(Coherence) The Ea are coherent (so that the ultrapowers Ult(V,Ea) form a directed system).
(Normality) If f is such that 
 
 
 
 
 , then for some 
 
 
 
 .
(Wellfoundedness) The limit ultrapower Ult(V,E) is wellfounded (where Ult(V,E) is the direct limit of the ultrapowers Ult(V,Ea)).

By coherence, one means that if a and b are finite subsets of λ such that b is a superset of a, then if X is an element of the ultrafilter Eb and one chooses the right way to project X down to a set of sequences of length |a|, then X is an element of Ea. More formally, for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , where m≤n and for j≤m the ij are pairwise distinct and at most n, we define the projection 
 
 
 
 
 .
Then Ea and Eb cohere if


 
 .
Defining an extender from an elementary embedding
Given an elementary embedding j:V→M, which maps the set-theoretic universe V into a transitive inner model M, with critical point κ, and a cardinal λ, κ≤λ≤j(κ), one defines 
 
 
 
  as follows:


 
  One can then show that E has all the properties stated above in the definition and therefore is a (κ,λ)-extender.
References




"
Category:Large cardinals Category:Inner model theory


