


Potential flow around a circular cylinder




Potential flow around a circular cylinder

 In mathematics, potential flow around a circular cylinder is a classical solution for the flow of an inviscid, incompressible fluid around a cylinder that is transverse to the flow. Far from the cylinder, the flow is unidirectional and uniform. The flow has no vorticity and thus the velocity field is irrotational and can be modeled as a potential flow. Unlike a real fluid, this solution indicates a net zero drag on the body, a result known as d'Alembert's paradox.
"The flow of an incompressible fluid past a cylinder is one of the first mathematical models that a student of fluid dynamics encounters. This flow is an excellent vehicle for the study of concepts that will be encountered numerous times in mathematical physics, such as vector fields, coordinate transformations, and most important, the physical interpretation of mathematical results." 1
Mathematical solution
   A cylinder (or disk) of radius

 
  is placed in two-dimensional, incompressible, inviscid flow. The goal is to find the steady velocity vector 
 
 
 
  and pressure

 
  in a plane, subject to the condition that far from the cylinder the velocity vector is



where 
 
 
 
  is a constant, and at the boundary of the cylinder



where 
 
 
 
  is the vector normal to the cylinder surface. The upstream flow is uniform and has no vorticity. The flow is inviscid, incompressible and has constant mass density 
 
 
 
 . The flow therefore remains without vorticity, or is said to be irrotational, with 
 
 
 
  everywhere. Being irrotational, there must exist a velocity potential

 
 :



Being incompressible, 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  must satisfy Laplace's equation:



The solution for 
 
 
 
  is obtained most easily in polar coordinates

 
  and 
 
 
 
 , related to conventional Cartesian coordinates by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In polar coordinates, Laplace's equation is:



The solution that satisfies the boundary conditions is2



The velocity components in polar coordinates are obtained from the components of 
 
 
 
  in polar coordinates:



and



Being invisicid and irrotational, Bernoulli's equation allows the solution for pressure field to be obtained directly from the velocity field:



where the constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  appear so that 
 
 
 
  far from the cylinder, where 
 
 
 
 . Using






In the figures, the colorized field referred to as "pressure" is a plot of



On the surface of the cylinder, or 
 
 
 
 , pressure varies from a maximum of 1 (red color) at the stagnation points at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to a minimum of -3 (purple) on the sides of the cylinder, at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  Likewise, 
 
 
 
  varies from V=0 at the stagnation points to 
 
 
 
  on the sides, in the low pressure.
Stream function
The flow being incompressible, a stream function can be found such that



It follows from this definition, using vector identities,



Therefore a contour of a constant value of 
 
 
 
  will also be a stream line, a line tangent to 
 
 
 
  For the flow past a cylinder, we find:



Physical interpretation
Laplace's equation is linear, and is one of the most elementary partial differential equations. This simple equation yields the entire solution for both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  because of the constraint of irrotationality and incompressibility. Having obtained the solution for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the consistency of the pressure gradient with the accelerations can be noted.
The dynamic pressure at the upstream stagnation point has value of 
 
 
 
  a value needed to decelerate the free stream flow of speed 
 
 
 
  This same value appears at the downstream stagnation point, this high pressure is again need to decelerate the flow to zero speed. This symmetry arises only because the flow is completely frictionless.
The low pressure on sides on the cylinder is needed to provide the centripetal acceleration of the flow:



where 
 
 
 
  is the radius of curvature of the flow. But 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  The integral of the equation for centripetal acceleration, which will over a distance 
 
 
 
  will thus yield



The exact solution has, for the lowest pressure,



The low pressure, which must be present to provide the centripetal acceleration, will also increase the flow speed as the fluid travels from higher to lower values of pressure. Thus we find the maximum speed in the flow, 
 
 
 
  in the low pressure on the sides of the cylinder.
A value of 
 
 
 
  is consistent with conservation of the volume of fluid. With the cylinder blocking some of the flow, 
 
 
 
  must be greater than 
 
 
 
  somewhere in the plane through the center of the cylinder and transverse to the flow.
Comparison with flow of a real fluid past a cylinder
This symmetry of this ideal solution has the peculiar property of having zero net drag on the cylinder, a property known as d'Alembert's paradox. Unlike an ideal inviscid fluid, a viscous flow past a cylinder, no matter how small the viscosity, will acquire vorticity in a thin boundary layer adjacent to the cylinder. Boundary layer separation can occur, and a trailing wake will occur behind the cylinder. The pressure will be lower on the wake side of the cylinder, than on the upstream side, resulting in a drag force in the downstream direction.
References
"
Category:Fluid dynamics



http://library.wolfram.com/infocenter/Articles/2731/↩
William S. Janna, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, PWS Publishing Company, Boston (1993)↩




