


Rossmo's formula




Rossmo's formula

Rossmo's formula is a geographic profiling formula to predict where a serial criminal lives. The formula was developed and patented1 by criminologist Kim Rossmo and integrated into a specialized crime analysis software product called Rigel. The Rigel product is developed by the software company Environmental Criminology Research Inc. (ECRI), which Rossmo co-founded.2
Formula
Imagine a map with an overlaying grid of little squares named sectors. If this map is a raster image file on a computer, these sectors are pixels. A sector 
 
 
 
  is the square on row i and column j, located at coordinates (Xi,Yj). The following function gives the probability 
 
 
 
  of the position of the serial criminal residing within a specific sector (or point) 
 
 
 
 :3


 
  where: 
 
 

Here the summation is over past crimes located at coordinates (xn,yn). 
 
 
 
  is a characteristic function that returns 0 when a point 
 
 
 
  is an element of the buffer zone B (the neighborhood of a criminal residence that is swept out by a radius of B from its center). 
 
 
 
  allows p to switch between the two terms. If a crime occurs within the buffer zone, then 
 
 
 
  and, thus, the first term does not contribute to the overall result. This is a prerogative for defining the first term in the case when the distance between a point (or pixel) becomes equal to zero. When 
 
 
 
 
 , the 1st term is used to calculate 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the Manhattan distance between a point 
 
 
 
  and the n-th crime site 
 
 
 
 .
Explanation
The summation in the formula consists of two terms. The first term describes the idea of decreasing probability with increasing distance. The second term deals with the concept of a buffer zone. The variable 
 
 
 
 
  is used to put more weight on one of the two ideas. The variable 
 
 
 
  describes the radius of the buffer zone. The constant 
 
 
 
  is empirically determined.
The main idea of the formula is that the probability of crimes first increases as one moves through the buffer zone away from the hotzone, but decreases afterwards. The variable 
 
 
 
  can be chosen so that it works best on data of past crimes. The same idea goes for the variable 
 
 
 
 .
The distance is calculated with the Manhattan distance formula.
Applications
The formula has been applied to fields other than forensics.
4
Because of the buffer zone idea, the formula works well for studies concerning predatory animals such as white sharks.
5
This formula and math behind it were used in crime detecting in the Pilot episode of the TV-series Numb3rs and in the 100th episode of the same show, called "Disturbed".
Notes


(fr) http://www.siteduzero.com/tutoriel-3-422405-profilage-geographique.html
References






"
Category:Offender profiling Category:Criminology Category:Crime mapping Category:Spatial data analysis Category:Forensic techniques



Rossmo, D. K. (1996). U.S. Patent No. 5,781,704. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Rich, T. and Shively, M (2004, December).P. 14. A Methodology for Evaluating Geographic Profiling Software. U.S. Department of Justice, Retrieved from https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/208993.pdf







