


Mnev's universality theorem




Mnev's universality theorem

In algebraic geometry, Mnev's universality theorem is a result which can be used to represent algebraic (or semi algebraic) varieties as realizations of oriented matroids, a notion of combinatorics.
Oriented matroids
For the purposes of Mnev's universality, an oriented matroid of a finite subset 
 
 
 
  is a list of all partitions of points in S induced by hyperplanes in 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the structure of oriented matroid contains full information on the incidence relations in S, inducing on S a matroid structure.
The realization space of an oriented matroid is the space of all configurations of points 
 
 
 
  inducing the same oriented matroid structure on S.
Stable equivalence of semialgebraic sets
For the purposes of Mnev's Universality, the stable equivalence of semialgebraic sets is defined as follows.
Let U, V be semialgebraic sets, obtained as a disconnected union of connected semialgebraic sets




 
 , 
 
 




We say that U and V are rationally equivalent if there exist homeomorphisms 
 
 
 
  defined by rational maps.
Let 
 
 
 
  be semialgebraic sets,




 
 
 , 
 
 




with 
 
 
 
  mapping to 
 
 
 
  under the natural projection 
 
 
 
  deleting last d coordinates. We say that 
 
 
 
 
  is a stable projection if there exist integer polynomial maps








such that




 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 




The stable equivalence is an equivalence relation on semialgebraic subsets generated by stable projections and rational equivalence.
Mnev's Universality theorem
THEOREM (Mnev's universality theorem)
 Let V be a semialgebraic subset in 
 
 
 
 
  defined over integers. Then V is stably equivalent to a realization space of a certain oriented matroid.
History
Mnev's universality theorem was discovered by Nikolai Mnev in his Ph. D. thesis. It has numerous applications in algebraic geometry, due to Laurent Lafforgue, Ravi Vakil and others, allowing one to construct moduli spaces with arbitrarily bad behaviour.
Notes

Universality Theorem, a lecture of Nikolai Mnev (in Russian).


N. E. Mnev, The universality theorems on the classification problem of configuration varieties and convex polytopes varieties (pp. 527–543), in "Topology and geometry: Rohlin Seminar." Edited by O. Ya. Viro. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1346. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988.


R. Vakil "Murphy's Law in algebraic geometry: Badly-behaved deformation spaces", Invent. math. 164, 569-590 (2006).





J. Richter-Gebert The universality theorems for oriented matroids and polytopes, Contemporary Mathematics 223, 269-292 (1999).

"
Category:Real algebraic geometry Category:Oriented matroids Category:Theorems in algebraic geometry Category:Theorems in combinatorics


