


Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars polarization




Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars polarization

In dielectric spectroscopy, large frequency dependent contributions to the dielectric response, especially at low frequencies, may come from build-ups of charge.
This, so-called Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars polarization (or often just Maxwell-Wagner polarization), occurs either at inner dielectric boundary layers on a mesoscopic scale, or at the external electrode-sample interface on a macroscopic scale. In both cases this leads to a separation of charges (such as through a depletion layer). The charges are often separated over a considerable distance (relative to the atomic and molecular sizes), and the contribution to dielectric loss can therefore be orders of magnitude larger than the dielectric response due to molecular fluctuations.1
Occurrences
Maxwell-Wagner polarization processes should be taken into account during the investigation of inhomogeneous materials like suspensions or coloids, biological materials, phase separated polymers, blends, and crystalline or liquid crystalline polymers.2
Models
The simplest model for describing an inhomogeneous structure is a double layer arrangement, where each layer is characterized by its permittivity 
 
 
 
 
  and its conductivity 
 
 
 
 . The relaxation time is then: 
 
 
 
  Importantly this shows that an inhomogeneous material may have frequency dependent response, even though none of the individual inhomogeneities severally are frequency dependent.
A more sophisticated model for treating interfacial polarization was developed by Maxwell, and later generalized by Wagner 3 and Sillars.4 Maxwell considered a spherical particle with a dielectric permittivity 
 
 
 
  and radius 
 
 
 
  suspended in an infinite medium characterized by 
 
 
 
 
 . Certain European text books will represent the 
 
 
 
  constant with the Greek letter ω (Omega), sometimes referred to as Doyle's constant.5
References


See also

Debye relaxation
Dielectric dispersion
Dielectric function
Dipole
Permittivity


Ellipsometry
Linear response function
Kramers–Kronig relation
Green–Kubo relations

"
Category:Spectroscopy Category:Electric and magnetic fields in matter



Kremer F., & Schönhals A. (eds.): Broadband Dielectric Spectroscopy. – Springer-Verlag, 2003, ISBN 978-3-540-43407-8.
Kremer F., & Schönhals A. (eds.): Broadband Dielectric Spectroscopy. – Springer-Verlag, 2003, ISBN 978-3-540-43407-8.
Wagner KW (1914) Arch Elektrotech 2:371; 
Sillars RW (1937) J Inst Elect Eng 80:378
G.McGuinness, Polymer Physics, Oxford University Press, p211




