


Dynamic risk measure




Dynamic risk measure

In financial mathematics, a conditional risk measure is a random variable of the financial risk (particularly the downside risk) as if measured at some point in the future. A risk measure can be thought of as a conditional risk measure on the trivial sigma algebra.
A dynamic risk measure is a risk measure that deals with the question of how evaluations of risk at different times are related. It can be interpreted as a sequence of conditional risk measures. 1
Conditional risk measure
A mapping 
 
 
 
  is a conditional risk measure if it has the following properties:

Conditional cash invariance





Monotonicity





Normalization




If it is a conditional convex risk measure then it will also have the property:

Conditional convexity




A conditional coherent risk measure is a conditional convex risk measure that additionally satisfies:

Conditional positive homogeneity




Acceptance set
The acceptance set at time 
 
 
 
  associated with a conditional risk measure is


 
 .
If you are given an acceptance set at time 
 
 
 
 
  then the corresponding conditional risk measure is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the essential infimum.2
Regular property
A conditional risk measure 
 
 
 
  is said to be regular if for any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function on 
 
 
 
 . Any normalized conditional convex risk measure is regular.3
The financial interpretation of this states that the conditional risk at some future node (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) only depends on the possible states from that node. In a binomial model this would be akin to calculating the risk on the subtree branching off from the point in question.
Time consistent property
A dynamic risk measure is time consistent if and only if 
 
 
 
 
 .4
Example: dynamic superhedging price
The dynamic superhedging price has conditional risk measures of the form
 
 
 
 . It is a widely shown result that this is also a time consistent risk measure.
References
"
Category:Financial risk Category:Mathematical finance











