


Standardized mean of a contrast variable




Standardized mean of a contrast variable

In statistics, the standardized mean of a contrast variable (SMCV or SMC), is a parameter assessing effect size. The SMCV is defined as mean divided by the standard deviation of a contrast variable.12 The SMCV was first proposed for one-way ANOVA cases 3 and was then extended to multi-factor ANOVA cases .4
Background
Consistent interpretations for the strength of group comparison, as represented by a contrast, are important.56 The standardized mean of a contrast variable, along with c+-probability , can provide a consistent interpretation of the strength of a comparison.7 When there are only two groups involved in a comparison, SMCV is the same as SSMD. SSMD belongs to a popular type of effect-size measure called "standardized mean differences"8 which includes Cohen's 
 
 
9 and Glass's 
 
 
10 In ANOVA, a similar parameter for measuring the strength of group comparison is standardized effect size (SES).11 One issue with SES is that its values are incomparable for contrasts with different coefficients. SMCV does not have such an issue.
Concept
Suppose the random values in t groups represented by random variables 
 
 
 
  have means 
 
 
 
  and variances 
 
 
 
 , respectively. A contrast variable 
 
 
 
  is defined by


 
  where the 
 
 
 
 's are a set of coefficients representing a comparison of interest and satisfy 
 
 
 
 . The SMCV of contrast variable 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is defined as12



where 
 
 
 
  is the covariance of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  are independent,



Classifying rule for the strength of group comparisons
The population value (denoted by 
 
 
 
  ) of SMCV can be used to classify the strength of a comparison represented by a contrast variable, as shown in the following table.1314 This classifying rule has a probabilistic basis due to the link between SMCV and c+-probability.15




Effect type

Effect subtype

Thresholds for negative SMCV

Thresholds for positive SMCV





Extra large

Extremely strong











Very strong











Strong











Fairly strong











Large

Moderate











Fairly moderate











Medium

Fairly weak











Weak











Very weak











Small

Extremely weak











No effect







Statistical estimation and inference
The estimation and inference of SMCV presented below is for one-factor experiments.1617 Estimation and inference of SMCV for multi-factor experiments has also been discussed.181920
The estimation of SMCV relies on how samples are obtained in a study. When the groups are correlated, it is usually difficult to estimate the covariance among groups. In such a case, a good strategy is to obtain matched or paired samples (or subjects) and to conduct contrast analysis based on the matched samples. A simple example of matched contrast analysis is the analysis of paired difference of drug effects after and before taking a drug in the same patients. By contrast, another strategy is to not match or pair the samples and to conduct contrast analysis based on the unmatched or unpaired samples. A simple example of unmatched contrast analysis is the comparison of efficacy between a new drug taken by some patients and a standard drug taken by other patients. Methods of estimation for SMCV and c+-probability in matched contrast analysis may differ from those used in unmatched contrast analysis.
Unmatched samples
Consider an independent sample of size 
 
 
 
 ,



from the 
 
 
 
  group 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 's are independent. Let 
 
 
 
 ,





 
  and



When the 
 
 
 
  groups have unequal variance, the maximal likelihood estimate (MLE) and method-of-moment estimate (MM) of SMCV (
 
 
 
 ) are, respectively2122


 
  and



When the 
 
 
 
  groups have equal variance, under normality assumption, the uniformly minimal variance unbiased estimate (UMVUE) of SMCV (
 
 
 
 ) is2324


 
  where 
 
 
 
 . The confidence interval of SMCV can be made using the following non-central t-distribution:2526


 
  where 
 
 

Matched samples
In matched contrast analysis, assume that there are 
 
 
 
  independent samples 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  groups (
 
 
 
 's), where 
 
 
 
 . Then the 
 
 
 
  observed value of a contrast 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the sample mean and sample variance of the contrast variable 
 
 
 
 , respectively. Under normality assumptions, the UMVUE estimate of SMCV is27


 
  where 
 
 

A confidence interval for SMCV can be made using the following non-central t-distribution:28



See also

Dual-flashlight plot

References
"
Category:Effect size Category:Analysis of variance



↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩





















