


HO (complexity)




HO (complexity)

High-order logic is an extension of first-order and second-order with high order quantifiers. In descriptive complexity we can see that it is equal to the ELEMENTARY functions.1 There is a relation between the 
 
 
 
 th order and non determinist algorithm the time of which is with 
 
 
 
 
  level of exponentials.
Definitions and notations
We define high-order variable, a variable of order 
 
 
 
  has got an arity 
 
 
 
  and represent any set of 
 
 
 
 -tuples of elements of order 
 
 
 
 . They are usually written in upper-case and with a natural number as exponent to indicate the order. High order logic is the set of FO formulae where we add quantification over higher-order variables, hence we will use the terms defined in the FO article without defining them again.
HO
 
 
 
 
  is the set of formulae where variable's order are at most 
 
 
 
 . HO
 
 
 
  is the subset of the formulae of the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a quantifier, 
 
 
 
 
  means that 
 
 
 
  is a tuple of variable of order 
 
 
 
  with the same quantification. So it is the set of formulae with 
 
 
 
  alternations of quantifiers of 
 
 
 
 th order, beginning by and 
 
 
 
 
 , followed by a formula of order 
 
 
 
 .
Using the tetration's standard notation, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
  times 
 
 

Property
Normal form
Every formula of 
 
 
 
 th order is equivalent to a formula in prenex normal form, where we first write quantification over variable of 
 
 
 
 th order and then a formula of order 
 
 
 
  in normal form.
Relation to complexity classes
HO is equal to ELEMENTARY functions. To be more precise, 
 
 
 
 
 , it means a tower of 
 
 
 
  2s, ending with 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a constant. A special case of it is that 
 
 
 
 =HO
 
 
 
 
 =NTIME(
 
 
 
 )=NP, which is exactly the Fagin's theorem. Using oracle machines in the polynomial hierarchy, HO
 
 
 
 =NTIME(
 
 
 
 )
References
External links

zoo about HO.

"
Category:Finite model theory Category:Descriptive complexity Category:Computational complexity theory








