


Lachter




Lachter

The Lachter (also Berglachter) was a common unit of length used in the mining industry in Europe, usually to measure depth, tunnel driving and the size of mining fields; it was also used for contract work. In most German-speaking mining fields it was the most important unit of length.
A Lachter was roughly equal to the amount which a man could contain within his outstretched arms. It was thus similar to the Klafter (ca. ), but was usually rather larger.
The Lachter was - with regional differences - subdivided into Achtel (also called a Spann, Gräpel or Gröbel), (Lachter)Zoll, Primen (or Prinen) and Sekunden:

1 Lachter = 8 Spann = 80 (Lachter)Zoll = 800 Primen = 8,000 Sekunden

In the 19th century a decimal system of subdivision was established:

1 Lachter = 10 Lachterfuß = 100 Lachterzoll = 1,000 Lachterlinien

Like other units of measure, the Lachter varied in length depending on the region, but there could also be differences in length within the same region. In addition there could also be differences between various mining fields within a territory. The specification and use of conversion tables only makes sense if it is known for certain, where and at which times the values were valid. Some examples:




Some kinds of Lachter





Region



Altenberg (Ore Mountains)



Anhalt-Köthen



Annaberg



Baden (to 1827)1



Baden (from 1827)2



Bavaria



Bayreuth



Berchtesgaden



Bohemia



Brunswick



Clausthal



Eisleben



Freiberg



Hanover



Idrija (Carniola)



Joachimsthal (today: Jáchymov)



Johanngeorgenstadt



Kronach



Lippe-Detmold



Marienberg



Nassau



Austria



Prussia



Saxony



Schemnitz (today: Banská Štiavnica)



Silesia



Tyrol (1769-1809 and after 1815)3



Tyrol: Innsbruck (before 1769)4



Tyrol: Kitzbühl (1747)5



Tyrol: Schwaz6



Württemberg



A Lachterschnur was an oiled, 10–12 Lachter long cord, used as a measuring device.
See also

German obsolete units of measurement
List of human-based units of measure
List of obsolete units of measurement

References


Sources




"
Category:Mining Category:Obsolete units of measurement Category:Timber rafting Category:Units of length



Metz, Rudolf: Mineralogisch-Landeskundliche Wanderungen im Nordschwarzwald. 2nd ed., Lahr 1977, p. 597.↩

Rottleuthner, Wilhelm: Die alten Localmasse und Gewichte nebst den Aichungsvorschriften bis zur Einführung des metrischen Mass- und Gewichtssystems und der Staatsaichämter in Tirol und Vorarlberg. Universitätsverlag Wagner: Innsbruck, 1883, p. 14-22.↩
Rottleuthner, Wilhelm: Die alten Localmasse und Gewichte nebst den Aichungsvorschriften bis zur Einführung des metrischen Mass- und Gewichtssystems und der Staatsaichämter in Tirol und Vorarlberg. Universitätsverlag Wagner: Innsbruck, 1883, p. 16 & 130.↩
Rottleuthner, Wilhelm: Die alten Localmasse und Gewichte nebst den Aichungsvorschriften bis zur Einführung des metrischen Mass- und Gewichtssystems und der Staatsaichämter in Tirol und Vorarlberg. Universitätsverlag Wagner: Innsbruck, 1883, p. 32.↩





