


Shinnar–Le Roux algorithm




Shinnar–Le Roux algorithm

The Shinnar–Le Roux algorithm is a mathematical tool for generating optimized selective pulses in magnetic resonance imaging radio frequency pulse sequence design.1 Selective pulses are used in MRI to isolate a slice through the subject.2
Given a desired magnetization profile, determining the RF pulse that will produce it is not trivial. At low tip angles, the RF excitation waveform can be approximated by the inverse Fourier Transform of the desired frequency profile.3
The RF pulse design problem is generally nonlinear due to the non-linearity of the Bloch equations. A direct solution to the pulse design problem was independently proposed by Shinnar 4567 and Le Roux 8 based on a discrete approximation to the spin domain version of the Bloch equations.
Theory
The Shinnar-LeRoux algorithm simplifies the solution of the Bloch equations to the design of two polynomials, which can be solved using well-known digital filter design algorithms.9



Where N is the number of bins, or hard pulse divisions that you wish to approximate with, and φ(t) is the phase of the B1(t) waveform at a given time t.
The mapping of the RF pulse into two complex polynomials will be denoted as the Forward SLR Transform. Given two polynomials 
 
 
 
  the SLR transform can be inverted to calculate the RF pulse the produces these polynomials. The order of the polynomials 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . A minimum phase 
 
 
 
  results in a minimum energy RF pulse.
References
"
Category:Nuclear magnetic resonance Category:Magnetic resonance imaging Category:Medical imaging






M. Shinnar, L. Bolinger, and J. S. Leigh, “Use of finite impulse response filters in pulse design,” in Proc. 7th SMRM, Aug. 1988, p. 695.
M. Shinnar, L. Bolinger, and J. S. Leigh, “Synthesis of soft pulses with specified frequency responses,” in Proc. 7th SMRM, Aug. 1988, p. 1040.
M. Shinnar, S. Eleff, H. Subramanian, and J. S. Leigh, “The synthesis of pulse sequences yielding arbitrary magnetization vectors,” Magnet. Resonance Med., vol. 12, pp. 74-80, Oct. 1989.
M. Shinnar, L. Bolinger, and J. S. Leigh, “The use of finite impulse response filters in pulse design,” Magnetic Resonance Med., vol. 12, pp. 75-87, Oct. 1989.
P. Le Roux, “Exact synthesis of radio frequency waveforms,” in Proc. 7th SMRM, Aug. 1988, p. 1049.





