


Q-Gaussian distribution




Q-Gaussian distribution

\right]  for 
 
 
 
 |
 pdf        =

|
 cdf        = |
 mean       =

, otherwise undefined|
 median     =

|
 mode       =

|
 variance   =





|
 skewness   =

|
 kurtosis   =

|
 entropy    =|
 mgf        =|
 cf         =|
 }}
The q-Gaussian is a probability distribution arising from the maximization of the Tsallis entropy under appropriate constraints. It is one example of a Tsallis distribution. The q-Gaussian is a generalization of the Gaussian in the same way that Tsallis entropy is a generalization of standard Boltzmann–Gibbs entropy or Shannon entropy.1 The normal distribution is recovered as 
 
 
 
 .
The q-Gaussian has been applied to problems in the fields of statistical mechanics, geology, anatomy, astronomy, economics, finance, and machine learning. The distribution is often favored for its heavy tails in comparison to the Gaussian for 
 
 
 
 . There is generalized q-analog of the classical central limit theorem2 in which the independence constraint for the i.i.d. variables is relaxed to an extent defined by the q parameter, with independence being recovered as q → 1. In analogy to the classical central limit theorem, an average of such random variables with fixed mean and variance tend towards the q-Gaussian distribution.
In the heavy tail regions, the distribution is equivalent to the Student's t-distribution with a direct mapping between q and the degrees of freedom. A practitioner using one of these distributions can therefore parameterize the same distribution in two different ways. The choice of the q-Gaussian form may arise if the system is non-extensive, or if there is lack of a connection to small samples sizes.
Characterization
Probability density function
The q-Gaussian has the probability density function 3



where



is the q-exponential and the normalization factor 
 
 
 
  is given by









Entropy
Just as the normal distribution is the maximum information entropy distribution for fixed values of the first moment 
 
 
 
  and second moment 
 
 
 
  (with the fixed zeroth moment 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the normalization condition), the q-Gaussian distribution is the maximum Tsallis entropy distribution for fixed values of these three moments.
Related distributions
Student's t-distribution
While it can be justified by an interesting alternative form of entropy, statistically it is a scaled reparametrization of the Student's t-distribution introduced by W. Gosset in 1908 to describe small-sample statistics. In Gosset's original presentation the degrees of freedom parameter 
 
 
 
  was constrained to be a positive integer related to the sample size, but it is readily observed that Gosset's density function is valid for all real values of 
 
 
 
 . The scaled reparametrization introduces the alternative parameters 
 
 
 
  which are related to 
 
 
 
 .
Given a Student's t distribution with 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom, the equivalent q-Gaussian has



with inverse



Whenever 
 
 
 
 , the function is simply a scaled version of Student's t distribution.
It is sometimes argued that the distribution is a generalization of Student's t distribution to negative and or non-integer degrees of freedom. However, the theory of Student's t distribution extends trivially to all real degrees of freedom, where the support of the distribution is now compact rather than infinite in the case of 
 
 
 
 .
Three-parameter version
As with many distributions centered on zero, the q-gaussian can be trivially extended to include a location parameter 
 
 
 
 . The density then becomes defined by



Generating random deviates
The Box–Muller transform has been generalized to allow random sampling from q-gaussians.4 The standard Box–Muller technique generates pairs of independent normally distributed variables from equations of the following form.






The generalized Box–Muller technique can generates pairs of q-gaussian deviates that are not independent. In practice, only a single deviate will be generated from a pair of uniformly distributed variables. The following formula will generate deviates from a q-Gaussian with specified parameter q and 
 
 



 
  Where 
 
 
 
  is the q-logarithm and 
 
 

These deviates can be transformed to generate deviates from an arbitrary q-Gaussian by



Applications
Physics
It has been shown that the momentum distribution of cold atoms in dissipative optical lattices is a q-Gaussian5
Finance
Financial return distributions in the New York Stock Exchange, NASDAQ and elsewhere are often interpreted as q-Gaussians.67
See also

Constantino Tsallis
Tsallis statistics
Tsallis entropy
Tsallis distribution
q-exponential distribution

Notes
Further reading

Juniper, J. (2007) "The Tsallis Distribution and Generalised Entropy: Prospects for Future Research into Decision-Making under Uncertainty", Centre of Full Employment and Equity, The University of Newcastle, Australia

External links

Tsallis Statistics, Statistical Mechanics for Non-extensive Systems and Long-Range Interactions

"
Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions with non-finite variance Category:Probability distributions



Tsallis, C. Nonadditive entropy and nonextensive statistical mechanics-an overview after 20 years. Braz. J. Phys. 2009, 39, 337–356


W. Thistleton, J.A. Marsh, K. Nelson and C. Tsallis, Generalized Box–Muller method for generating q-Gaussian random deviates, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 53, 4805 (2007)

L.Borland, Option pricing formulas based on a non-Gaussian stock price model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 098701 (2002)
L. Borland, The pricing of stock options, in Nonextensive Entropy -Interdisciplinary Applications, eds. M. Gell-Mann and C. Tsallis (Oxford University Press, New York, 2004)




