


Noncentral beta distribution




Noncentral beta distribution

{\mathrm{B}\left(\alpha + j,\beta\right)}|
cdf           = (type I) 

|
mean          = (type I) 

 (see Confluent hypergeometric function)|
variance      = (type I) 

 where 

 is the mean. (see Confluent hypergeometric function)
}}
In probability theory and statistics, the noncentral beta distribution is a continuous probability distribution that is a generalization of the (central) beta distribution.
The noncentral beta distribution (Type I) is the distribution of the ratio



where 
 
 
 
  is a  noncentral chi-squared random variable with degrees of freedom m and noncentrality parameter 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a central chi-squared random variable with degrees of freedom n, independent of 
 
 
 
 
 .1 In this case, 
 
 

A Type II noncentral beta distribution is the distribution of the ratio


 
  where the noncentral chi-squared variable is in the denominator only.2 If 
 
 
 
  follows the type II distribution, then 
 
 
 
  follows a type I distribution.
Cumulative distribution function
The Type I cumulative distribution function is usually represented as a Poisson mixture of central beta random variables:3


 
  where λ is the noncentrality parameter, P(.) is the Poisson(λ/2) probability mass function, \alpha=m/2 and \beta=n/2 are shape parameters, and 
 
 
 
  is the incomplete beta function. That is,



The Type II cumulative distribution function in mixture form is



Algorithms for evaluating the noncentral beta distribution functions are given by Posten4 and Chattamvelli.5
Probability density function
The (Type I) probability density function for the noncentral beta distribution is:



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the beta function, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the shape parameters, and 
 
 
 
  is the noncentrality parameter. The density of Y is the same as that of 1-X with the degrees of freedom reversed.6
Related distributions
Transformations
If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 
  follows a noncentral F-distribution with 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom, and non-centrality parameter 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  follows a noncentral F-distribution

 
  with 
 
 
 
 
  numerator degrees of freedom and 
 
 
 
  denominator degrees of freedom, then 
 
 
 
  follows a noncentral Beta distribution so 
 
 
 
 . This is derived from making a straight-forward transformation.
Special cases
When 
 
 
 
 , the noncentral beta distribution is equivalent to the (central) beta distribution.
References

M. Abramowitz and I. Stegun, editors (1965) "Handbook of Mathematical Functions", Dover: New York, NY.


Christian Walck, "Hand-book on Statistical Distributions for experimentalists."

"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions













