


Gell-Mann and Low theorem




Gell-Mann and Low theorem

The Gell-Mann and Low theorem is a theorem in quantum field theory that allows one to relate the ground (or vacuum) state of an interacting system to the ground state of the corresponding non-interacting theory. It was proved in 1951 by Murray Gell-Mann and Francis E. Low. The theorem is useful because, among other things, by relating the ground state of the interacting theory to its non-interacting ground state, it allows one to express Green's functions (which are defined as expectation values of Heisenberg-picture fields in the interacting vacuum) as expectation values of interaction-picture fields in the non-interacting vacuum. While typically applied to the ground state, the Gell-Mann and Low theorem applies to any eigenstate of the Hamiltonian. Its proof relies on the concept of starting with a non-interacting Hamiltonian and adiabatically switching on the interactions.
History
The theorem was proved first by Gell-Mann and Low in 1951, making use of the Dyson series. In 1969 Klaus Hepp provided an alternative derivation for the case where the original Hamiltonian describes free particles and the interaction is norm bounded. In 1989 Nenciu and Rasche proved it using the adiabatic theorem. A proof that does not rely on the Dyson expansion was given in 2007 by Molinari.
Statement of the theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be an eigenstate of 
 
 
 
  with energy 
 
 
 
  and let the 'interacting' Hamiltonian be 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a coupling constant and 
 
 
 
  the interaction term. We define a Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
  which effectively interpolates between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the limit 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the evolution operator in the interaction picture. The Gell-Mann and Low theorem asserts that if the limit as 
 
 
 
  of



exists, then 
 
 
 
  are eigenstates of 
 
 
 
 .
Note that when applied to, say, the ground-state, the theorem does not guarantee that the evolved state will be a ground state. In other words, level crossing is not excluded.
Proof
As in the original paper, the theorem is typically proved making use of Dyson's expansion of the evolution operator. Its validity however extends beyond the scope of perturbation theory as has been demonstrated by Molinari. We follow Molinari's method here. Focus on 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
 . From Schrödinger's equation for the time-evolution operator



and the boundary condition that 
 
 
 
  we can formally write



Focus for the moment on the case 
 
 
 
 . Through a change of variables we can write



We therefore have that



This result can be combined with the Schrödinger equation and its adjoint



to obtain



The corresponding equation between 
 
 
 
  is the same. It can be obtained by pre-multiplying both sides with 
 
 
 
 , post-multiplying with 
 
 
 
  and making use of



The other case we are interested in, namely 
 
 
 
  can be treated in an analogous fashion and yields an additional minus sign in front of the commutator (we are not concerned here with the case where 
 
 
 
  have mixed signs). In summary, we obtain



We proceed for the negative-times case. Abbreviating the various operators for clarity



Now using the definition of 
 
 
 
  we differentiate and eliminate derivatives 
 
 
 
  using the above expression, finding



where 
 
 
 
 . We can now let 
 
 
 
  as by assumption the 
 
 
 
  in left hand side is finite. We then clearly see that 
 
 
 
  is an eigenstate of 
 
 
 
  and the proof is complete.
References
1. M. Gell-Mann and F. Low: "Bound States in Quantum Field Theory", Phys. Rev. 84, 350 (1951)
2. K. Hepp: Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1969), Vol. 2.
3. G. Nenciu and G. Rasche: "Adiabatic theorem and Gell-Mann-Low formula", Helv. Phys. Acta 62, 372 (1989).
4. L.G. Molinari: "Another proof of Gell-Mann and Low's theorem", J. Math. Phys. 48, 052113 (2007)
5. A.L. Fetter and J.D. Walecka: "Quantum Theory of Many-Particle Systems", McGraw–Hill (1971)
"
Category:Theorems in mathematical physics Category:Quantum field theory


