


Metaplectic structure




Metaplectic structure

In differential geometry, a metaplectic structure is the symplectic analog of spin structure on orientable Riemannian manifolds. A metaplectic structure on a symplectic manifold allows one to define the symplectic spinor bundle, which is the Hilbert space bundle associated to the metaplectic structure via the metaplectic representation, giving rise to the notion of a symplectic spinor field in differential geometry.
Symplectic spin structures have wide applications to mathematical physics, in particular to quantum field theory where they are an essential ingredient in establishing the idea that symplectic spin geometry and symplectic Dirac operators may give valuable tools in symplectic geometry and symplectic topology. They are also of purely mathematical interest in differential geometry, algebraic topology, and K theory. They form the foundation for symplectic spin geometry.
Formal definition
A metaplectic structure 1 on a symplectic manifold

 
  is an equivariant lift of the symplectic frame bundle

 
  with respect to the double covering 
 
 
 
  In other words, a pair 
 
 
 
 
  is a metaplectic structure on the principal bundle

 
  when

a) 
 
 
 
  is a principal 
 
 
 
 -bundle over 
 
 
 
 ,
 
b) 
 
 
 
 
  is an equivariant

 
 -fold covering map such that
 



 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

The principal bundle 
 
 
 
  is also called the bundle of metaplectic frames over 
 
 
 
 .
Two metaplectic structures 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on the same symplectic manifold

 
 
  are called equivalent if there exists a 
 
 
 
 -equivariant map 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Of course, in this case 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two equivalent double coverings of the symplectic frame 
 
 
 
 -bundle 
 
 
 
 
  of the given symplectic manifold 
 
 
 
 .
Obstruction
Since every symplectic manifold

 
  is necessarily of even dimension and orientable, one can prove that the topological obstruction to the existence of metaplectic structures is precisely the same as in Riemannian spin geometry.2 In other words, a symplectic manifold 
 
 
 
  admits a metaplectic structures if and only if the second Stiefel-Whitney class

 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  vanishes. In fact, the modulo 
 
 
 
  reduction of the first Chern class

 
  is the second Stiefel-Whitney class

 
 . Hence, 
 
 
 
  admits metaplectic structures if and only if 
 
 
 
 
  is even, i.e., if and only if 
 
 
 
  is zero.
If this is the case, the isomorphy classes of metaplectic structures on 
 
 
 
  are classified by the first cohomology group

 
  of 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
 -coefficients.
As the manifold 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be oriented, the first Stiefel-Whitney class

 
  of 
 
 
 
  vanishes too.
Examples
Manifolds admitting a metaplectic structure

Phase spaces 
 
 

 
 
  any orientable manifold.
Complex projective spaces 
 
 

 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is simply connected, such a structure has to be unique.
Grassmannian 
 
 
 
  e.t.c.

See also

Metaplectic group
Symplectic frame bundle
Symplectic group
Symplectic spinor bundle

Notes
References




"
Category:Symplectic geometry Category:Structures on manifolds Category:Algebraic topology



 page 35↩
↩




