


Irrational winding of a torus




Irrational winding of a torus

In topology, a branch of mathematics, an irrational winding of a torus is a continuous injection of a line into a torus that is used to set up several counterexamples.1 A related notion is the Kronecker foliation of a torus, a foliation formed by the set of all translates of a given irrational winding.
Definition
One way of constructing a torus is as the quotient space

 
  of a two-dimensional real vector space by the additive subgroup of integer vectors, with the corresponding projection

 
 . Each point in the torus has as its preimage one of the translates of the square lattice 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  factors through a map that takes any point in the plane to a point in the unit square

 
  given by the fractional parts of the original point's Cartesian coordinates. Now consider a line in 
 
 
 
  given by the equation y = kx. If the slope k of the line is rational, then it can be represented by a fraction and a corresponding lattice point of 
 
 
 
 . It can be shown that then the projection of this line is a simple closed curve on a torus. If, however, k is irrational, then it will not cross any lattice points except 0, which means that its projection on the torus will not be a closed curve, and the restriction of 
 
 
 
 
  on this line is injective. Moreover, it can be shown that the image of this restricted projection as a subspace, called the irrational winding of a torus, is dense in the torus.
Applications
Irrational windings of a torus may be used to set up counter-examples related to monomorphisms. An irrational winding is an immersed submanifold but not a regular submanifold of the torus, which shows that the image of a manifold under a continuous injection to another manifold is not necessarily a (regular) submanifold.2 Irrational windings are also examples of the fact that the induced submanifold topology does not have to coincide with the subspace topology of the submanifold 3 
Secondly, the torus can be considered as a Lie group

 
 , and the line can be considered as 
 
 
 
 . Then it is easy to show that the image of the continuous and analytic group homomorphism

 
  is not a Lie subgroup45 (because it's not closed in the torus – see the closed subgroup theorem) while, of course, it is still a group. It may also be used to show that if a subgroup H of the Lie group G is not closed, the quotient G/H does not need to be a submanifold6 and might even fail to be a Hausdorff space.
See also

Torus knot

Notes
References


"
Category:General topology Category:Lie groups Category:Topological spaces



↩
↩


↩
↩




