


Harish-Chandra's c-function




Harish-Chandra's c-function

In mathematics, Harish-Chandra's c-function is a function related to the intertwining operator between two principal series representations, that appears in the Plancherel measure for semisimple Lie groups.  introduced a special case of it defined in terms of the asymptotic behavior of a zonal spherical function of a Lie group, and  introduced a more general c-function called Harish-Chandra's (generalized) C-function.  introduced the Gindikin–Karpelevich formula, a product formula for Harish-Chandra's c-function,.
Harish-Chandra's c-function
Gindikin–Karpelevich formula
The c-function has a generalization cw(λ) depending on an element w of the Weyl group. The unique element of greatest length s0, is the unique element that carries the Weyl chamber 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
 . By Harish-Chandra's integral formula, cs0 is Harish-Chandra's c-function:



The c-functions are in general defined by the equation



where ξ0 is the constant function 1 in L2(K/M). The cocycle property of the intertwining operators implies a similar multiplicative property for the c-functions:



provided



This reduces the computation of cs to the case when s = sα, the reflection in a (simple) root α, the so-called "rank-one reduction" of . In fact the integral involves only the closed connected subgroup Gα corresponding to the Lie subalgebra generated by 
 
 
 
  where α lies in Σ0+. Then Gα is a real semisimple Lie group with real rank one, i.e. dim Aα = 1, and cs is just the Harish-Chandra c-function of Gα. In this case the c-function can be computed directly and is given by



where


 
  and α0=α/〈α,α〉.
The general Gindikin–Karpelevich formula for c(λ) is an immediate consequence of this formula and the multiplicative properties of cs(λ), as follows:


 
  where the constant c0 is chosen so that c(–iρ)=1 .
Plancherel measure
The c-function appears in the Plancherel theorem for spherical functions, and the Plancherel measure is 1/c2 times Lebesgue measure.
Generalized C-function
p-adic Lie groups
There is a similar c-function for p-adic Lie groups.  and  found an analogous product formula for the c-function of a p-adic Lie group.
References
















"
Category:Lie groups


