


Coherent states in mathematical physics




Coherent states in mathematical physics

Coherent states have been introduced in a physical context, first as quasi-classical states in quantum mechanics, then as the backbone of quantum optics and they are described in that spirit in the article Coherent states (see also1). However, they have generated a huge variety of generalizations, which have led to a tremendous literature in mathematical physics. In this article, we sketch the main directions of research on this line. For further details, we refer to several existing surveys .234
A general definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a complex, separable Hilbert space, 
 
 
 
  a locally compact space and 
 
 
 
  a measure on 
 
 
 
 . For each 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , denote 
 
 
 
  a vector in 
 
 
 
 . Assume that this set of vectors possesses the following properties:

The mapping 
 
 
 
  is weakly continuous, i.e., for each vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the function 
 
 
 
  is continuous (in the topology of 
 
 
 
 ).
The resolution of the identity




holds in the weak sense on the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 , i.e., for any two vectors 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the following equality holds:


 
  A set of vectors 
 
 
 
  satisfying the two properties above is called a family of generalized coherent states. In order to recover the previous definition (given in the article Coherent state) of canonical or standard coherent states (CCS), it suffices to take 
 
 
 
 , the complex plane, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Sometimes the resolution of the identity condition is replaced by a weaker condition, with the vectors 
 
 
 
  simply forming a total set in 
 
 
 
  and the functions 
 
 
 
 , as 
 
 
 
  runs through 
 
 
 
 , forming a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. The objective in both cases is to ensure that an arbitrary vector 
 
 
 
  be expressible as a linear (integral) combination of these vectors. Indeed, the resolution of the identity immediately implies that


 
  where 
 
 
 
 .
These vectors 
 
 
 
  are square integrable, continuous functions on 
 
 
 
  and satisfy the reproducing property


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the reproducing kernel, which satisfies the following properties






Some examples
We present in this section some of the more commonly used types of coherent states, as illustrations of the general structure given above.
Nonlinear coherent states
A large class of generalizations of the CCS is obtained by a simple modification of their analytic structure. Let 
 
 
 
  be an infinite sequence of positive numbers (
 
 
 
 ). Define 
 
 
 
  and by convention set 
 
 
 
 . In the same Fock space in which the CCS were described, we now define the related deformed or nonlinear coherent states by the expansion


 
  The normalization factor 
 
 
 
  is chosen so that 
 
 
 
 . These generalized coherent states are overcomplete in the Fock space and satisfy a resolution of the identity



 
  being an open disc in the complex plane of radius 
 
 
 
 , the radius of convergence of the series 
 
 
 
  (in the case of the CCS, 
 
 
 
 .) The measure 
 
 
 
  is generically of the form 
 
 
 
  (for 
 
 
 
 ), where 
 
 
 
  is related to the 
 
 
 
  through the moment condition.
Once again, we see that for an arbitrary vector 
 
 
 
  in the Fock space, the function 
 
 
 
  is of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an analytic function on the domain 
 
 
 
 . The reproducing kernel associated to these coherent states is



Barut–Girardello coherent states
By analogy with the CCS case, one can define a generalized annihilation operator

 
  by its action on the vectors 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  and its adjoint operator 
 
 
 
 . These act on the Fock states

 
  as


 
  Depending on the exact values of the quantities 
 
 
 
 , these two operators, together with the identity 
 
 
 
  and all their commutators, could generate a wide range of algebras including various types of deformed quantum algebras. The term 'nonlinear', as often applied to these generalized coherent states, comes again from quantum optics where many such families of states are used in studying the interaction between the radiation field and atoms, where the strength of the interaction itself depends on the frequency of radiation. Of course, these coherent states will not in general have either the group theoretical or the minimal uncertainty properties of the CCS (there might have more general ones).
Operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the general type defined above are also known as ladder operators . When such operators appear as generators of representations of Lie algebras, the eigenvectors of 
 
 
 
  are usually called Barut–Girardello coherent states.5 A typical example is obtained from the representations of the Lie algebra of SU(1,1) on the Fock space.
Gazeau–Klauder coherent states
A non-analytic extension of the above expression of the non-linear coherent states is often used to define generalized coherent states associated to physical Hamiltonians having pure point spectra. These coherent states, known as Gazeau-Klauder coherent states, are labelled by action-angle variables.6 Suppose that we are given the physical Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , i.e., it has the energy eigenvalues 
 
 
 
  and eigenvectors 
 
 
 
 , which we assume to form an orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space of states 
 
 
 
 . Let us write the eigenvalues as 
 
 
 
  by introducing a sequence of dimensionless quantities 
 
 
 
  ordered as: 
 
 
 
 . Then, for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the Gazeau–Klauder coherent states are defined as


 
  where again 
 
 
 
  is a normalization factor, which turns out to be dependent on 
 
 
 
  only. These coherent states satisfy the temporal stability condition,


 
  and the action identity,


 
  While these generalized coherent states do form an overcomplete set in 
 
 
 
 , the resolution of the identity is generally not given by an integral relation as above, but instead by an integral in Bohr's sense, like it is in use in the theory of almost periodic functions.7
Actually the construction of Gazeau–Klauder CS can be extended to vector CS and to Hamiltonians with degenerate spectra, as shown by Ali and Bagarello.S. T. Ali and F. Bagarello, Some physical appearances of vector coherent states and coherent states related to degenerate Hamiltonians,
J. Math. Phys. , 46 (2005) 053518.
The group-theoretical approach
Gilmore and Perelomov, independently, realized that the construction of coherent states may sometimes be viewed as a group theoretical problem.8910111213
In order to see this, let us go back for a while to the case of CCS. There, indeed, the displacement operator 
 
 
 
  is nothing but the representative in Fock space of an element of the Heisenberg group (also called the Weyl–Heisenberg group), whose Lie algebra is generated by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . However, before going on with the CCS, take first the general case.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a locally compact group and suppose that it has a continuous, irreducible representation 14

 
  on a Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  by unitary operators 
 
 
 
 . This representation is called square integrable if there exists a non-zero vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  for which the integral


 
  converges. Here 
 
 
 
  is the left invariant Haar measure on 
 
 
 
 . A vector 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is said to be admissible, and it can be shown that the existence of one such vector guarantees the existence of an entire dense set of such vectors in 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, if the group 
 
 
 
  is unimodular, i.e., if the left and the right invariant measures coincide, then the existence of one admissible vector implies that every vector in 
 
 
 
  is admissible. Given a square integrable representation 
 
 
 
  and an admissible vector 
 
 
 
 , let us define the vectors


 
  These vectors are the analogues of the canonical coherent states, written there in terms of the representation of the Heisenberg group (however, see the section on Gilmore-Perelomov CS, below). Next, it can be shown that the resolution of the identity


 
  holds on 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the vectors 
 
 
 
  constitute a family of generalized coherent states. The functions 
 
 
 
  for all vectors 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  are square integrable with respect to the measure 
 
 
 
  and the set of such functions, which in fact are continuous in the topology of 
 
 
 
 , forms a closed subspace of 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, the mapping 
 
 
 
  is a linear isometry between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and under this isometry the representation $U$ gets mapped to a subrepresentation of the left regular representation of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 .
An example: wavelets
A typical example of the above construction is provided by the affine group of the line, 
 
 
 
 . This is the group of all 2
 
 
 
 2 matrices of the type,



 
  and 
 
 
 
  being real numbers with 
 
 
 
 . We shall also write 
 
 
 
 , with the action on 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
 . This group is non-unimodular, with the left invariant measure being given by 
 
 
 
  (the right invariant measure being 
 
 
 
 ). The affine group has a unitary irreducible representation on the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 . Vectors in 
 
 
 
  are measurable functions 
 
 
 
  of the real variable 
 
 
 
  and the (unitary) operators 
 
 
 
  of this representation act on them as


 
  If 
 
 
 
  is a function in 
 
 
 
  such that its Fourier transform

 
  satisfies the (admissibility) condition


 
  then it can be shown to be an admissible vector, i.e.,


 
  Thus, following the general construction outlined above, the vectors


 
  define a family of generalized coherent states and one has the resolution of the identity


 
  on 
 
 
 
 . In the signal analysis literature, a vector satisfying the admissibility condition above is called a mother wavelet and the generalized coherent states 
 
 
 
  are called wavelets. Signals are then identified with vectors 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and the function


 
  is called the continuous wavelet transform of the signal 
 
 
 
 . 15 16
This concept can be extended to two dimensions, the group 
 
 
 
  being replaced by the so-called similitude group of the plane, which consists of plane translations, rotations and global dilations. The resulting 2D wavelets, and some generalizations of them, are widely used in image processing. 17
Gilmore–Perelomov coherent states
The construction of coherent states using group representations described above is not sufficient. Already it cannot yield the CCS, since these are not indexed by the elements of the Heisenberg group, but rather by points of the quotient of the latter by its center, that quotient being precisely 
 
 
 
 . The key observation is that the center of the Heisenberg group leaves the vacuum vector 
 
 
 
  invariant, up to a phase. Generalizing this idea, Gilmore and Perelomov 18 19 20 21 consider a locally compact group 
 
 
 
  and a unitary irreducible representation 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  on the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 , not necessarily square integrable. Fix a vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , of unit norm, and denote by 
 
 
 
  the subgroup of 
 
 
 
  consisting of all elements 
 
 
 
  that leave it invariant up to a phase, that is,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a real-valued function of 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the left coset space and 
 
 
 
  an arbitrary element in 
 
 
 
 . Choosing a coset representative 
 
 
 
 , for each coset 
 
 
 
 , we define the vectors


 
  The dependence of these vectors on the specific choice of the coset representative 
 
 
 
  is only through a phase. Indeed, if instead of 
 
 
 
 , we took a different representative 
 
 
 
  for the same coset 
 
 
 
 , then since 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 , we would have 
 
 
 
 . Hence, quantum mechanically, both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent the same physical state and in particular, the projection operator 
 
 
 
  depends only on the coset. Vectors 
 
 
 
  defined in this way are called Gilmore–Perelomov coherent states. Since 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be irreducible, the set of all these vectors as 
 
 
 
  runs through 
 
 
 
  is dense in 
 
 
 
 . In this definition of generalized coherent states, no resolution of the identity is postulated. However, if 
 
 
 
  carries an invariant measure, under the natural action of 
 
 
 
 , and if the formal operator 
 
 
 
  defined as


 
  is bounded, then it is necessarily a multiple of the identity and a resolution of the identity is again retrieved.
Gilmore–Perelomov coherent states have been generalized to quantum groups, but for this we refer to the literature 22 .23B. Jurčo, On coherent states for the simplest quantum groups, Lett. Math. Phys.
21 (1991)  51-58.24252627
Further generalization: Coherent states on coset spaces
The Perelomov construction can be used to define coherent states for any locally compact group. On the other hand, particularly in case of failure of the Gilmore–Perelomov construction, there exist other constructions of generalized coherent states, using group representations, which generalize the notion of square integrability to homogeneous spaces of the group.2829
Briefly, in this approach one starts with a unitary irreducible representation 
 
 
 
  and attempts to find a vector 
 
 
 
 , a subgroup 
 
 
 
  and a section

 
  such that


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a bounded, positive operator with bounded inverse and 
 
 
 
  is a quasi-invariant measure on 
 
 
 
 . It is not assumed that 
 
 
 
  be invariant up to a phase under the action of 
 
 
 
  and clearly, the best situation is when 
 
 
 
  is a multiple of the identity. Although somewhat technical, this general construction is of enormous versatility for semi-direct product groups of the type 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a closed subgroup of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, it is useful for many physically important groups, such as the Poincaré group or the Euclidean group, which do not have square integrable representations in the sense of the earlier definition. In particular, the integral condition defining the operator 
 
 
 
  ensures that any vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  can be written in terms of the generalized coherent states 
 
 
 
  namely,


 
  which is the primary aim of any kind of coherent states.
Coherent states: a Bayesian construction for the quantization of a measure set
We now depart from the standard situation and present a general method of construction of coherent states, starting from a few observations on the structure of these objects as superpositions of eigenstates of some self-adjoint operator, as was the harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian for the standard CS. It is the essence of quantum mechanics that this superposition has a probabilistic flavor. As a matter of fact, we notice that the probabilistic structure of the canonical coherent states involves two probability distributions that underlie their construction. There are, in a sort of duality, a Poisson distribution ruling the probability of detecting 
 
 
 
  excitations when the quantum system is in a coherent state 
 
 
 
 , and a gamma distribution on the set 
 
 
 
  of complex parameters, more exactly on the range 
 
 
 
 
  of the square of the radial variable. The generalization follows that duality scheme. Let 
 
 
 
  be a set of parameters equipped with a measure 
 
 
 
  and its associated Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  of complex-valued functions, square integrable with respect to 
 
 
 
 . Let us choose in 
 
 
 
 
  a finite or countable orthonormal set 
 
 
 
 :


 
  In case of infinite countability, this set must obey the (crucial) finiteness condition:


 
  Let 
 
 
 
  be a separable complex Hilbert space with orthonormal basis 
 
 
 
 
  in one-to-one correspondence with the elements of 
 
 
 
 . The two conditions above imply that the family of normalized coherent states 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , which are defined by


 
  resolves the identity in 
 
 
 
 
 :


 
  Such a relation allows us to implement a coherent state or frame quantization of the set of parameters 
 
 
 
  by associating to a function 
 
 
 
  that satisfies appropriate conditions the following operator in 
 
 
 
  :


 
  The operator 
 
 
 
  is symmetric if 
 
 
 
  is real-valued, and it is self-adjoint (as a quadratic form) if 
 
 
 
  is real and semi-bounded. The original 
 
 
 
  is an upper symbol, usually non-unique, for the operator 
 
 
 
 
 . It will be called a classical observable with respect to the family 
 
 
 
  if the so-called lower symbol of 
 
 
 
 , defined as


 
  has mild functional properties to be made precise according to further topological properties granted to the original set 
 
 
 
 . A last point of this construction of the space of quantum states concerns its statistical aspects. There is indeed an interplay between two probability distributions:
(i) For almost each 
 
 
 
 
 , a discrete distribution,


 
  This probability could be considered as concerning experiments performed on the system within some experimental protocol, in order to measure the spectral values of a certain self-adjoint operator 
 
 
 
 , i.e., a quantum observable, acting in 
 
 
 
  and having the discrete spectral resolution 
 
 
 
 .
(ii) For each 
 
 
 
 
 , a continuous distribution on 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  Here, we observe a Bayesian duality typical of coherent states. There are two interpretations: the resolution of the unity verified by the coherent states 
 
 
 
  introduces a preferred prior measure on the set 
 
 
 
 , which is the set of parameters of the discrete distribution, with this distribution itself playing the role of the likelihood function. The associated discretely indexed continuous distributions become the related conditional posterior distribution. Hence, a probabilistic approach to experimental observations concerning 
 
 
 
 
  should serve as a guideline in choosing the set of the 
 
 
 
 's. We note that the continuous prior distribution will be relevant for the quantization whereas the discrete posterior one characterizes the measurement of the physical spectrum from which is built the coherent superposition of quantum states 
 
 
 
 .30
See also

Coherent states
Quantization

References


"
Category:Mathematical physics



J-P. Gazeau,Coherent States in Quantum Physics, Wiley-VCH, Berlin, 2009.
S.T. Ali, J-P. Antoine, J-P. Gazeau, and U.A. Mueller, Coherent states and their generalizations: A mathematical overview, Reviews in Mathematical Physics 7 (1995) 1013-1104.
S.T. Ali, J-P. Antoine, and J-P. Gazeau, Coherent States, Wavelets and Their Generalizations, Springer-Verlag, New York, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000.
S.T. Ali, Coherent States, Encyclopedia of Mathematical Physics, pp. 537-545; Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.
A. O. Barut and L. Girardello, New "coherent" states associated with non compact groups, Commun. Math. Phys. 21 (1971) 41–55.
J-P. Gazeau and J. R. Klauder, Coherent states for systems with discrete and continuous spectrum, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 32(1999) 123–132.
Almost periodic function
A. M. Perelomov, Coherent states for arbitrary Lie groups, Commun. Math. Phys. 26 (1972) 222–236; arXiv: math-ph/0203002.
A. Perelomov, Generalized coherent states and their applications, Springer, Berlin 1986.
R. Gilmore, Geometry of symmetrized states, Ann. Phys. (NY) 74 (1972) 391–463.
R. Gilmore, On properties of coherent states, Rev. Mex. Fis. 23 (1974) 143–187.

E. Onofri, A note on coherent state representations of Lie groups, J. Math. Phys. 16 (1975) 1087–1089.
Group representation
I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets, SIAM, Philadelphia, 1992.
S. G. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, 2nd ed., Academic Press, San Diego, 1999.
J-P. Antoine, R. Murenzi, P. Vandergheynst, and S.T. Ali, Two-Dimensional Wavelets and their Relatives, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (UK), 2004.




Quantum group
L. C. Biedenharn, The quantum group 
 
 
 
  and a 
 
 
 
 -analogue of the boson operators, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 22 (1989) L873-L878.
E. Celeghini, M. Rasetti, and G. Vitiello, Squeezing and quantum groups, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991) 2056–2059.
H. Sazdjian, Y.S. Stanev, I.T. Todorov, SU(3)-coherent state operators and invariant correlation functions and their quantum group counterparts, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 2030-2052.
B. Jurčo, P. Štoviček, Coherent states for quantum compact groups, Commun. Math. Phys. 182 (1996) 221-251; http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9403114.
Z. Škoda, Coherent states for Hopf algebras, Lett. Math. Phys. 81 (2007) 1; earlier version: http://arXiv.org/abs/math/0303357.







