


Z N model




Z N model

The 

 
 
  model is a simplified statistical mechanical spin model. It is a generalization of the Ising model. Although it can be defined on an arbitrary graph, it is integrable only on one and two-dimensional lattices, in several special cases.
Definition
The 
 
 
 
  model, sometimes known as the clock model, is defined by assigning a spin value at each node 
 
 
 
  on a graph, with the spins taking values 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . The spins therefore take values in the form of complex roots of unity. Roughly speaking, we can think of the spins assigned to each node of the 
 
 
 
 
  model as pointing in any one of 
 
 
 
  equidistant directions. The Boltzmann weights for a general edge 
 
 
 
  are:








where 
 
 
 
  denotes complex conjugation and the 
 
 
 
 
  are related to the interaction strength along the edge 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is often set to 1. The (real valued) Boltzmann weights are invariant under the transformations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , analogous to universal rotation and reflection respectively.
Self-dual critical solution
There is a class of solutions to the 
 
 
 
  model defined on an in general anisotropic square lattice. If the model is self-dual in the Kramers-Wannier sense and thus critical, and the lattice is such that there are two possible 'weights' 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for the two possible edge orientations, we can introduce the following parametrization in 
 
 
 
 :











Requiring the duality relation and the Star triangle relation, which ensures integrability, to hold, it is possible to find the solution:








with 
 
 
 
 . This particular case of the 
 
 
 
  model is often called the FZ model in its own right, after V.A. Fateev and A.B. Zamolodchikov who first calculated this solution. The FZ model approaches the XY model in the limit as 
 
 
 
 
 . It is also a special case of the chiral Potts model and the Kashiwara-Miwa model.
Solvable Special Cases
As is the case for most lattice models in statistical mechanics, there are no known exact solutions to the 
 
 
 
  model in three dimensions. In two dimensions, however, it is exactly solvable on a square lattice for certain values of 
 
 
 
  and/or the 'weights' 
 
 
 
 . Perhaps the most well-known example is the Ising model, which admits spins in two opposite directions (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ). This is precisely the 
 
 
 
 
  model for 
 
 
 
 , and therefore the 
 
 
 
  model can be thought of as a generalization of the Ising model. Other exactly solvable models corresponding to particular cases of the 
 
 
 
  model include the three-state Potts model, with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a certain critical value (FZ), and the critical Askin-Teller model where 
 
 
 
 .
References

V.A. Fateev and A.B. Zamolodchikov (1982); "Self-dual solutions of the star-triangle relations in 
 
 
 
 -models", Physics letters A, 92, pp. 37–39
''M.A. Rajabpour and J. Cardy (2007); "Discretely holomorphic parafermions in lattice 
 
 
 
  models" J. Phys. A 40, 14703–14714

"
Category:Spin models Category:Exactly solvable models Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Lattice models


