


Campbell's theorem (probability)




Campbell's theorem (probability)

In probability theory and statistics, Campell's theorem or the Campbell-Hardy theorem can refer to a particular equation or set of results relating to the expectation of a function summed over a point process to an integral involving the intensity measure of the point process, which allows for the calculation of expected value and variance of the random sum. One version1 of the theorem specifically relates to the Poisson point process and gives a method for calculating moments as well as Laplace functionals of the process.
Another result by the name of Campell's theorem,2 but also known as Campbell's formula,3 entails an integral equation for the aforementioned sum over a general point process, and not necessarily a Poisson point process.4 There also exist equations involving moment measures and factorial moment measures that are considered versions of Campbell's formula. All these results are employed in probability and statistics with a particular importance in the related fields of point processes,5 stochastic geometry6 and continuum percolation theory,R. Meester and R. Roy. Continuum percolation, volume 119 of Cambridge tracts in mathematics, 1996.
 spatial statistics.78
The theorem's name stems from the work910 by Norman R. Campbell on theormionic noise, also known as shot noise, in vacuum tubes,1112 which was partly inspired by the work of Ernest Rutherford and Hans Geiger on alpha particle detection, where the Poisson point process arose as a solution to a family of differential equations by Harry Bateman.13 In Campbell's work, he presents the moments and generating functions of the random sum of a Poisson process on the real line, but remarks that the main mathematical argument was due to G. H. Hardy, which has inspired the result to be sometimes called the Campbell-Hardy theorem.1415
Background
For a point process 
 
 
 
  defined on (d-dimensional) Euclidean space

 
  , Campbell's theorem offers a way to calculate expectations of a function 
 
 
 
  (with range in the real line R) defined also on 
 
 
 
  and summed over 
 
 
 
 , namely:


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  denotes the expectation and set notation is used such that 
 
 
 
  is considered as a random set (see Point process notation). For a point process 
 
 
 
 , Campbell's theorem relates the above expectation with the intensity measure Λ. In relation to a Borel set B the intensity measure of 
 
 
 
  is defined as:


 
 ,
where the measure notation is used such that 
 
 
 
  is considered a random counting measure. The quantity Λ(B) can be interpreted as the average number of points of 
 
 
 
  located in the set B.
Campbell's theorem: Poisson point process
One version of Campbell's theorem16 says that for a Poisson point process 
 
 
 
  and a measurable function 
 
 
 
 , the random sum



is absolutely convergent with probability one if and only if the integral



Provided that this integral is finite, then the theorem further asserts that for any complex value 
 
 
 
  the equation



holds if the integral on the right-hand side converges, which is the case for purely imaginary

 
 . Moreover



and if this integral converges, then



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the variance of the random sum 
 
 
 
 .
From this theorem some expectation results for the Poisson point process follow directly including its Laplace functional.17 
Campbell's theorem: general point process
A related result for a general (not necessarily simple) point process 
 
 
 
  with intensity measure:



is known as Campbell's formula18 or Campbell's theorem,1920 which gives a method for calculating expectations of sums of measurable functions

 
  with ranges on the real line. More specifically, for a point process 
 
 
 
  and a measurable function 
 
 
 
 , the sum of 
 
 
 
  over the point process is given by the equation:



where if one side of the equation is finite, then so is the other side.A. Baddeley. A crash course in stochastic geometry. Stochastic Geometry: Likelihood and Computation Eds OE Barndorff-Nielsen, WS Kendall, HNN van Lieshout (London: Chapman and Hall) pp, pages 1--35, 1999.
 This equation is essentially an application of Fubini's theorem21 and coincides with the aforementioned Poisson case, but holds for a much wider class of point processes, simple or not.22 Depending on the integral notation, this integral may also be written as:23



If the intensity measure 
 
 
 
  of a point process 
 
 
 
  has a density 
 
 
 
 , then Campbell's formula becomes:



Stationary point process
For a stationary point process 
 
 
 
  with constant density 
 
 
 
 , Campbell's theorem or formula reduces to a volume integral:



This equation naturally holds for the homogeneous Poisson point processes, which is an example of a stationary stochastic process.24
Applications
Laplace functional of the Poisson point process
For a Poisson point process 
 
 
 
  with intensity measure 
 
 
 
 , the Laplace functional is a consequence of Campbell's theorem25 and is given by:26



which for the homogeneous case is:



Neuroscience
The total input current in neurons is the sum of many inputs with similar timecourses. When an Poisson approximation is used the mean current and variance are given by Campbell theorem. As the synaptic timecourse is typically known, this can be applied to infer the input rate.
Extension to higher moments is given in.27
Another common extension is to consider a sum with random amplitudes


 
  In this case the cumulants 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  equal


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the raw moments of the distribution of 
 
 
 
 .
Notes
References


"
Category:Probability theorems




D. Stoyan, W. S. Kendall, J. Mecke, and L. Ruschendorf. Stochastic geometry and its applications, volume 2. Wiley Chichester, 1995.
























S.O. Rice Mathematical analysis of random noise Bell Syst. Tech. J. 24, 1944 reprinted in "'Selected papers on noise and random processes'' N. Wax (editor) Dover 1954.




