


Trace distance




Trace distance

In quantum mechanics, and especially quantum information and the study of open quantum systems, the trace distance T is a metric on the space of density matrices and gives a measure of the distinguishability between two states. It is the quantum generalization of the Kolmogorov distance for classical probability distributions.
Definition
The trace distance is just half of the trace norm of the difference of the matrices:



(The trace norm is the Schatten norm for p=1.) The purpose of the factor of two is to restrict the trace distance between two normalized density matrices to the range [0, 1] and to simplify formulas in which the trace distance appears.
Since density matrices are Hermitian,



where the 
 
 
 
  are eigenvalues of the Hermitian, but not necessarily positive, matrix 
 
 
 
 .
Physical interpretation
It can be shown that the trace distance satisfies the equation1


 
  where the maximization can be carried either over all projectors

 
 , or over all positive operators 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the identity operator. 
 
 
 
  is the difference in probability that the outcome of the measurement be 
 
 
 
 , depending on whether the system was in the state 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . Thus the trace distance is the probability difference maximized over all possible measurements: it gives a measure of the maximum probability of distinguishing between two states with an optimal measurement.
For example, suppose Alice prepares a system in either the state 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , each with probability 
 
 
 
  and sends it to Bob who has to discriminate between the two states. It is easy to show that with the optimal measurement, Bob has the probability


 
  of correctly identifying in which state Alice prepared the system.2
Properties
The trace distance has the following properties3

It is a metric on the space of density matrices, i.e. it is non-negative, symmetric, and satisfies the triangle inequality, and 
 
 



 
  and 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have orthogonal supports
It is preserved under unitary transformations


It is contractive under trace-preserving CP maps, i.e. if 
 
 
 
  is a CPT map, then 
 
 

It is convex in each of its inputs. E.g. 
 
 


For qubits, the trace distance is equal to half the Euclidean distance in the Bloch representation.
Relationship to other distance measures
Fidelity
The fidelity of two quantum states 
 
 
 
  is related to the trace distance 
 
 
 
  by the inequalities



The upper inequality becomes an equality when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are pure states.
Total variation distance
The trace distance is a generalization of the total variation distance, and for two commuting density matrices, has the same value as the total variation distance of the two corresponding probability distributions.
References
"
Category:Quantum information science Category:Quantum mechanics



M. Nielsen, I. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge University Press, 2000, Chapter 9
S. M. Barnett, "Quantum Information", Oxford University Press, 2009, Chapter 4





