


Sauer–Shelah lemma




Sauer–Shelah lemma

 In combinatorial mathematics and extremal set theory, the Sauer–Shelah lemma states that every family of sets with small VC dimension consists of a small number of sets. It is named after Norbert Sauer and Saharon Shelah, who published it independently of each other in 1972.12 The same result was also published slightly earlier and again independently, by Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis, after whom the VC dimension is named.3 In his paper containing the lemma, Shelah gives credit also to Micha Perles, and for this reason the lemma has also been called the Perles–Sauer–Shelah lemma.4
Buzaglo et al. call this lemma "one of the most fundamental results on VC-dimension",5 and it has applications in many areas. Sauer's motivation was in the combinatorics of set systems, while Shelah's was in model theory and that of Vapnik and Chervonenkis was in statistics. It has also been applied in discrete geometry6 and graph theory.7
Definitions and statement
If 
 
 
 
  is a family of sets, and 
 
 
 
  is another set, then 
 
 
 
  is said to be shattered by 
 
 
 
  if every subset of 
 
 
 
  (including the empty set and 
 
 
 
  itself) can be obtained as an intersection 
 
 
 
  between 
 
 
 
  and a set in the family. The VC dimension of 
 
 
 
  is the largest cardinality of a set shattered by 
 
 
 
 .
In terms of these definitions, the Sauer–Shelah lemma states that if 
 
 
 
  is a family of sets with 
 
 
 
  distinct elements such that 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  shatters a set of size 
 
 
 
 . Equivalently, if the VC dimension of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  can consist of at most 
 
 
 
  sets.
The bound of the lemma is tight: there exists a family 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  that does not shatter any set of size 
 
 
 
 . Namely, let 
 
 
 
  be the family of all subsets of 
 
 
 
  that have cardinality less than 
 
 
 
 .8
The number of shattered sets
A strengthening of the Sauer–Shelah lemma, due to , states that every finite set family 
 
 
 
 shatters at least 
 
 
 
  sets.9 This immediately implies the Sauer–Shelah lemma, because only 
 
 
 
  of the subsets of an 
 
 
 
 -item universe have cardinality less than 
 
 
 
 . Thus, when 
 
 
 
 , there are not enough small sets to be shattered, so one of the shattered sets must have cardinality at least 
 
 
 
 .
For a restricted type of shattered set, called an order-shattered set, the number of shattered sets always equals the cardinality of the set family.10
Proof
Pajor's variant of the Sauer–Shelah lemma may be proved by mathematical induction; the proof has variously been credited to Noga Alon11 or to Ron Aharoni and Ron Holzman.12 As a base case to the induction, every family of only one set shatters the empty set. To see that every finite family 
 
 
 
  of two or more sets shatters at least 
 
 
 
  sets, let 
 
 
 
  be an element that belongs to some but not all of the sets in 
 
 
 
 . Split 
 
 
 
  into two subfamilies, of the sets that contain 
 
 
 
  and the sets that do not contain 
 
 
 
 . By induction, these two subfamilies shatter two collections of sets whose sizes add to at least 
 
 
 
 . None of these shattered sets contain 
 
 
 
 , but some of them may be shattered by both subfamilies. When a set 
 
 
 
  is shattered by only one of the two subfamilies, it contributes one unit both to the number of shattered sets of the subfamily and to the number of shattered sets of 
 
 
 
 . When a set 
 
 
 
  is shattered by both subfamilies, then both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are shattered by 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  contributes two units to the number of shattered sets of the subfamilies and of 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, the number of shattered sets of 
 
 
 
  is at least equal to the number shattered by the two subfamilies of 
 
 
 
 , which is at least 
 
 
 
 .
A different proof of the Sauer–Shelah lemma in its original form, by Péter Frankl and János Pach, is based on linear algebra and the inclusion–exclusion principle.1314
Applications
The original application of the lemma, by Vapnik and Chervonenkis, was in showing that every probability distribution can be approximated (with respect to a family of events of a given VC dimension) by a finite set of sample points whose cardinality depends only on the VC dimension of the family of events. In this context, there are two important notions of approximation, both parameterized by a number ε: a set S of samples, and a probability distribution on S, is said to be an ε-approximation of the original distribution if the probability of each event with respect to S differs from its original probability by at most ε. A set S of (unweighted) samples is said to be an ε-net if every event with probability at least ε includes at least one point of S. An ε-approximation must also be an ε-net but not necessarily vice versa.
Vapnik and Chervonenkis used the lemma to show that set systems of VC dimension d always have ε-approximations of cardinality 
 
 
 
 . Later authors including 15 and 16 similarly showed that there always exist ε-nets of cardinality 
 
 
 
 , and more precisely of cardinality at most 
 
 
 
 .17 The main idea of the proof of the existence of small ε-nets is to choose a random sample x of cardinality 
 
 
 
  and a second independent random sample y of cardinality 
 
 
 
 , and to bound the probability that x is missed by some large event E by the probability that x is missed and simultaneously the intersection of y with E is larger than its median value. For any particular E, the probability that x is missed while y is larger than its median is very small, and the Sauer–Shelah lemma (applied to 
 
 
 
 ) shows that only a small number of distinct events E need to be considered, so by the union bound, with nonzero probability, x is an ε-net.18
In turn, ε-nets and ε-approximations, and the likelihood that a random sample of large enough cardinality has these properties, have important applications in machine learning, in the area of probably approximately correct learning.19 In computational geometry, they have been applied to range searching,20 derandomization,21 and approximation algorithms.2223  use generalizations of the Sauer–Shelah lemma to prove results in graph theory such as that the number of strong orientations of a given graph is sandwiched between its numbers of connected and 2-edge-connected subgraphs.24
References
"
Category:Set families Category:Lemmas



.↩
.↩
.↩
.↩

.↩
.↩
.↩
. As cited by .↩

.↩
.↩


.↩
.↩


.↩

.↩
.↩
.↩





