


Horvitz–Thompson estimator




Horvitz–Thompson estimator

In statistics, the Horvitz–Thompson estimator, named after Daniel G. Horvitz and Donovan J. Thompson,1 is a method for estimating the total2 and mean of a superpopulation in a stratified sample. Inverse probability weighting is applied to account for different proportions of observations within strata in a target population. The Horvitz–Thompson estimator is frequently applied in survey analyses and can be used to account for missing data.
The method
Formally, let 
 
 
 
  be an independent sample from n of N ≥ n distinct strata with a common mean μ. Suppose further that 
 
 
 
  is the inclusion probability that a randomly sampled individual in a superpopulation belongs to the ith stratum. The Horvitz–Thompson estimate of the total is given by:



and the estimate of the mean is given by:



In a Bayesian probabilistic framework 
 
 
 
  is considered the proportion of individuals in a target population belonging to the ith stratum. Hence, 
 
 
 
  could be thought of as an estimate of the complete sample of persons within the ith stratum. The Horvitz–Thompson estimator can also be expressed as the limit of a weighted bootstrap resampling estimate of the mean. It can also be viewed as a special case of multiple imputation approaches.3
For post-stratified study designs, estimation of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are done in distinct steps. In such cases, computating the variance of 
 
 
 
  is not straightforward. Resampling techniques such as the bootstrap or the jackknife can be applied to gain consistent estimates of the variance of the Horvitz–Thompson estimator. The Survey package for R conducts analyses for post-stratified data using the Horvitz–Thompson estimator.
References
External links

Survey Package Website for R

"
Category:Sampling (statistics) Category:Survey methodology Category:Missing data



Horvitz, D. G.; Thompson, D. J. (1952) "A generalization of sampling without replacement from a finite universe", Journal of the American Statistical Association, 47, 663–685, . ↩
William G. Cochran (1977), Sampling Techniques, 3rd Edition, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-16240-X↩
Roderick J.A. Little, Donald B. Rubin (2002) Statistical Analysis With Missing Data, 2nd ed., Wiley. ISBN 0-471-18386-5↩




