


Reflection principle (Wiener process)




Reflection principle (Wiener process)

(Figure)
Wiener process and its reflection upon reaching a crossing point|Simulation of Wiener process (black curve). When the process reaches the crossing point at a=50 at t

 
 3000, both the original process and its reflection (red curve) about the a=50 line (blue line) are shown. After the crossing point, both black and red curves have the same distribution.

In the theory of probability for stochastic processes, the reflection principle for a Wiener process states that if the path of a Wiener process f(t) reaches a value f(s) = a at time t = s, then the subsequent path after time s has the same distribution as the reflection of the subsequent path about the value a.1 More formally, the reflection principle refers to a lemma concerning the distribution of the supremum of the Wiener process, or Brownian motion. The result relates the distribution of the supremum of Brownian motion up to time t to the distribution of the process at time t. It is a corollary of the strong Markov property of Brownian motion.
Statement
If 
 
 
 
  is a Wiener process, and 
 
 
 
  is a threshold (also called a crossing point), then the lemma states:



In a stronger form, the reflection principle says that if 
 
 
 
  is a stopping time then the reflection of the Wiener process starting at 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 , is also a Wiener process, where:



The stronger form implies the original lemma by choosing 
 
 
 
 
 .
Proof
The earliest stopping time for reaching crossing point a, 
 
 
 
 , is an almost surely bounded stopping time. Then we can apply the strong Markov property to deduce that a relative path subsequent to 
 
 
 
 , given by 
 
 
 
 , is also simple Brownian motion independent of 
 
 
 
 . Then the probability distribution for the last time 
 
 
 
 
  is at or above the threshold 
 
 
 
  in the time interval 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed as


 
 
 . By the tower property for conditional expectations, the second term reduces to:


 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  is a standard Brownian motion independent of 
 
 
 
  and has probability 
 
 
 
  of being less than 
 
 
 
 . The proof of the lemma is completed by substituting this into the first equation.2
Consequences
The reflection principle is often used to simplify distributional properties of Brownian motion. Considering Brownian motion on the restricted interval 
 
 
 
  then the reflection principle allows us to prove that the location of the maxima 
 
 
 
 , satisfying 
 
 
 
 , has the arcsine distribution. This is one of the Lévy arcsine laws.3
References
"
Category:Articles created via the Article Wizard Category:Stochastic calculus




Mörters, P.; Peres,Y. (2010) Brownian Motion, CUP. ISBN 978-0-521-76018-8





