


Rank error-correcting code




Rank error-correcting code

In coding theory, rank codes (also called Gabidulin codes) are non-binary1 linear error-correcting codes over not Hamming but rank metric. They described a systematic way of building codes that could detect and correct multiple random rank errors. By adding redundancy with coding k-symbol word to a n-symbol word, a rank code can correct any errors of rank up to t = ⌊ (d − 1) / 2 ⌋, where d is a code distance. As an erasure code, it can correct up to d − 1 known erasures.
A rank code is an algebraic linear code over the finite field 
 
 
 
  similar to Reed–Solomon code.
The rank of the vector over 
 
 
 
  is the maximum number of linearly independent components over 
 
 
 
 . The rank distance between two vectors over 
 
 
 
 
  is the rank of the difference of these vectors.
The rank code corrects all errors with rank of the error vector not greater than t.
Rank metric
Let 
 
 
 
  — n-dimensional vector space over the finite field

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a power of a prime, 
 
 
 
  is an integer and 
 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  is a base of the vector space over the field 
 
 
 
 .
Every element 
 
 
 
  can be represented as 
 
 
 
 . Hence, every vector 
 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  can be written as matrix:



Rank of the vector

 
  over the field 
 
 
 
 
  is a rank of the corresponding matrix 
 
 
 
  over the field 
 
 
 
  denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
The set of all vectors 
 
 
 
  is a space 
 
 
 
 
 . The map 
 
 
 
 ) defines a norm over 
 
 
 
  and a rank metric:



Rank code
A set 
 
 
 
  of vectors from 
 
 
 
 
  is called a code with code distance 
 
 
 
  and a k-dimensional subspace of 
 
 
 
  – a linear (n, k)-code with distance 
 
 
 
 .
Generating matrix
There is known the only construction of rank code, which is a maximum rank distance MRD-code with d = n − k + 1.
Let's define a Frobenius power 
 
 
 
  of the element 
 
 
 
 
  as



Then, every vector 
 
 
 
 , linearly independent over 
 
 
 
 , defines a generating matrix of the MRD (n, k, d = n − k + 1)-code.



where 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
There are several proposals for public-key cryptosystems based on rank codes. However, most of them have been proven insecure (see e.g. Journal of Cryptology, April 20082).
Rank codes are also useful for error and erasure correction in network coding.
See also

Linear code
Reed–Solomon error correction
Berlekamp–Massey algorithm
Network coding

Notes
References





External links

MATLAB implementation of a Rank–metric codec

"
Category:Error detection and correction Category:Coding theory



Codes for which each input symbol is from a set of size greater than 2.↩
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00145-007-9003-9)↩




