


Rank SIFT




Rank SIFT

Rank SIFT algorithm is the revised SIFT (Scale-invariant feature transform) algorithm which uses ranking techniques to improve the performance of the SIFT algorithm. In fact, ranking techniques can be used in key point localization or descriptor generation of the original SIFT algorithm.
SIFT With Ranking Techniques
Ranking the Key Point
Ranking techniques can be used to keep certain number of key points which are detected by SIFT detector.1
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a training image sequence and 
 
 
 
  is a key point obtained by SIFT detector. The following equation determines the rank of 
 
 
 
 
  in the key point set. Larger value of 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the higher rank of 
 
 
 
 .



where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function, 
 
 
 
 
  is the homography transformation from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the threshold.
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is the feature descriptor of key point 
 
 
 
 
  defined above. So 
 
 
 
  can be labeled with the rank of 
 
 
 
  in the feature vector space. Then the vector set 
 
 
 
  containing labeled elements can be used as a training set for the Ranking SVM2 problem.

 The learning process can be represented as follows:



The obtained optimal 
 
 
 
  can be used to order the future key points.
Ranking the Elements of Descriptor
Ranking techniques also can be used to generate the key point descriptor.3
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is the feature vector of a key point and the elements of 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding rank of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is defined as follows:



After transforming original feature vector 
 
 
 
  to the ordinal descriptor 
 
 
 
 , the difference between two ordinal descriptors can be evaluated in the following two measurements.

The Spearman corelation coefficient

The spearman correlation coefficient also refers to Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. For two ordinal descriptors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it can be proved that




The Kendall's Tau

The Kedall's Tau also refers to Kendall tau rank correlation coefficient. In the above case, the Kedall's Tau between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is




References
"
Category:Articles created via the Article Wizard Category:Object recognition and categorization



Bing Li; Rong Xiao; Zhiwei Li; Rui Cai; Bao-Liang Lu; Lei Zhang; "Rank-SIFT: Learning to rank repeatable local interest points",Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2011↩
Joachims, T. (2003), "Optimizing Search Engines using Clickthrough Data", Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining↩
Toews, M.; Wells, W."SIFT-Rank: Ordinal Description for Invariant Feature Correspondence",Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.↩




