


Pseudo-random number sampling




Pseudo-random number sampling

Pseudo-random number sampling or non-uniform pseudo-random variate generation is the numerical practice of generating pseudo-random numbers that are distributed according to a given probability distribution.
Methods of sampling a non-uniform distribution are typically based on the availability of a pseudo-random number generator producing numbers X that are uniformly distributed. Computational algorithms are then used to manipulate a single random variate, X, or often several such variates, into a new random variate Y such that these values have the required distribution.
Historically, basic methods of pseudo-random number sampling were developed for Monte-Carlo simulations in the Manhattan project; they were first published by John von Neumann in the early 1950s.
Finite discrete distributions
For a discrete probability distribution with a finite number n of indices at which the probability mass function f takes non-zero values, the basic sampling algorithm is straightforward. The interval [0, 1) is divided in n intervals [0, f(1)), [f(1), f(1) + f(2)), ... The width of interval i equals the probability f(i). One draws a uniformly distributed pseudo-random number X, and searches for the index i of the corresponding interval. The so determined i will have the distribution f(i).
Formalizing this idea becomes easier by using the cumulative distribution function


 
  It is convenient to set F(0) = 0. The n intervals are then simply [F(0), F(1)), [F(1), F(2)), ..., [F(n − 1), F(n)). The main computational task is then to determine i for which F(i − 1) ≤ X Ripley (1987)  also called the cutpoint method.1

Alias method, computational time is constant, using some pre-computed tables.
There are other methods that cost constant time.2

Continuous distributions
Generic methods for generating independent samples:

Rejection sampling for arbitrary density functions
Inverse transform sampling for distributions whose CDF is known
Slice sampling
Ziggurat algorithm, for monotonously decreasing density functions as well as symmetric unimodal distributions
Convolution random number generator, not a sampling method in itself: it describes the use of arithmetics on top of one or more existing sampling methods to generate more involved distributions.

Generic methods for generating correlated samples (often necessary for unusually-shaped or high-dimensional distributions):

Markov chain Monte Carlo, the general principle
Metropolis–Hastings algorithm
Gibbs sampling
Slice sampling
Reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo, when the number of dimensions is not fixed (e.g. when estimating a mixture model and simultaneously estimating the number of mixture components)
Particle filters, when the observed data is connected in a Markov chain and should be processed sequentially

For generating a normal distribution:

Box–Muller transform
Marsaglia polar method

For generating a Poisson distribution:

See Poisson distribution#Generating Poisson-distributed random variables

Software Libraries
GNU Scientific Library has a section entitled "Random Number Distributions" with routines for sampling under more than twenty different distributions.
Footnotes
Literature

Devroye, L. (1986) Non-Uniform Random Variate Generation. New York: Springer
Fishman, G.S. (1996) Monte Carlo. Concepts, Algorithms, and Applications. New York: Springer
Hörmann, W.; J Leydold, G Derflinger (2004,2011) Automatic Nonuniform Random Variate Generation. Berlin: Springer.
Knuth, D.E. (1997) The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2 Seminumerical Algorithms, Chapter 3.4.1 (3rd edition).
Ripley, B.D. (1987) Stochastic Simulation. Wiley.

"
Category:Pseudorandom number generators Category:Non-uniform random numbers



Fishman (1996) 
Fishman (1996) 




