


Probalign




Probalign

Probalign is a sequence alignment tool that calculates a maximum expected accuracy alignment using partition function posterior probabilities.1 Base pair probabilities are estimated using an estimate similar to Boltzmann distribution. The partition function is calculated using a dynamic programming approach.
Algorithm
The following describes the algorithm used by probalign to determine the base pair probabilities.2
Alignment score
To score an alignment of two sequences two things are needed:

a similarity function 
 
 
 
  (e.g. PAM, BLOSUM,...)
affine gap penalty
 
 


The score 
 
 
 
  of an alignment a is defined as:



Now the boltzmann weighted score of an alignment a is:



Where 
 
 
 
  is a scaling factor.
The probability of an alignment assuming boltzmann distribution is given by



Where 
 
 
 
  is the partition function, i.e. the sum of the boltzmann weights of all alignments.
Dynamic Programming
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the partition function of the prefixes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Three different cases are considered:



 
  the partition function of all alignments of the two prefixes that end in a match.


 
  the partition function of all alignments of the two prefixes that end in an insertion 
 
 
 
 .


 
  the partition function of all alignments of the two prefixes that end in a deletion 
 
 
 
 .

Then we have
 
 

Initialization
The matrixes are initialized as follows:














Recursion
The partition function for the alignments of two sequences 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 , which can be recursively computed:









 
  analogously

Base pair probability
Finally the probability that positions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  form a base pair is given by:



 
  are the respective values for the recalculated 
 
 
 
  with inversed base pair strings.
See also

ProbCons
Multiple Sequence Alignment

References
External links

Probalign Webservice

"
Category:Sequence alignment algorithms



U. Roshan and D. R. Livesay, Probalign: multiple sequence alignment using partition function posterior probabilities, Bioinformatics, 22(22):2715-21, 2006 ([http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/btl472?ijkey=GR3m5VV6yTz1jEx&keytype;;=ref PDF])
Lecture "Bioinformatics II" at University of Freiburg




