


Michelangelo Ricci




Michelangelo Ricci

Michelangelo Ricci (1619–1682) was an Italian mathematician and a Cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church.
Biography
Michelangelo Ricci was born on 30 January 1619 in Rome, then capital of the Papal States, to a family of low social standing that originated in Bergamo. He died in Rome, age 63, on 12 May 1682.
He studied theology and law in Rome, where he was a contemporary of Rene de Sluze - also mathematics under Benedetto Castelli who himself had been a student of Galileo Galilei. He was a friend of Evangelista Torricelli, kept close links with contemporary scientific culture, and played an important role in the development of the Galilean school.
Like de Sluze, he spent his entire career in the Roman Catholic Church and served the pope in various roles on several occasions. A trained theologian, he acted as consultant to various Congregations of the Roman Curia. Having suffered from epilepsy since his birth, he was (according to canon law of the time) disqualified from ordination. Nonetheless, he was created a Cardinal-Deacon in the Consistory of 1 September 1681 by Pope Innocent XI, with the title 'Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Aquiro'. His position in the church was very useful for protecting his friends and fellow scientists in their controversies with the opposing scholastic school.
He played a significant part in the theoretical debates and experiments that led up to Torricelli's discovery of atmospheric pressure and invention of the mercury barometer. In particular he followed the experiments in this field by Gasparo Berti, in Rome.
There is an unpublished manuscript by Ricci, devoted to algebra, in the library of the Mathematical Institute of Genoa. It shows that by 1640 he was familiar with the 'New Algebra' of François Viète. In this book he provides a critique of the solutions given by the geometer Marino Ghetaldi of Ragusa in his De Resolutione et Compositione Matematica to the problems posed by Apollonius of Perga.1
His published mathematical work is summarised in a treatise of nineteen pages, Exercitatio geometrica, de maximis et minimis (1666) in which he studies the maxima of functions of the form 
 
 
 
  and tangents to curves with equation 
 
 
 
 , using methods that are an early form of induction. This treatise was much admired by his contemporaries and has recently been republished as an appendix to Mercator's 'Logarithmo-Technia' (1688). He also studied spirals (1644) and cycloids (1674) and recognised that the study of tangents and the calculation of areas are reciprocal operations.
Ricci is also known for his correspondence with Torricelli, Vincenzo Viviani, Rene de Sluze and Cardinal Leopoldo de' Medici, founder of the Accademia del Cimento. These letters give his thoughts on paraboloids and hyperboloids when cut by parallel planes, on the surface of a ring, and on the properties of the vacuum. It was Ricci who welcomed Marin Mersenne, when he came to Italy to present the work of René Descartes. In optics he studied the magnifying effect of lenses. With Giovanni Battista Baliani he discussed the Galilean revolution.
Following the death of Torricelli and the disappearance of Bonaventura Cavalieri, he was requested to collate and publish his correspondence with these two men. However he declined the invitation, leading to Torricelli's work being forgotten for some time.
He endeavored to defend Francesco Redi against Cardinal Leopold when Redi published his Esperienze Intorno alla Generazione degl'Insetti, arguing against the spontaneous generation of insects.
Ricci was also the backer of Abbot Francisco Nazzari in the publication of the first review of Italian literature, the Giornale de' Letterati (1668-1683).
Works
(Figure)
Geometrica exercitatio, 1666


Michaelis Angeli Riccii Geometrica exercitatio, Romae: apud Nicolaum Angelum Tinassium, 1666
Decretum sacrae Congregationis indulgentijs, sacrisque reliquijs praepositae, Romae et Pataui: typis reuerendae Camerae Apostolicae, 1678
Decretum Aloysius card. Homodeus, Romae, et Pataui, Romae et Pataui: typis reuerendae Camerae Apostolicae, 1678
Decretum sacrae Congregationis Indulgentiarum, Romae: typis reuerendae Camerae Apostolicae, 1679
Logarithmotechnia Nicolaus Mercator. Beigebunden Exercitatio geometrica, Hildesheim; New York: Olms, 1975

Potential identity confusion
The name 'Ricci' is well known in the field of tensor algebra, with such concepts as Ricci curvature. These relate to the work of another Italian mathematician Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro, 1853 - 1925, not to the subject of this article.
Sources
This article is wholly based on the corresponding pages in the French, Italian and Spanish Wikipedias

«RICCI MICHELANGELO, Cardinale». In: Gaetano Moroni, Dizionario di erudizione storico-ecclesiastica, Vol. LVII, Venezia: Tipografia Emiliana, 1852, p. 177
Vitarum Italorum doctrina excellentium qui saeculo XVIII floruerunt decas I-VI. Auctore Angelo Fabronio, Romae: typis S. Michaelis apud Junchium: prostant venales apud Natalem Barbiellini in foro Pasquini, 1769, Vol. II, p. 200

External links


Biography on the University of Saint-Andrews site

Biography on the History of Science Museum, Florence, site

Biography on a site devoted to Francesco Redi

The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, Biography

References
"
Category:1619 births Category:1682 deaths Category:Italian mathematicians



Ronald Calinger : [http://books.google.fr/books?id=D21wKHoYGg0C&pg;;=PA122&lpg;=PA122&dq;=De+resolutione+et+de+compositione+mathematica&source;=bl&ots;=FThoEjnDa5&sig;=5yTkdDC6cUIliOY5CxG8QvIjPPM&hl;=fr&ei;=vbIlTMqaOYi6jAffyMGUAQ&sa;=X&oi;=book_result&ct;=result&resnum;=1&ved;=0CBcQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q;=De%20resolutione%20et%20de%20compositione%20mathematica&f;=false Vita mathematica: historical research and integration with teaching]




