


Nevanlinna function




Nevanlinna function


''See also Nevanlinna theory


In mathematics, in the field of complex analysis, a Nevanlinna function is a complex function which is an analytic function on the open upper half-plane H and has non-negative imaginary part. They map the upper half-plane to itself (or to a real constant), but are not necessarily injective or surjective. Functions with this property are sometimes also known as Herglotz, Pick or R functions.
Integral representation
Every Nevanlinna function N admits a representation



where C is a real constant, D is a non-negative constant and μ is a Borel measure on R satisfying the growth condition



Conversely, every function of this form turns out to be a Nevanlinna function. The constants in this representation are related to the function N via



and the Borel measure μ can be recovered from N by employing the Stieltjes inversion formula (related to the inversion formula for the Stieltjes transformation):



A very similar representation of functions is also called the Poisson representation.1
Examples

Some elementary examples of Nevanlinna functions follow (with appropriately chosen branch cuts in the first three). (
 
 
 
  can be replaced by 
 
 
 
  for some real number 
 
 
 
 )



















The above examples can also be rotated to some extent around the origin, such as 
 
 
















 
  (an example that is not injective)
 




A Möbius transformation










is a Nevanlinna function if (but not only if) 
 
 
 
 
  is a positive real number and 
 
 
 
  This is equivalent to the set of such transformations that map the real axis to itself. One may then add any constant in the upper half-plane, and move the pole into the lower half-plane, giving new values for the parameters. Example
 
 



If S is a self-adjoint operator in a Hilbert space and f is an arbitrary vector, then the function










is a Nevanlinna function.
 


If M and N are non-constant Nevanlinna functions, then their composition is a Nevanlinna function as well.

References





"
Category:Complex analysis



See for example Section 4, "Poisson representation", of . De Branges gives a form for functions whose real part is non-negative in the upper half-plane.↩




