


Schubert polynomial




Schubert polynomial

In mathematics, Schubert polynomials are generalizations of Schur polynomials that represent cohomology classes of Schubert cycles in flag varieties. They were introduced by  and are named after Hermann Schubert.
Background
described the history of Schubert polynomials.
The Schubert polynomials 
 
 
 
  are polynomials in the variables 
 
 
 
  depending on an element 
 
 
 
  of the infinite symmetric group 
 
 
 
  of all permutations of 
 
 
 
  fixing all but a finite number of elements. They form a basis for the polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  in infinitely many variables.
The cohomology of the flag manifold 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the ideal generated by homogeneous symmetric functions of positive degree. The Schubert polynomial 
 
 
 
  is the unique homogeneous polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  representing the Schubert cycle of 
 
 
 
  in the cohomology of the flag manifold

 
  for all sufficiently large 
 
 
 
 .
Properties

If 
 
 
 
 is the permutation of longest length in 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 



 
  if 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the transposition 
 
 
 
  and where 
 
 
 
  is the divided difference operator taking 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .

Schubert polynomials can be calculated recursively from these two properties. In particular, this implies that 
 
 
 
 .
Other properties are




If 
 
 
 
  is the transposition 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is the Schur polynomial 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the partition 
 
 
 
 . In particular all Schur polynomials (of a finite number of variables) are Schubert polynomials.
Schubert polynomials have positive coefficients. A conjectural rule for their coefficients was put forth by Richard P. Stanley, and proven in two papers, one by Sergey Fomin and Stanley and one by Sara Billey, William Jockusch, and Stanley.
The Schubert polynomials can be seen as a generating function over certain combinatorial objects called pipe dreams or rc-graphs. These are in bijection with reduced Kogan faces, (introduced in the PhD thesis of Mikhail Kogan) which are special faces of the Gelfand-Tsetlin polytope.

As an example 
 
 
 
 .
Multiplicative structure constants
Since the Schubert polynomials form a basis, there are unique coefficients 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . These can be seen as a generalization of the Littlewood−Richardson coefficients described by the Littlewood–Richardson rule. For representation-theoretical reasons, these coefficients are non-negative integers and it is an outstanding problem in representation theory and combinatorics to give a combinatorial rule for these numbers.
Double Schubert polynomials
Double Schubert polynomials 
 
 
 
  are polynomials in two infinite sets of variables, parameterized by an element w of the infinite symmetric group, that becomes the usual Schubert polynomials when all the variables 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 .
The double Schubert polynomial 
 
 
 
  are characterized by the properties



 
  when 
 
 
 
  is the permutation on 
 
 
 
  of longest length.


 
  if 
 
 
 
 .

Quantum Schubert polynomials
introduced quantum Schubert polynomials, that have the same relation to the (small) quantum cohomology of flag manifolds that ordinary Schubert polynomials have to the ordinary cohomology.
Universal Schubert polynomials
introduced universal Schubert polynomials, that generalize classical and quantum Schubert polynomials. He also described universal double Schubert polynomials generalizing double Schubert polynomials.
See also

Kostant polynomial
Monk's formula gives the product of a linear Schubert polynomial and a Schubert polynomial.
nil-Coxeter algebra

References














"
Category:Representation theory Category:Symmetric functions Category:Algebraic combinatorics


