


Labelled enumeration theorem




Labelled enumeration theorem

In combinatorial mathematics, the labelled enumeration theorem is the counterpart of the Pólya enumeration theorem for the labelled case, where we have a set of labelled objects given by an exponential generating function (EGF) g(z) which are being distributed into n slots and a permutation group G which permutes the slots, thus creating equivalence classes of configurations. There is a special re-labelling operation that re-labels the objects in the slots, assigning labels from 1 to k, where k is the total number of nodes, i.e. the sum of the number of nodes of the individual objects. The EGF 
 
 
 
  of the number of different configurations under this re-labelling process is given by



In particular, if G is the symmetric group of order n (hence, |G| = n!), the functions f_n(z) can be further combined into a single generating function:



which is exponential w.r.t. the variable z and ordinary w.r.t. the variable t.
The re-labelling process
(Figure)
A set of cycles being re-labelled to form a permutation. (There are three slots and 
 
 
 
 
 .)

We assume that an object 
 
 
 
  of size 
 
 
 
  represented by 
 
 
 
  contains 
 
 
 
  labelled internal nodes, with the labels going from 1 to m. The action of G on the slots is greatly simplified compared to the unlabelled case, because the labels distinguish the objects in the slots, and the orbits under G all have the same size 
 
 
 
 
 . (The EGF g(z) may not include objects of size zero. This is because they are not distinguished by labels and therefore the presence of two or more of such objects creates orbits whose size is less than 
 
 
 
 .) As mentioned, the nodes of the objects are re-labelled when they are distributed into the slots. Say an object of size 
 
 
 
  goes into the first slot, an object of size 
 
 
 
  into the second slot, and so on, and the total size of the configuration is k, so that



The re-labelling process works as follows: choose one of



partitions of the set of k labels into subsets of size 
 
 
 
  Now re-label the internal nodes of each object using the labels from the respective subset, preserving the order of the labels. E.g. if the first object contains four nodes labelled from 1 to 4 and the set of labels chosen for this object is {2, 5, 6, 10}, then node 1 receives the label 2, node 2, the label 5, node 3, the label 6 and node 4, the label 10. In this way the labels on the objects induce a unique labelling using the labels from the subset of 
 
 
 
  chosen for the object.
Proof of the theorem
It follows from the re-labelling construction that there are



or



different configurations of total size k. The formula evaluates to an integer because 
 
 
 
  is zero for k k \ge n  we have 
 
 
 
  and the order 
 
 
 
  of G divides the order of 
 
 
 
 , which is 
 
 
 
 , by Lagrange's theorem. The conclusion is that the EGF of the labelled configurations is given by



This formula could also be obtained by enumerating sequences, i.e. the case when the slots are not being permuted, and by using the above argument without the 
 
 
 
 -factor to show that their generating function under re-labelling is given by 
 
 
 
 . Finally note that every sequence belongs to an orbit of size 
 
 
 
 , hence the generating function of the orbits is given by 
 
 

References

François Bergeron, Gilbert Labelle, Pierre Leroux, Théorie des espèces et combinatoire des structures arborescentes, LaCIM, Montréal (1994). English version: Combinatorial Species and Tree-like Structures, Cambridge University Press (1998).

"
Category:Enumerative combinatorics Category:Theorems in combinatorics Category:Articles containing proofs


