


Dynamic logic (modal logic)




Dynamic logic (modal logic)

Dynamic logic is an extension of modal logic originally intended for reasoning about computer programs and later applied to more general complex behaviors arising in linguistics, philosophy, AI, and other fields.
Language
Modal logic is characterized by the modal operators

 
  (box p) asserting that 
 
 
 
  is necessarily the case, and 
 
 
 
  (diamond p) asserting that 
 
 
 
  is possibly the case. Dynamic logic extends this by associating to every action 
 
 
 
  the modal operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , thereby making it a multimodal logic. The meaning of 
 
 
 
  is that after performing action 
 
 
 
  it is necessarily the case that 
 
 
 
  holds, that is, 
 
 
 
  must bring about 
 
 
 
 . The meaning of 
 
 
 
  is that after performing 
 
 
 
  it is possible that 
 
 
 
  holds, that is, 
 
 
 
  might bring about 
 
 
 
 . These operators are related by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , analogously to the relationship between the universal (
 
 
 
 ) and existential (
 
 
 
 ) quantifiers.
Dynamic logic permits compound actions built up from smaller actions. While the basic control operators of any programming language could be used for this purpose, Kleene's regular expression operators are a good match to modal logic. Given actions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the compound action 
 
 
 
 , choice, also written 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , is performed by performing one of 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . The compound action 
 
 
 
 , sequence, is performed by performing first 
 
 
 
  and then 
 
 
 
 . The compound action 
 
 
 
 , iteration, is performed by performing 
 
 
 
  zero or more times, sequentially. The constant action 
 
 
 
  or BLOCK does nothing and does not terminate, whereas the constant action 
 
 
 
  or SKIP or NOP, definable as 
 
 
 
 , does nothing but does terminate.
Axioms
These operators can be axiomatized in dynamic logic as follows, taking as already given a suitable axiomatization of modal logic including such axioms for modal operators as the above-mentioned axiom 
 
 
 
  and the two inference rules modus ponens (
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 ) and necessitation (
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 ).
A1. 
 
 

A2. 
 
 

A3. 
 
 

A4. 
 
 

A5. 
 
 

A6. 
 
 

Axiom A1 makes the empty promise that when BLOCK terminates, 
 
 
 
  will hold, even if 
 
 
 
  is the proposition false. (Thus BLOCK abstracts the essence of the action of hell freezing over.)
 A2 says that [NOP] acts as the identity function on propositions, that is, it transforms 
 
 
 
  into itself.
 A3 says that if doing one of 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  must bring about 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  must bring about 
 
 
 
  and likewise for 
 
 
 
 , and conversely.
 A4 says that if doing 
 
 
 
  and then 
 
 
 
  must bring about 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  must bring about a situation in which 
 
 
 
  must bring about 
 
 
 
 .
 A5 is the evident result of applying A2, A3 and A4 to the equation 
 
 
 
  of Kleene algebra.
 A6 asserts that if 
 
 
 
  holds now, and no matter how often we perform 
 
 
 
  it remains the case that the truth of 
 
 
 
  after that performance entails its truth after one more performance of 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  must remain true no matter how often we perform 
 
 
 
 . A6 is recognizable as mathematical induction with the action n := n+1 of incrementing n generalized to arbitrary actions 
 
 
 
 .
Derivations
The modal logic axiom 
 
 
 
  permits the derivation of the following six theorems corresponding to the above:
T1. 
 
 

T2. 
 
 

T3. 
 
 

T4. 
 
 

T5. 
 
 

T6. 
 
 

T1 asserts the impossibility of bringing anything about by performing BLOCK.
 T2 notes again that NOP changes nothing, bearing in mind that NOP is both deterministic and terminating whence 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the same force.
 T3 says that if the choice of 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  could bring about 
 
 
 
 , then either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  alone could bring about 
 
 
 
 .
 T4 is just like A4.
 T5 is explained as for A5.
 T6 asserts that if it is possible to bring about 
 
 
 
  by performing 
 
 
 
  sufficiently often, then either 
 
 
 
  is true now or it is possible to perform 
 
 
 
  repeatedly to bring about a situation where 
 
 
 
  is (still) false but one more performance of 
 
 
 
  could bring about 
 
 
 
 .
Box and diamond are entirely symmetric with regard to which one takes as primitive. An alternative axiomatization would have been to take the theorems T1-T6 as axioms, from which we could then have derived A1-A6 as theorems.
The difference between implication and inference is the same in dynamic logic as in any other logic: whereas the implication 
 
 
 
  asserts that if 
 
 
 
  is true then so is 
 
 
 
 , the inference 
 
 
 
  asserts that if 
 
 
 
  is valid then so is 
 
 
 
 . However the dynamic nature of dynamic logic moves this distinction out of the realm of abstract axiomatics into the common-sense experience of situations in flux. The inference rule 
 
 
 
 , for example, is sound because its premise asserts that 
 
 
 
  holds at all times, whence no matter where 
 
 
 
  might take us, 
 
 
 
  will be true there. The implication 
 
 
 
  is not valid, however, because the truth of 
 
 
 
  at the present moment is no guarantee of its truth after performing 
 
 
 
 . For example, 
 
 
 
  will be true in any situation where 
 
 
 
  is false, or in any situation where 
 
 
 
  is true, but the assertion 
 
 
 
  is false in any situation where 
 
 
 
  has value 1, and therefore is not valid.
Derived rules of inference
As for modal logic, the inference rules modus ponens and necessitation suffice also for dynamic logic as the only primitive rules it needs, as noted above. However, as usual in logic, many more rules can be derived from these with the help of the axioms. An example instance of such a derived rule in dynamic logic is that if kicking a broken TV once can't possibly fix it, then repeatedly kicking it can't possibly fix it either. Writing 
 
 
 
  for the action of kicking the TV, and 
 
 
 
  for the proposition that the TV is broken, dynamic logic expresses this inference as 
 
 
 
 , having as premise 
 
 
 
  and as conclusion 
 
 
 
 . The meaning of 
 
 
 
  is that it is guaranteed that after kicking the TV, it is broken. Hence the premise 
 
 
 
  means that if the TV is broken, then after kicking it once it will still be broken. 
 
 
 
  denotes the action of kicking the TV zero or more times. Hence the conclusion 
 
 
 
  means that if the TV is broken, then after kicking it zero or more times it will still be broken. For if not, then after the second-to-last kick the TV would be in a state where kicking it once more would fix it, which the premise claims can never happen under any circumstances.
The inference 
 
 
 
  is sound. However the implication 
 
 
 
  is not valid because we can easily find situations in which 
 
 
 
  holds but 
 
 
 
  does not. In any such counterexample situation, 
 
 
 
  must hold but 
 
 
 
  must be false, while 
 
 
 
  however must be true. But this could happen in any situation where the TV is broken but can be revived with two kicks. The implication fails (is not valid) because it only requires that 
 
 
 
  hold now, whereas the inference succeeds (is sound) because it requires that 
 
 
 
  hold in all situations, not just the present one.
An example of a valid implication is the proposition 
 
 
 
 . This says that if 
 
 
 
  is greater or equal to 3, then after incrementing 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  must be greater or equal to 4. In the case of deterministic actions 
 
 
 
  that are guaranteed to terminate, such as 
 
 
 
 , must and might have the same force, that is, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the same meaning. Hence the above proposition is equivalent to 
 
 
 
  asserting that if 
 
 
 
  is greater or equal to 3 then after performing 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  might be greater or equal to 4.
Assignment
The general form of an assignment statement is 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a variable and 
 
 
 
  is an expression built from constants and variables with whatever operations are provided by the language, such as addition and multiplication. The Hoare axiom for assignment is not given as a single axiom but rather as an axiom schema.
A7.


This is a schema in the sense that 
 
 
 
  can be instantiated with any formula 
 
 
 
  containing zero or more instances of a variable 
 
 
 
 . The meaning of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  with those occurrences of 
 
 
 
  that occur free in 
 
 
 
 , i.e. not bound by some quantifier as in 
 
 
 
 , replaced by 
 
 
 
 . For example we may instantiate A7 with 
 
 
 
 , or with 
 
 
 
 . Such an axiom schema allows infinitely many axioms having a common form to be written as a finite expression connoting that form.
The instance 
 
 
 
  of A7 allows us to calculate mechanically that the example 
 
 
 
  encountered a few paragraphs ago is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 , which in turn is equivalent to 
 
 
 
  by elementary algebra.
An example illustrating assignment in combination with 
 
 
 
  is the proposition 
 
 
 
 . This asserts that it is possible, by incrementing 
 
 
 
  sufficiently often, to make 
 
 
 
  equal to 7. This of course is not always true, e.g. if 
 
 
 
  is 8 to begin with, or 6.5, whence this proposition is not a theorem of dynamic logic. If 
 
 
 
  is of type integer however, then this proposition is true if and only if 
 
 
 
  is at most 7 to begin with, that is, it is just a roundabout way of saying 
 
 
 
 .
Mathematical induction can be obtained as the instance of A6 in which the proposition 
 
 
 
  is instantiated as 
 
 
 
 , the action 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . The first two of these three instantiations are straightforward, converting A6 to 
 
 
 
 . However, the ostensibly simple substitution of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  is not so simple as it brings out the so-called referential opacity of modal logic in the case when a modality can interfere with a substitution.
When we substituted 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , we were thinking of the proposition symbol 
 
 
 
  as a rigid designator with respect to the modality 
 
 
 
 , meaning that it is the same proposition after incrementing 
 
 
 
  as before, even though incrementing 
 
 
 
  may impact its truth. Likewise, the action 
 
 
 
  is still the same action after incrementing 
 
 
 
 , even though incrementing 
 
 
 
  will result in its executing in a different environment. However, 
 
 
 
  itself is not a rigid designator with respect to the modality 
 
 
 
 ; if it denotes 3 before incrementing 
 
 
 
 , it denotes 4 after. So we can't just substitute 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  everywhere in A6.
One way of dealing with the opacity of modalities is to eliminate them. To this end, expand 
 
 
 
  as the infinite conjunction 
 
 
 
 , that is, the conjunction over all 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Now apply A4 to turn 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 , having 
 
 
 
  modalities. Then apply Hoare's axiom 
 
 
 
  times to this to produce 
 
 
 
 , then simplify this infinite conjunction to 
 
 
 
 . This whole reduction should be applied to both instances of 
 
 
 
  in A6, yielding 
 
 
 
 . The remaining modality can now be eliminated with one more use of Hoare's axiom to give 
 
 
 
 .
With the opaque modalities now out of the way, we can safely substitute 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in the usual manner of first-order logic to obtain Peano's celebrated axiom 
 
 
 
 , namely mathematical induction.
One subtlety we glossed over here is that 
 
 
 
  should be understood as ranging over the natural numbers, where 
 
 
 
  is the superscript in the expansion of 
 
 
 
  as the union of 
 
 
 
  over all natural numbers 
 
 
 
 . The importance of keeping this typing information straight becomes apparent if 
 
 
 
  had been of type integer, or even real, for any of which A6 is perfectly valid as an axiom. As a case in point, if 
 
 
 
  is a real variable and 
 
 
 
  is the predicate 
 
 
is a natural number, then axiom A6 after the first two substitutions, that is, 
 
 
 
 , is just as valid, that is, true in every state regardless of the value of 
 
 
 
  in that state, as when 
 
 
 
  is of type natural number. If in a given state 
 
 
 
  is a natural number, then the antecedent of the main implication of A6 holds, but then 
 
 
 
  is also a natural number so the consequent also holds. If 
 
 
 
  is not a natural number, then the antecedent is false and so A6 remains true regardless of the truth of the consequent. We could strengthen A6 to an equivalence 
 
 
 
  without impacting any of this, the other direction being provable from A5, from which we see that if the antecedent of A6 does happen to be false somewhere, then the consequent must be false.
Test
Dynamic logic associates to every proposition 
 
 
 
  an action 
 
 
 
  called a test. When 
 
 
 
  holds, the test 
 
 
 
  acts as a NOP, changing nothing while allowing the action to move on. When 
 
 
 
  is false, 
 
 
 
  acts as BLOCK. Tests can be axiomatized as follows.
A8.


The corresponding theorem for 
 
 
 
  is:
T8.


The construct if p then a else b is realized in dynamic logic as 
 
 
 
 . This action expresses a guarded choice: if 
 
 
 
  holds then 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 , whereas 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to BLOCK, and 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 . Hence when 
 
 
 
  is true the performer of the action can only take the left branch, and when 
 
 
 
  is false the right.
The construct while p do a is realized as 
 
 
 
 . This performs 
 
 
 
  zero or more times and then performs 
 
 
 
 . As long as 
 
 
 
  remains true, the 
 
 
 
  at the end blocks the performer from terminating the iteration prematurely, but as soon as it becomes false, further iterations of the body 
 
 
 
  are blocked and the performer then has no choice but to exit via the test 
 
 
 
 .
Quantification as random assignment
The random-assignment statement 
 
 
 
  denotes the nondeterministic action of setting 
 
 
 
  to an arbitrary value. 
 
 
 
  then says that 
 
 
 
  holds no matter what you set 
 
 
 
  to, while 
 
 
 
  says that it is possible to set 
 
 
 
  to a value that makes 
 
 
 
  true. 
 
 
 
  thus has the same meaning as the universal quantifier 
 
 
 
 , while 
 
 
 
  similarly corresponds to the existential quantifier 
 
 
 
 . That is, first-order logic can be understood as the dynamic logic of programs of the form 
 
 
 
 .1
Possible-world semantics
Modal logic is most commonly interpreted in terms of possible world semantics or Kripke structures. This semantics carries over naturally to dynamic logic by interpreting worlds as states of a computer in the application to program verification, or states of our environment in applications to linguistics, AI, etc. One role for possible world semantics is to formalize the intuitive notions of truth and validity, which in turn permit the notions of soundness and completeness to be defined for axiom systems. An inference rule is sound when validity of its premises implies validity of its conclusion. An axiom system is sound when all its axioms are valid and its inference rules are sound. An axiom system is complete when every valid formula is derivable as a theorem of that system. These concepts apply to all systems of logic including dynamic logic.
Propositional dynamic logic (PDL)
Ordinary or first-order logic has two types of terms, respectively assertions and data. As can be seen from the examples above, dynamic logic adds a third type of term denoting actions. The dynamic logic assertion 
 
 
 
  contains all three types
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are data, 
 
 
 
  is an action, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are assertions. Propositional logic is derived from first-order logic by omitting data terms and reasons only about abstract propositions, which may be simple propositional variables or atoms or compound propositions built with such logical connectives as and, or, and not.
Propositional dynamic logic, or PDL, was derived from dynamic logic in 1977 by Michael J. Fischer and Richard Ladner. PDL blends the ideas behind propositional logic and dynamic logic by adding actions while omitting data; hence the terms of PDL are actions and propositions. The TV example above is expressed in PDL whereas the next example involving 
 
 
 
  is in first-order DL. PDL is to (first-order) dynamic logic as propositional logic is to first-order logic.
Fischer and Ladner showed in their 1977 paper that PDL satisfiability was of computational complexity at most nondeterministic exponential time, and at least deterministic exponential time in the worst case. This gap was closed in 1978 by Vaughan Pratt who showed that PDL was decidable in deterministic exponential time. In 1977, Krister Segerberg proposed a complete axiomatization of PDL, namely any complete axiomatization of modal logic K together with axioms A1-A6 as given above. Completeness proofs for Segerberg's axioms were found by Gabbay (unpublished note), Parikh (1978), Pratt (1979), and Kozen and Parikh (1981).
History
Dynamic logic was developed by Vaughan Pratt in 1974 in notes for a class on program verification as an approach to assigning meaning to Hoare logic by expressing the Hoare formula 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . The approach was later published in 1976 as a logical system in its own right. The system parallels A. Salwicki's system of Algorithmic Logic2 and Edsger Dijkstra's notion of weakest-precondition predicate transformer 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  corresponding to Dijkstra's 
 
 
 
 , weakest liberal precondition. Those logics however made no connection with either modal logic, Kripke semantics, regular expressions, or the calculus of binary relations; dynamic logic therefore can be viewed as a refinement of algorithmic logic and Predicate Transformers that connects them up to the axiomatics and Kripke semantics of modal logic as well as to the calculi of binary relations and regular expressions.
The Concurrency Challenge
Hoare logic, algorithmic logic, weakest preconditions, and dynamic logic are all well suited to discourse and reasoning about sequential behavior. Extending these logics to concurrent behavior however has proved problematic. There are various approaches but all of them lack the elegance of the sequential case. In contrast Amir Pnueli's 1977 system of temporal logic, another variant of modal logic sharing many common features with dynamic logic, differs from all of the above-mentioned logics by being what Pnueli has characterized as an "endogenous" logic, the others being "exogenous" logics. By this Pnueli meant that temporal logic assertions are interpreted within a universal behavioral framework in which a single global situation changes with the passage of time, whereas the assertions of the other logics are made externally to the multiple actions about which they speak. The advantage of the endogenous approach is that it makes no fundamental assumptions about what causes what as the environment changes with time. Instead a temporal logic formula can talk about two unrelated parts of a system, which because they are unrelated tacitly evolve in parallel. In effect ordinary logical conjunction of temporal assertions is the concurrent composition operator of temporal logic. The simplicity of this approach to concurrency has resulted in temporal logic being the modal logic of choice for reasoning about concurrent systems with its aspects of synchronization, interference, independence, deadlock, livelock, fairness, etc.
These concerns of concurrency would appear to be less central to linguistics, philosophy, and artificial intelligence, the areas in which dynamic logic is most often encountered nowadays.
For a comprehensive treatment of dynamic logic see the book by David Harel et al. cited below.
See also

Temporal logic
Temporal logic in finite-state verification
Temporal logic of actions
Modal μ-calculus

Footnotes
References

Vaughan Pratt, "Semantical Considerations on Floyd-Hoare Logic", Proc. 17th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1976, 109-121.
David Harel, Dexter Kozen, and Jerzy Tiuryn, "Dynamic Logic". MIT Press, 2000 (450 pp).
David Harel, "Dynamic Logic", In D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, volume II: Extensions of Classical Logic, chapter 10, pages 497-604. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1984.

External links

Semantical Considerations on Floyd-Hoare Logic (original paper on dynamic logic)

"
Category:Modal logic Category:Logic in computer science









