


Cardinal characteristic of the continuum




Cardinal characteristic of the continuum

In the mathematical discipline of set theory, a cardinal characteristic of the continuum is an infinite cardinal number that may consistently lie strictly between 

 (the cardinality of the set of natural numbers), and the cardinality of the continuum, that is, the cardinality of the set 
 
 
 
  of all real numbers. The latter cardinal is denoted 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . A variety of such cardinal characteristics arise naturally, and much work has been done in determining what relations between them are provable, and constructing models of set theory for various consistent configurations of them.
Background
Cantor's diagonal argument shows that 
 
 
 
  is strictly greater than 
 
 
 
 , but it does not specify whether it is the least cardinal greater than 
 
 
 
  (that is, 
 
 
 
 ). Indeed the assumption that 
 
 
 
  is the well-known Continuum Hypothesis, which was shown to be independent of the standard ZFC axioms for set theory by Paul Cohen. If the Continuum Hypothesis fails and so 
 
 
 
  is at least 
 
 
 
 , natural questions arise about the cardinals strictly between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , for example regarding Lebesgue measurability. By considering the least cardinal with some property, one may get a definition for an uncountable cardinal that is consistently less than 
 
 
 
 . Generally one only considers definitions for cardinals that are provably greater than 
 
 
 
  and at most 
 
 
 
  as cardinal characteristics of the continuum, so if the Continuum Hypothesis holds they are all equal to 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
As is standard, we denote by 
 
 
 
  the least infinite ordinal, which has cardinality 
 
 
 
  and may be identified with the set of all natural numbers.
A number of cardinal characteristics naturally arise as cardinal invariants for ideals which are closely connected with the structure of the reals, such as the ideal of Lebesgue null sets and the ideal of meagre sets.
non(N)
The cardinal characteristic non(
 
 
 
 ) is the least cardinality of a non-measurable set; equivalently, it is the least cardinality of a set that is not a Lebesgue null set.
Bounding number 
 
 
 
  and dominating number 
 
 

We denote by 
 
 
 
  the set of functions from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . For any two functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we denote by 
 
 
 
  the statement that for all but finitely many 
 
 
 
 . The bounding number

 
  is the least cardinality of an unbounded set in this relation, that is, 
 
 

The dominating number

 
  is the least cardinality of a set of functions from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  such that every such function is dominated by (that is, 
 
 
 
 ) a member of that set, that is, 
 
 

Clearly any such dominating set 
 
 
 
  is unbounded, so 
 
 
 
  is at most 
 
 
 
 , and a diagonalisation argument shows that 
 
 
 
 . Of course if 
 
 
 
  this implies that 
 
 
 
 , but Hechler1 has shown that it is also consistent to have 
 
 
 
  strictly less than 
 
 
 
 .
Splitting number 
 
 
 
  and reaping number 
 
 

We denote by 
 
 
 
  the set of all infinite subsets of 
 
 
 
 . For any 
 
 
 
 , we say that 
 
 
splits

 
  if both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are infinite. The splitting number

 
  is the least cardinality of a subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
 , there is some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  splits 
 
 
 
 . That is, 
 
 

The reaping number

 
  is the least cardinality of a subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that no element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  splits every element of 
 
 
 
 . That is, 
 
 

Ultrafilter number 
 
 

The ultrafilter number 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the least cardinality of a filter base of an ultrafilter on 
 
 
 
 . Kunen2 gave a model of set theory in which 
 
 
 
  but 
 
 
 
 , and using a countable support iteration of Sacks forcings, Baumgartner and Laver3 demonstrated a model in which 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Almost disjointness number 
 
 

Two subsets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  are said to be almost disjoint if 
 
 
 
  is finite, and a family of subsets of 
 
 
 
  is said to be almost disjoint if its members are pairwise almost disjoint. A maximal almost disjoint (mad) family of subsets of 
 
 
 
  is thus an almost disjoint family 
 
 
 
  such that for every subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , there is a set 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not almost disjoint (that is, their intersection is infinite). The almost disjointness number 
 
 
 
  is the least cardinality of an infinite maximal almost disjoint family. A basic result4 is that 
 
 
 
 ; Shelah5 showed that it is consistent to have the strict inequality 
 
 
 
 .
Cichoń's diagram
A well known diagram of cardinal characteristics is Cichoń's diagram, showing all relations provable in ZFC between 10 cardinal characteristics.
References
Further reading

Tomek Bartoszyński and Haim Judah. Set Theory On the Structure of the Real Line. A K Peters, 1995.






"
Category:Cardinal numbers



Stephen Hechler. On the existence of certain cofinal subsets of 
 
 
 
 . In T. Jech (ed), Axiomatic Set Theory, Part II. Volume 13(2) of Proc. Symp. Pure Math., pp 155–173. American Mathematical Society, 1974↩
Kenneth Kunen. Set Theory An Introduction to Independence Proofs. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics vol. 102, Elsevier, 1980↩
James Earl Baumgartner and Richard Laver. Iterated perfect-set forcing. Annals of Mathematical Logic 17 (1979) pp 271–288.↩
Eric van Douwen. The Integers and Topology. In K. Kunen and J.E. Vaughan (eds) ''Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.↩
Saharon Shelah. On cardinal invariants of the continuum. In J. Baumgartner, D. Martin and S. Shelah (eds) Axiomatic Set Theory, Contemporary Mathematics 31, American Mathematical Society, 1984, pp 183-207.↩




