


Activating function




Activating function

The activating function is a mathematical formalism that is used to approximate the influence of an extracellular field on an axon or neurons.123456 It was developed by Frank Rattay and is a useful tool to approximate the influence of functional electrical stimulation (FES) or neuromodulation techniques on target neurons.7 It points out locations of high hyperpolarization and depolarization caused by the electrical field acting upon the nerve fiber. As a rule of thumb, the activating function is proportional to the second-order spatial derivative of the extracellular potential along the axon.
Equations
In a compartment model of an axon, the activating function of compartment n, 
 
 
 
 , is derived from the driving term of the external potential, or the equivalent injected current


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the membrane capacity, 
 
 
 
  the extracellular voltage outside compartment 
 
 
 
  relative to the ground and 
 
 
 
  the axonal resistance of compartment 
 
 
 
 .
The activating function represents the rate of membrane potential change if the neuron is in resting state before the stimulation. Its physical dimensions are V/s or mV/ms. In other words, it represents the slope of the membrane voltage at the beginning of the stimulation.8
Following McNeal's9 simplifications for long fibers of an ideal internode membrane, with both membrane capacity and conductance assumed to be 0 the differential equation determining the membrane potential

 
  for each node is:


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the constant fiber diameter, 
 
 
 
  the node-to-node distance, 
 
 
 
  the node length 
 
 
 
  the axomplasmatic resistivity, 
 
 
 
  the capacity and 
 
 
 
  the ionic currents. From this the activating function follows as:


 
 .
In this case the activating function is proportional to the second order spatial difference of the extracellular potential along the fibers. If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then:


 
 .
Thus 
 
 
 
  is proportional to the second order spatial differential along the fiber.
Interpretation
Positive values of 
 
 
 
  suggest a depolarization of the membrane potential and negative values a hyperpolarization of the membrane potential.
References
"
Category:Bioelectrochemistry Category:Computational neuroscience
















