


Phase detector characteristic




Phase detector characteristic

A phase detector characteristic is a function of phase difference describing the output of the phase detector.
For the analysis of Phase detector it is usually considered the models of PD in signal (time) domain and phase-frequency domain.1 In this case for constructing of an adequate nonlinear mathematical model of PD in phase-frequency domain it is necessary to find the characteristic of phase detector. The inputs of PD are high-frequency signals and the output contains a low-frequency error correction signal, corresponding to a phase difference of input signals. For the suppression of high-frequency component of the output of PD (if such component exists) a low-pass filter is applied. The characteristic of PD is the dependence of the signal at the output of PD (in the phase-frequency domain) on the difference of phases at the input of PD.
This characteristic of PD depends on the realization of PD and the types of waveforms of signals. Consideration of PD characteristic allows to apply averaging methods for high frequency oscillations and to pass from analysis and simulation of non autonomous models of phase synchronization systems in time domain to analysis and simulation of autonomous dynamical models in phase-frequency domain .2
Analog multiplier phase detector characteristic
Consider a classical phase detector implemented with analog multiplier and low-pass filter.
(Figure)
Multiplier phase detector in time domain.

Here 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote high-frequency signals, piecewise differentiable functions 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  represent waveforms of input signals, 
 
 
 
  denote phases, and 
 
 
 
  and denotes the output of the filter. If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfy the high frequency conditions (see 34) then phase detector characteristic 
 
 
 
  is calculated in such a way that time-domain model filter output


 
  and filter output for phase-frequency domain model


 
  are almost equal:







Sine waveforms case
Consider a simple case of harmonic waveforms 
 
 

 
  and integration filter.


 
  Standard engineering assumption is that the filter removes the upper sideband 
 
 
 
  from the input but leaves the lower sideband 
 
 
 
  without change.
Consequently, the PD characteristic in the case of sinusoidal waveforms is



Square waveforms case
Consider high-frequency square-wave signals 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For this signals it was found5 that similar thing takes place. The characteristic for the case of square waveforms is



General waveforms case
Let us consider general case of piecewise-differentiable waveforms 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
This class of functions can be expanded in Fourier series. Denote by




 
  the Fourier coefficients of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then the phase detector characteristic is 6



Obviously, the PD characteristic 
 
 
 
  is periodic, continuous, and bounded on 
 
 
 
 .
Modeling method based on this result is described in 7
Examples




Multiplier phase detector characteristics

Waveforms 
 
 


PD characteristic 
 
 



(Figure)
Cosine waveform.svg

(Figure)
Cosine waveforms pd characteristic.svg



(Figure)
Square waveform.svg

(Figure)
Square waveforms pd characteristic.svg



(Figure)
Saw waveform.svg

(Figure)
Saw waveform pd characteristic.svg




References
"
Category:Detectors Category:Electronic circuits



A. J. Viterbi, Principles of Coherent Communication, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966





Patent RU 2011113212/08(019571)




