


Photon rocket




Photon rocket

A photon rocket is a hypothetical rocket that uses thrust from emitted photons (radiation pressure by emission) for its propulsion.1
Photons could be generated by onboard generators, as in the nuclear photonic rocket. The standard textbook case of such a rocket is the ideal case where all of the fuel is converted to photons which are radiated in the same direction. In more realistic treatments, one takes into account that the beam of photons is not perfectly collimated, that not all of the fuel is converted to photons, and so on. A large amount of fuel would be required and the rocket would be a huge vessel.23
In the Beamed Laser Propulsion, the photon generators and the spacecraft are physically separated and the photons are beamed from the photon source to the spacecraft using lasers.
In the Photonic Laser Thruster, collimated photons are reused by mirrors, multiplying the force by the number of bounces.
Speed
The speed an ideal photon rocket will reach, in the absence of external forces, depends on the ratio of its initial and final mass:



where 
 
 
 
  is the initial mass and 
 
 
 
  is the final mass.
The gamma factor corresponding to this speed has the simple expression:



Derivation
We denote the four-momentum of the rocket at rest as 
 
 
 
 , the rocket after it has burned its fuel as 
 
 
 
 , and the four-momentum of the emitted photons as 
 
 
 
 . Conservation of four-momentum implies:



squaring both sides (i.e. taking the Lorentz inner product of both sides with themselves) gives:



According to the energy-momentum relation, the square of the four-momentum equals the square of the mass, and 
 
 
 
  because all the photons are moving in the same direction. Therefore the above equation can be written as:



Solving for the gamma factor gives:



See also

Beam-powered propulsion
Laser propulsion
Nuclear photonic rocket
Photonic laser thruster

References
External links

Whatever happened to Photon Rockets?

"
Category:Spacecraft propulsion




A Photon Rocket, by G.G. Zel'kin
There will be no photon rocket, by V. Smilga




