


Perturbation function




Perturbation function

In mathematical optimization, the perturbation function is any function which relates to primal and dual problems. The name comes from the fact that any such function defines a perturbation of the initial problem. In many cases this takes the form of shifting the constraints.1
In some texts the value function is called the perturbation function, and the perturbation function is called the bifunction.2
Definition
Given two dual pairs separated locally convex spaces

 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then given the function 
 
 
 
 , we can define the primal problem by



If there are constraint conditions, these can be built into the function 
 
 
 
  by letting 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function. Then 
 
 
 
  is a perturbation function if and only if 
 
 
 
 
 .34
Use in duality
The duality gap is the difference of the right and left hand side of the inequality


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the convex conjugate in both variables.56
For any choice of perturbation function F weak duality holds. There are a number of conditions which if satisfied imply strong duality.7 For instance, if F is proper, jointly convex, lower semi-continuous with 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is the algebraic interior and 
 
 
 
 
  is the projection onto Y defined by 
 
 
 
 ) and X, Y are Fréchet spaces then strong duality holds.8
Examples
Lagrangian
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be dual pairs. Given a primal problem (minimize f(x)) and a related perturbation function (F(x,y)) then the Lagrangian

 
  is the negative conjugate of F with respect to y (i.e. the concave conjugate). That is the Lagrangian is defined by


 
  In particular the weak duality minmax equation can be shown to be



If the primal problem is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
 . Then if the perturbation is given by


 
  then the perturbation function is


 
 . Thus the connection to Lagrangian duality can be seen, as L can be trivially seen to be


 
 .
Fenchel duality
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be dual pairs. Assume there exists a linear map

 
  with adjoint operator

 
 . Assume the primal objective function

 
  (including the constraints by way of the indicator function) can be written as 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Then the perturbation function is given by


 
 .
In particular if the primal objective is 
 
 
 
  then the perturbation function is given by 
 
 
 
 , which is the traditional definition of Fenchel duality.9
References
"
Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Linear programming Category:Convex optimization



↩
↩

↩

↩


↩




