


Ritz's Equation




Ritz's Equation
In 1908, [[Walter Ritz]] published Recherches critiques sur l'Électrodynamique générale,Ritz, Walter (1908), ''Annales de Chimie et de Physique'', Vol. 13, pp. 145-275<
 /ref> (See English translation1) a lengthy criticism of Maxwell-Lorentz electromagnetic theory, in which he contended that the theory's connection with the luminiferous aether (see Lorentz ether theory) made it "essentially inappropriate to express the comprehensive laws for the propagation of electrodynamic actions." Ritz proposed a new equation, derived from the principles of the ballistic theory of electromagnetic waves. This equation relates the force between two charged particles with a radial separation r relative velocity v and relative acceleration a, where k is an undetermined parameter from the general form of Ampere's force law as proposed by Maxwell. This equation obeys Newton's third law and forms the basis of Ritz's electrodynamics.



Derivation of Ritz's Equation
On the assumption of an emission theory, the force acting between two moving charges should depend on the density of the messenger particles emitted by the charges (
 
 
 
 ), the radial distance between the charges (ρ), the velocity of the emission relative to the receiver, (
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for the x and r components, respectively), and the acceleration of the particles relative to each other (
 
 
 
 ). This gives us an equation of the form:2




 
 .
 



where the coefficients 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are independent of the coordinate system and are functions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The stationary coordinates of the observer relate to the moving frame of the charge as follows








Developing the terms in the force equation, we find that the density of particles is given by








The tangent plane of the shell of emitted particles in the stationary coordinate is given by the Jacobian of the transformation from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 :








We can also develop expressions for the retarded radius 
 
 
 
  and velocity 
 
 
 
  using Taylor series expansions














With this substitutions, we find that the force equation is now








Next we develop the series representations of the coefficients














With these substitutions, the force equation is now








Since the equation must reduce to the Coulomb force law when the relative velocities are zero, we immediately know that 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, to obtain the correct expression for electromagnetic mass, we may deduce that 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
To determine the other coefficients, we consider the force on a linear circuit using Ritz's expression, and compare the terms with the general form of Ampere's law. The second derivative of Ritz's equation is








 Consider the diagram on the right, and note that 
 
 
 
 ,










































Plugging these expressions into Ritz's equation, we obtain the following








Comparing to the original expression for Ampere's force law








we obtain the coefficients in Ritz's equation














From this we obtain the full expression of Ritz's electrodynamic equation with one unknown



In a footnote at the end of Ritz's section on Gravitation (English translation) the editor says, "Ritz used k = 6.4 to reconcile his formula (to calculate the angle of advancement of perihelion of planets per century) with the observed anomaly for Mercury (41") however recent data give 43.1", which leads to k = 7. Substituting this result into Ritz’s formula yields exactly the general relativity formula." Using this same integer value for k in Ritz's electrodynamic equation we get:



References and notes


"
Category:History of physics



Critical Researches on General Electrodynamics, Introduction and First Part (1980) Robert Fritzius, editor; Second Part (2005) Yefim Bakman, Editor.↩
↩




