


Cofree coalgebra




Cofree coalgebra

In algebra, the cofree coalgebra of a vector space or module is a coalgebra analog of the free algebra of a vector space. The cofree coalgebra of any vector space over a field exists, though it is more complicated than one might expect by analogy with the free algebra.
Definition
If V  is a vector space over a field F, then the cofree coalgebra C (V), of V, is a coalgebra together with a linear map C (V)→V, such that any linear map from a coalgebra X to V factors through a coalgebra homomorphism from X to C (V). In other words, the functor C  is right adjoint to the forgetful functor from coalgebras to vector spaces.
The cofree coalgebra of a vector space always exists, and is unique up to canonical isomorphism.
Cofree cocommutative coalgebras are defined in a similar way, and can be constructed as the largest cocommutative coalgebra in the cofree coalgebra.
Construction
C (V) may be constructed as a completion of the tensor coalgebra T(V) of V. For k ∈ N = {0, 1, 2, ...}, let TkV denote the k-fold tensor power of V:


 
  with T0V = F, and T1V = V. Then T(V) is the direct sum of all TkV:


 
  In addition to the graded algebra structure given by the tensor product isomorphisms TjV ⊗ TkV → Tj+kV for j, k ∈ N, T(V) has a graded coalgebra structure Δ : T(V) → T(V) ⊗ T(V) defined by extending


 
  by linearity to all of T(V). This coproduct does not make T(V) into a bialgebra, but is instead dual to the algebra structure on T(V∗), where V∗ denotes the dual vector space of linear maps V → F. Here an element of T(V) defines a linear form on T(V∗) using the nondegenerate pairings


 
  induced by evaluation, and the duality between the coproduct on T(V) and the product on T(V∗) means that



This duality extends to a nondegenerate pairing


 
  where


 
  is the direct product of the tensor powers of V. (The direct sum T(V) is the subspace of the direct product for which only finitely many components are nonzero.) However, the coproduct Δ on T(V) only extends to a linear map


 
  with values in the completed tensor product, which in this case is


 
  and contains the tensor product as a proper subspace:



The completed tensor coalgebra C (V) is the largest subspace C  satisfying


 
  which exists because if C1 and C2 satisfiy these conditions, then so does their sum C1 + C2.
It turns out1 that C (V) is the subspace of all representative elements:


 
  Furthermore, by the finiteness principle for coalgebras, any f ∈ C (V) must belong to a finite-dimensional subcoalgebra of C (V). Using the duality pairing with T(V∗), it follows that f ∈ C (V) if and only if the kernel of f on T(V∗) contains a two-sided ideal of finite codimension. Equivalently,


 
  is the union of annihilators I 0 of finite codimension ideals I  in T(V∗), which are isomorphic to the duals of the finite-dimensional algebra quotients T(V∗)/I.
Example
When V = F, T(V∗) is the polynomial algebra F[t] in one variable t, and the direct product


 
  may be identified with the vector space F[[τ]] of formal power series


 
  in an indeterminate τ. The coproduct Δ on the subspace F[τ] is determined by


 
  and C (V) is the largest subspace of F[[τ]] on which this extends to a coalgebra structure.
The duality F[[τ]] × F[t] → F is determined by τj(tk) = δjk so that


 
  Putting t=τ−1, this is the constant term in the product of two formal Laurent series. Thus, given a polynomial p(t) with leading term tN, the formal Laurent series


 
  is a formal power series for any j ∈ N, and annihilates the ideal I(p) generated by p for j 



Hazewinkel 2003↩




