


Diffusion wavelets




Diffusion wavelets
'''Diffusion wavelets''' are a fast multiscale framework for the analysis of functions on discrete (or discretized continuous) structures like graphs, manifolds, and point clouds
 in Euclidean space.  Diffusion wavelets are an extension of classical wavelet theory from harmonic analysis.  Unlike classical wavelets whose basis functions are predetermined, diffusion wavelets are adapted to the geometry of a given diffusion operator 

 (e.g., a heat kernel or a random walk).  Moreover, the diffusion wavelet basis functions are constructed by dilation using the dyadic powers (powers of two) of 

.  These dyadic powers of 

 diffusion over the space and propagate local relationships in the function throughout the space until they become global.  And if the rank of higher powers of 

 decrease (i.e., its spectrum decays), then these higher powers become compressible.  From these decaying dyadic powers of 

 comes a chain of decreasing subspaces.  These subspaces are the scaling function approximation subspaces, and the differences in the subspace chain are the wavelet subspaces.
Diffusion wavelets were first introduced in 2004 by Ronald Coifman and Mauro Maggioni at Yale University.1
Algorithm
This algorithm constructs the scaling basis functions and the wavelet basis functions along with the representations of the diffusion operator 
 
 
 
  at these scales.
In the algorithm below, the subscript notation 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represents the scaling basis functions at scale 
 
 
 
  and the wavelet basis functions at scale 
 
 
 
  respectively. The notation 
 
 
 
  denotes the matrix representation of the scaling basis 
 
 
 
  represented with respect to the basis 
 
 
 
 . Lastly, the notation 
 
 
 
  denotes the matrix represents of the operator 
 
 
 
 , where the row space of 
 
 
 
  is represented with respect to the basis 
 
 
 
 , and the column space of 
 
 
 
  is represented with respect to the basis 
 
 
 
 . Otherwise put, the domain of operator 
 
 
 
  is represented with respect to the basis 
 
 
 
  and the range is represented with respect to the basis 
 
 
 
 . The function 
 
 
 
  is a sparse QR decomposition with 
 
 
 
  precision.2 
    // Input:
    //     is the matrix representation of the diffusion operator.
    //     is the precision of the QR decomposition, e.g., 1e-6.
    //     is the maximum number of scale levels (note: this is an optional upper bound, it may converge sooner.)
    // Output:
    //     is the set of scaling basis functions indexed by scale .
    //     is the set of wavelet basis functions indexed by scale .
    
    
:
          




Applications
Mathematics
Diffusion wavelets are of general interest in mathematics. Specifically, they allow for the direct calculation of the Green′s function and the inverse graph Laplacian.
Computer science
Diffusion wavelets have been used extensively in computer science, especially in machine learning. They have been applied to the following fields:

solving Markov decision processes and Markov chains for machine learning,3
transfer learning,4
value function approximation in reinforcement learning,5
dimensionality reduction,6
mesh compression for 3D graphics,7
topic model analysis of document corpora.8
relation extraction. 9

See also

Wavelets

References


External links

Mauro Maggioni's MATLAB code implementation
Chang Wang's diffusion wavelet page

"
Category:Wavelets



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




