


Confidence distribution




Confidence distribution

In statistical inference, the concept of a confidence distribution (CD) has often been loosely referred to as a distribution function on the parameter space that can represent confidence intervals of all levels for a parameter of interest. Historically, it has typically been constructed by inverting the upper limits of lower sided confidence intervals of all levels, and it was also commonly associated with a fiducial1 interpretation (fiducial distribution), although it is a purely frequentist concept.2 A confidence distribution is not a valid probability distribution,3 but may still be a function useful for making inferences.4
In recent years, there has been a surge of renewed interest in confidence distributions. In the more recent developments, the concept of confidence distribution has emerged as a purely frequentist concept, without any fiducial interpretation or reasoning. Conceptually, a confidence distribution is no different from a point estimator or an interval estimator (confidence interval), but it uses a sample-dependent distribution function on the parameter space (instead of a point or an interval) to estimate the parameter of interest.
A simple example of a confidence distribution, that has been broadly used in statistical practice, is a bootstrap distribution.5 The development and interpretation of a bootstrap distribution does not involve any fiducial reasoning; the same is true for the concept of a confidence distribution. But the notion of confidence distribution is much broader than that of a bootstrap distribution. In particular, recent research suggests that it encompasses and unifies a wide range of examples, from regular parametric cases (including most examples of the classical development of Fisher's fiducial distribution) to bootstrap distributions, p-value functions,6 normalized likelihood functions and, in some cases, Bayesian priors and Bayesian posteriors.7
Just as a Bayesian posterior distribution contains a wealth of information for any type of Bayesian inference, a confidence distribution contains a wealth of information for constructing almost all types of frequentist inferences, including point estimates, confidence intervals and p-values, among others. Some recent developments have highlighted the promising potentials of the CD concept, as an effective inferential tool.
The history of CD concept
Neyman (1937)8 introduced the idea of "confidence" in his seminal paper on confidence intervals which clarified the frequentist repetition property. According to Fraser,9 the seed (idea) of confidence distribution can even be traced back to Bayes (1763)10 and Fisher (1930).11 Some researchers view the confidence distribution as "the Neymanian interpretation of Fishers fiducial distribution",12 which was "furiously disputed by Fisher".13 It is also believed that these "unproductive disputes" and Fisher's "stubborn insistence"14 might be the reason that the concept of confidence distribution has been long misconstrued as a fiducial concept and not been fully developed under the frequentist framework.1516 Indeed, the confidence distribution is a purely frequentist concept with a purely frequentist interpretation, and it also has ties to Bayesian inference concepts and the fiducial arguments.
Definition
Classical definition
Classically, a confidence distribution is defined by inverting the upper limits of a series of lower sided confidence intervals.1718 In particular,

For every α in (0, 1), let (−∞, ξn(α)] be a 100α% lower-side confidence interval for θ, where ξn(α) = ξn(Xn,α) is continuous and increasing in α for each sample Xn. Then, Hn(•) = ξn−1(•) is a confidence distribution for θ.
 

Efron stated that this distribution "assigns probability 0.05 to θ lying between the upper endpoints of the 0.90 and 0.95 confidence interval, etc." and "it has powerful intuitive appeal".19 In the classical literature, the confidence distribution function is interpreted as a distribution function of the parameter θ, which is impossible unless fiducial reasoning is involved since, in a frequentist setting, the parameters are fixed and nonrandom.
To interpret the CD function entirely from a frequentist viewpoint and not interpret it as a distribution function of a (fixed/nonrandom) parameter is one of the major departures of recent development relative to the classical approach. The nice thing about treating confidence distribution as a purely frequentist concept (similar to a point estimator) is that it is now free from those restrictive, if not controversial, constraints set forth by Fisher on fiducial distributions.2021
The modern definition
The following definition applies;222324 Θ is the parameter space of the unknown parameter of interest θ, and χ is the sample space corresponding to data Xn={X1, ..., Xn}:

A function Hn(•) = Hn(Xn, •) on χ × Θ → [0, 1] is called a confidence distribution (CD) for a parameter θ, if it follows two requirements:
 
(R1) For each given Xn ∈ χ, Hn(•) = Hn(Xn, •) is a continuous cumulative distribution function on Θ;
(R2) At the true parameter value θ = θ0, Hn(θ0) ≡ Hn(Xn, θ0), as a function of the sample Xn, follows the uniform distribution U[0, 1].



Also, the function H is an asymptotic CD (aCD), if the U[0, 1] requirement is true only asymptotically and the continuity requirement on Hn(•) is dropped.
In nontechnical terms, a confidence distribution is a function of both the parameter and the random sample, with two requirements. The first requirement (R1) simply requires that a CD should be a distribution on the parameter space. The second requirement (R2) sets a restriction on the function so that inferences (point estimators, confidence intervals and hypothesis testing, etc.) based on the confidence distribution have desired frequentist properties. This is similar to the restrictions in point estimation to ensure certain desired properties, such as unbiasedness, consistency, efficiency, etc.2526
A confidence distribution derived by inverting the upper limits of confidence intervals (classical definition) also satisfies the requirements in the above definition and this version of the definition is consistent with the classical definition.27
Unlike the classical fiducial inference, more than one confidence distributions may be available to estimate a parameter under any specific setting. Also, unlike the classical fiducial inference, optimality is not a part of requirement. Depending on the setting and the criterion used, sometimes there is a unique "best" (in terms of optimality) confidence distribution. But sometimes there is no optimal confidence distribution available or, in some extreme cases, we may not even be able to find a meaningful confidence distribution. This is not different from the practice of point estimation.
Examples
Example 1: Normal Mean and Variance
Suppose a normal sample Xi ~ N(μ, σ2), i = 1, 2, ..., n is given.
(1) Variance σ2 is known
Both the functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  given by



satisfy the two requirements in the CD definition, and they are confidence distribution functions for μ. Here, Φ is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution, and 
 
 
 
  is the cumulative distribution function of the student 
 
 
 
  distribution. Furthermore,



satisfies the definition of an asymptotic confidence distribution when n→∞, and it is an asymptotic confidence distribution for μ. The uses of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are equivalent to state that we use 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to estimate 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
(2) Variance σ2 is unknown
For the parameter μ, since 
 
 
 
  involves the unknown parameter σ and it violates the two requirements in the CD definition, it is no longer a "distribution estimator" or a confidence distribution for μ. However, 
 
 
 
  is still a CD for μ and 
 
 
 
  is an aCD for μ.
For the parameter σ2, the sample-dependent cumulative distribution function



is a confidence distribution function for σ2.28 Here, 
 
 
 
  is the cumulative distribution function of the student 
 
 
 
  distribution .
In the case when the variance σ2 is known, 
 
 
 
  is optimal in terms of producing the shortest confidence intervals at any given level. In the case when the variance σ2 is unknown, 
 
 
 
  is an optimal confidence distribution for μ.
Example 2: Bivariate normal correlation
Let ρ denotes the correlation coefficient of a bivariate normal population. It is well known that Fisher's z defined by the Fisher transformation:



has the limiting distribution

 
  with a fast rate of convergence, where r is the sample correlation and n is the sample size.
The function



is an asymptotic confidence distribution for ρ.
Using CD to make inference
Confidence interval
 From the CD definition, it is evident that the interval 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  provide 100(1 − α)%-level confidence intervals of different kinds, for θ, for any α ∈ (0, 1). Also 
 
 
 
  is a level 100(1 − α1 − α2)% confidence interval for the parameter θ for any α1 > 0, α2 > 0 and α1 + α2  H_n^{-1}(\beta)  is the 100β% quantile of 
 
 
 
  or it solves for θ in equation 
 
 
 
 . The same holds for an aCD, where the confidence level is achieved in limit.
Point estimation
Point estimators can also be constructed given a confidence distribution estimator for the parameter of interest. For example, given Hn(θ) the CD for a parameter θ, natural choices of point estimators include the median Mn = Hn−1(1/2), the mean 
 
 
 
 , and the maximum point of the CD density



Under some modest conditions, among other properties, one can prove that these point estimators are all consistent.2930
Hypothesis testing
One can derive a p-value for a test, either one-sided or two-sided, concerning the parameter θ, from its confidence distribution Hn(θ).3132 Denote by the probability mass of a set C under the confidence distribution function 
 
 
 
  This ps(C) is called "support" in the CD inference and also known as "belief" in the fiducial literature.33 We have
(1) For the one-sided test K0: θ ∈ C vs. K1: θ ∈ Cc, where C is of the type of (−∞, b] or [b, ∞), one can show from the CD definition that supθ ∈ CPθ(ps(C) ≤ α) = α. Thus, ps(C) = Hn(C) is the corresponding p-value of the test.
(2) For the singleton test K0: θ = b vs. K1: θ ≠ b, P{K0: θ = b}(2 min{ps(Clo), one can show from the CD definition that ps(Cup)} ≤ α) = α. Thus, 2 min{ps(Clo), ps(Cup)} = 2 min{Hn(b), 1 − Hn(b)} is the corresponding p-value of the test. Here, Clo = (−∞, b] and Cup = [b, ∞).
See Figure 1 from Xie and Singh (2011)34 for a graphical illustration of the CD inference.
See also

Coverage probability

References
Bibliography

Fisher, R A (1956). Statistical Methods and Scientific Inference. New York: Hafner. ISBN 0-02-844740-9.
Fisher, R. A. (1955). "Statistical methods and scientific induction" J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B. 17, 69—78. (criticism of statistical theories of Jerzy Neyman and Abraham Wald from a fiducial perspective)
Hannig, J. (2009). "On generalized fiducial inference". Statistica Sinica, 19, 491–544.
Lawless, F. and Fredette, M. (2005). "Frequentist prediction intervals and predictive distributions." Biometrika. 92(3) 529–542.
Lehmann, E.L. (1993). "The Fisher, Neyman–Pearson theories of testing hypotheses: one theory or two?" Journal of the American Statistical Association 88 1242–1249.
Neyman, Jerzy (1956). "Note on an Article by Sir Ronald Fisher". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 18 (2): 288–294. . (reply to Fisher 1955, which diagnoses a fallacy of "fiducial inference")
Schweder T., Sadykova D., Rugh D. and Koski W. (2010) "Population Estimates From Aerial Photographic Surveys of Naturally and Variably Marked Bowhead Whales" '' Journal of Agricultural Biological and Environmental Statistics'' 2010 15: 1–19
Bityukov S., Krasnikov N., Nadarajah S. and Smirnova V. (2010) "Confidence distributions in statistical inference". AIP Conference Proceedings, 1305, 346-353.
Singh, K. and Xie, M. (2012). [http://projecteuclid.org/DPubS?service=UI&version;;=1.0&verb;=Display&handle;=euclid.imsc/1331731621 "CD-posterior --- combining prior and data through confidence distributions."] Contemporary Developments in Bayesian Analysis and Statistical Decision Theory: A Festschrift for William E. Strawderman. (D. Fourdrinier, et al., Eds.). IMS Collection, Volume 8, 200 -214.

"
Category:Statistical inference Category:Parametric statistics









































