


Alpha centrality




Alpha centrality

In graph theory and social network analysis, alpha centrality is a measure of centrality of nodes within a graph. It is an adaptation of eigenvector centrality with the addition that nodes are imbued with importance from external sources.
Definition
Given a graph with adjacency matrix

 
  the alpha centrality is defined as follows:



where 
 
 
 
  is the external importance given to node 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a parameter.1
Motivation
To understand alpha centrality one must first understand Eigenvector Centrality. An intuitive process to compute eigenvector centrality is to give every node a starting random positive amount of influence. Each node then splits its influence evenly and divides it amongst its outward neighbors, receiving from its inward neighbors in kind. This process repeats until everyone is giving out as much as they're taking in and the system has reached steady state. The amount of influence they have at this steady state is their eigenvector centrality. Computationally this process is called the power method. We know that this process has converged when the vector of influence changes only by a constant as follows.


 
  Where 
 
 
 
  is the amount of influence that node 
 
 
 
  carries, 
 
 
 
  is the adjacency matrix and 
 
 
 
  happens to be the principal eigenvalue (although this is not terribly important here).
Alpha centrality enhances this process by allowing nodes to have external sources of influence. The amount of influence that node 
 
 
 
  receives at every round is encoded in 
 
 
 
 . The process described above should now stop when



Where 
 
 
 
  is a constant that trades off the importance of external influence against the importance of connection. When 
 
 
 
  only the external influence matters. When 
 
 
 
  is very large then only the connectivity matters, i.e. we reduce to the eigenvector centrality case.
Rather than perform the iteration described above we can solve this system for 
 
 
 
 , obtaining the following equation:



Applications
Alpha centrality is implemented in igraph library for network analysis and visualization.2
See also

Eigenvector centrality

Notes and references
es:Centralidad ar:مركزية ألفا"
Category:Algebraic graph theory Category:Network analysis Category:Social networks




http://igraph.sourceforge.net/doc/R/alpha.centrality.html




