


Oscillator representation




Oscillator representation

In mathematics, the oscillator representation is a projective unitary representation of the symplectic group, first investigated by Irving Segal, David Shale, and André Weil. A natural extension of the representation leads to a semigroup of contraction operators, introduced as the oscillator semigroup by Roger Howe in 1988. The semigroup had previously been studied by other mathematicians and physicists, most notably Felix Berezin in the 1960s. The simplest example in one dimension is given by SU(1,1). It acts as Möbius transformations on the extended complex plane, leaving the unit circle invariant. In that case the oscillator representation is a unitary representation of a double cover of SU(1,1) and the oscillator semigroup corresponds to a representation by contraction operators of the semigroup in SL(2,C) corresponding to Möbius transformations that take the unit disk into itself. The contraction operators, determined only up to a sign, have kernels that are Gaussian functions. On an infinitesimal level the semigroup is described by a cone in the Lie algebra of SU(1,1) that can be identified with a light cone. The same framework generalizes to the symplectic group in higher dimensions, including its analogue in infinite dimensions. This article explains the theory for SU(1,1) in detail and summarizes how the theory can be extended.
Historical overview
The mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics by Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schrödinger was originally in terms of unbounded self-adjoint operators on a Hilbert space. The fundamental operators corresponding to position and momentum satisfy the Heisenberg commutation relations. Quadratic polynomials in these operators, which include the harmonic oscillator, are also closed under taking commutators. A large amount of operator theory was developed in the 1920s and 1930s to provide a rigorous foundation for quantum mechanics. Part of the theory was formulated in terms of unitary groups of operators, largely through the contributions of Hermann Weyl, Marshall Stone and John von Neumann. In turn these results in mathematical physics were subsumed within mathematical analysis, starting with the 1933 lecture notes of Norbert Wiener, who used the heat kernel for the harmonic oscillator to derive the properties of the Fourier transform. The uniqueness of the Heisenberg commutation relations, as formulated in the Stone–von Neumann theorem, was later interpreted within group representation theory, in particular the theory of induced representations initiated by George Mackey. The quadratic operators were understood in terms of a projective unitary representation of the group SU(1,1) and its Lie algebra. Irving Segal and David Shale generalized this construction to the symplectic group in finite and infinite dimensions: in physics this is often referred to as bosonic quantization. André Weil later extended the construction to p-adic Lie groups, showing how the ideas could be applied in number theory, in particular to give a group theoretic explanation of theta functions and quadratic reciprocity. Several physicists and mathematicians observed the heat kernel operators corresponding to the harmonic oscillator were associated to a complexification of SU(1,1): this was not the whole of SL(2,C), but instead a complex semigroup defined by a natural geometric condition. The representation theory of this semigroup, and its generalizations in finite and infinite dimensions, has applications both in mathematics and theoretical physics.1
Semigroups in SL(2,C)
The group G = SU(1,1) is formed of matrices



with



It is a subgroup of Gc = SL(2,C), the group of complex 2 × 2 matrices with determinant 1.
If G1 = SL(2,R) and



then



since the Möbius transformation corresponding M is the Cayley transform carrying the upper half plane onto the unit disk and the real line onto the unit circle.
The group SL(2,R) is generated as an abstract group by



and the subgroup of lower triangular matrices



with b real and a > 0. Indeed the orbit of the vector



under the subgroup generated by these matrices is easily seen to be the whole of R2 and the stabilizer of v in G1 lies in inside this subgroup.
The Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of SU(1,1) consists of matrices



with x real.
The period 2 automorphism σ of Gc



with



has fixed point subgroup G since



Similarly the same formula defines a period two automorphism σ of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of Gc, the complex matrices with trace zero. A standard basis of 
 
 
 
  over C is given by



Thus for −1 ≤ m, n ≤ 1



There is a direct sum decomposition



where 
 
 
 
  is the +1 eigenspace of σ and 
 
 
 
  the –1 eigenspace.
The matrices X in 
 
 
 
  have the form



Note that



The cone C in 
 
 
 
  is defined by two conditions. The first is that



By definition this condition is preserved under conjugation by G. Since G is connected it leaves the two components with x > 0 and x  x
The group Gc acts by Möbius transformations on the extended complex plane. The subgroup G acts as automorphisms of the unit disk D. A semigroup H of Gc, first considered by , can be defined by the geometric condition:



The semigroup can be described explicitly in terms of the cone C:2



In fact the matrix X can be conjugated by an element of G to the matrix



with



Since the Möbius transformation corresponding to exp Y sends z to e−2y z, it follows that the right hand side lies in the semigroup. Conversely if g lies in H it carries the closed unit disk onto a smaller closed disk in its interior. Conjugating by an element of G, the smaller disk can be taken to have centre 0. But then for appropriate y, the element



carries D onto itself so lies in G.
A similar argument shows that the closure of H, also a semigroup, is given by



From the above statement on conjugacy, it follows that



where



If a matrix



is in H then so too are the matrices



since the latter is obtained by taking the transpose and conjugating by the diagonal matrix with entries ±1.
Hence H also contains the matrix



which gives the inverse matrix if the original matrix lies in SU(1,1).
A further result on conjugacy follows by noting that every element of H must fix a point in D, which by conjugating by an element of G can be taken to be 0. Then the element of H has the form



with



and



The set of such lower triangular matrices forms a subsemigroup H0 of H.
Since



every matrix in H0 is conjugate to a diagonal matrix by a matrix M in H0.
Similarly every one-parameter semigroup S(t) in H fixes the same point in D so is conjugate by an element of G to a one-parameter semigroup in H0.
It follows that there is a matrix M in H0 such that



with S0(t) diagonal. Similarly there is a matrix N in H0 such that



The semigroup H0 generates the subgroup L of complex lower triangular matrices with determinant 1 (given by the above formula with a ≠ 0). Its Lie algebra consists of matrices of the form



In particular the one parameter semigroup exp tZ lies in H0 for all t > 0 if and only if



and



This follows from the criterion for H or directly from the formula



The exponential map is known not to be surjective in this case, even though it is surjective on the whole group L. This follows because the squaring operation is not surjective in H. Indeed since the square of an element fixes 0 only if the original element fixes 0, it suffices to prove this in H0. Take α with |α| \displaystyle{|\alpha +\alpha^{-1}|
If a = α2 and



with



then the matrix



has no square root in H0. For a square root would have the form



On the other hand



The closed semigroup 
 
 
 
  is maximal in SL(2,C): any larger semigroup must be the whole of SL(2,C).345
In fact if S is a semigroup properly containing 
 
 
 
  and g is in S but not 
 
 
 
  then either:

The image of the unit circle under g cuts the unit circle twice.
The image of the unit disk under g is disjoint from the unit disk. In this case either the image of the unit circle touches the unit circle or is disjoint. Applying a scaling transformation in H reduces to case (1).

In case (1) if the circles cut at right angles, pre- and post-multiplying g by elements of SU(1,1) the image of the unit circle can be taken to be the real axis with the points ±1 fixed. But then g is the Cayley transform and its square k is the Möbius transformation z−1. Since k H k = H−1, S contains a neighbourhood of the identity and hence is the whole of SL(2,C). If the circles do not intersect at right angles, pre- and post-multiplying g by elements of SU(1,1) the points of intersection may be moved close together with 0 in the crescent formed by the obtuse angles and outside the second circle. Scaling transformations in H will transform the second circle into a touching interior circle. In between the angle will have been a right angle, for which the previous argument applies.
gives another way to prove maximality by first showing that there is a g in S sending D onto the disk Dc, |z| > 1. In fact if x is in S but not in 
 
 
 
 , then there is a small disk D1 in D such that x D1 lies in Dc. Then for some h in H, D1 = hD. Similarly yxD1 = Dc for some y in H. So g = yxh lies in S and sends D onto Dc. It follows that g2 fixes the unit disc D so lies in SU(1,1). So g−1 lies in S. If t lies in H then t g D contains g D. Hence g−1t−1 g lies in 
 
 
 
 . So t−1 lies in S and therefore S contains an open neighbourhood of 1. Hence S = SL(2,C).
Exactly the same argument works for Möbius transformations on Rn and the open semigroup taking the closed unit sphere ||x|| ≤ 1 into the open unit sphere ||x|| See:





The semigroup H and its closure have a further piece of structure inherited from G, namely inversion on G extends to an antiautomorphism of H and its closure, which fixes the elements in exp C and its closure. For



the antiautomorphism is given by



and extends to an antiautomorphism of SL(2,C).
Similarly the antiautomorphism



leaves G1 invariant and fixes the elements in exp C1 and its closure, so it has analogous properties for the semigroup in G1.
Commutation relations of Heisenberg and Weyl
Let 
 
 
 
  be the space of Schwartz functions on R. It is dense in the Hilbert space L2(R) of square-integrable functions on R. Following the terminology of quantum mechanics, the "momentum" operator P and "position" operator Q are defined on 
 
 
 
  by



There operators satisfy the Heisenberg commutation relation



Formally both P and Q are formally self-adjoint for the inner product on 
 
 
 
  inherited from L2(R).
Two one parameter unitary groups U(s) and V(t) can be defined on 
 
 
 
  and L2(R) by



By definition



for f in 
 
 
 
 , so that formally



It is immediate from the definition that the one parameter groups U and V satisfy the Weyl commutation relation



The realization of U and V on L2(R) is called the Schrödinger representation.
Fourier transform
The Fourier transform is defined on 
 
 
 
  by6



It defines a continuous map of 
 
 
 
  into itself for its natural topology.
Contour integration shows that the function



is its own Fourier transform.
On the other hand, integrating by parts or differentiating under the integral,



It follows that the operator on 
 
 
 
  defined by



commutes with both Q (and P). On the other hand



and since



lies in 
 
 
 
 , it follows that



and hence



This implies the Fourier inversion formula:



and shows that the Fourier transform is an isomorphism of 
 
 
 
  onto itself.
By Fubini's theorem



When combined with the inversion formula this implies that the Fourier transform preserves the inner product



so defines an isometry of 
 
 
 
  onto itself.
By density it extends to a unitary operator on L2(R), as asserted by Plancherel's theorem.
Stone–von Neumann theorem
Now suppose that U(s) and V(t) are one parameter unitary groups on a Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  satisfying the Weyl commutation relations



For F(s, t) in 
 
 
 
 , let78



and define a bounded operator on 
 
 
 
  by



Then



where



The operators T(F) have an important non-degeneracy property: the linear span of all vectors T(F)ξ is dense in 
 
 
 
 .
Indeed if f ds and g dt define probability measures with compact support, then the smeared operators



satisfy



and converge in the strong operator topology to the identity operator if the supports of the measures decrease to 0.
Since U(f)V(g) has the form T(F), non-degeneracy follows.
When 
 
 
 
  is the Schrödinger representation on L2(R), the operator T(F) is given by



It follows from this formula that U and V jointly act irreducibly on the Schrödinger representation since this is true for the operators given by kernels that are Schwartz functions.
Conversely given a representation of the Weyl communtation relations on 
 
 
 
 , it gives rise to a non-degenerate representation of the *-algebra of kernel operators. But all such representations are on an orthogonal direct sum of copies of L2(R) with the action on each copy as above. This is a straightforward generalisation of the elementary fact that the representations of the N × N matrices are on direct sums of the standard representation on CN. The proof using matrix units works equally well in infinite dimensions.
The one parameter unitary groups U and V leave each component invariant, inducing the standard action on the Schrödinger representation.
In particular this implies the Stone–von Neumann theorem: the Schrödinger representation is the unique irreducible representation of the Weyl commutation relations on a Hilbert space.
Oscillator representation of SL(2,R)
Given U and V satisfying the Weyl commutation relations, define



Then



so that W defines a projective unitary representation of R2 with cocycle given by



where



and B is the symplectic form on R2 given by



By the Stone–von Neumann theorem, there is a unique irreducible representation corresponding to this cocycle.
It follows that if g is an automorphism of R2 preserving the form B, i.e. an element of SL(2,R), then there is a unitary π(g) on L2(R) satisfying the covariance relation



By Schur's lemma the unitary π(g) is unique up to multiplication by a scalar ζ with |ζ| = 1, so that π defines a projective unitary representation of SL(2,R).
This can be established directly using only the irreducibility of the Schrödinger representation. Irreducibility was a direct consequence of the fact the operators



with K a Schwartz function correspond exactly to operators given by kernels with Schwartz functions.
These are dense in the space of Hilbert–Schmidt operators, which, since it contains the finite rank operators, acts irreducibly.
The existence of π can be proved using only the irreducibility of the Schrödinger representation. The operators are unique up to a sign with



so that the 2-cocycle for the projective representation of SL(2,R) takes values ±1.
In fact the group SL(2,R) is generated by matrices of the form



and it can be verified directly that the operators



satisfy the covariance relations above.
The generators gi satisfy the following Bruhat relations, which uniquely specify the group SL(2,R):9



It can be verified by direct calculation that these relations are satisfied up to a sign by the corresponding operators, which establishes that the cocycle takes values ±1.
There is a more conceptual explanation using an explicit construction of the metaplectic group as a double cover of SL(2,R).10
In fact SL(2,R) acts by Möbius transformations on the upper half plane H.
Moreover if



then



The function



satisfies the 1-cocycle relation



For each g, the function m(g,z) is non-vanishing on H and therefore has two possible holomorphic square roots.
The metaplectic group is defined as the group



By definition it is a double cover of SL(2,R) and is connected.
Multiplication is given by



where



Thus for an element g of the metaplectic group there is a uniquely determined function m(g,z)1/2 satisfying the 1-cocycle relation.
If 
 
 
 
 , then



lies in L2 and is called a coherent state.
These functions lie in a single orbit of SL(2,R) generated by



since for g in SL(2,R)



More specifically if g lies in Mp(2,R) then



Indeed if this holds for g and h, it also holds for their product. On the other hand the formula is easily checked if gt has the form gi and these are generators.
This defines an ordinary unitary representation of the metaplectic group.
The element (1,–1) acts as multiplication by –1 on L2(R), from which it follows that the cocycle on SL(2,R) takes only values ±1.
Maslov index
As explained in , the 2-cocycle on SL(2,R) associated with the metaplectic representation, taking values ±1, is determined by the Maslov index.
Given three non-zero vectors u, v, w in the plane, their Maslov index

 
  is defined as the signature of the quadratic form on R3 defined by



Properties of the Maslov index:

it depends on the one-dimensional subpaces spanned by the vectors
it is invariant under SL(2,R)
it is alternating in its arguments, i.e. its sign changes if two of the arguments are interchanged
it vanishes if two of the subspaces coincide
it takes the values –1, 0 and +1: if u and v satisfy B(u,v) = 1 and w = au + bv, then the Maslov index is zero is if ab = 0 and is otherwise equal to minus the sign of ab




Picking a non-zero vector u0, it follows that the function



defines a 2-cocycle on SL(2,R) with values in the eighth roots of unity.
A modification of the 2-cocycle can be used to define a 2-cocycle with values in ±1 connected with the metaplectic cocycle.11
In fact given non-zero vectors u, v in the plane, define f(u,v) to be

i times the sign of B(u,v) if u and v are not proportional
the sign of λ if u = λv.

If



then



The representatives π(g) in the metaplectic representation can be chosen so that



where the 2-cocycle ω is given by



with



Holomorphic Fock space
Holomorphic Fock space (also known as the Segal–Bargmann space) is defined to be the vector space 
 
 
 
  of holomorphic functions f(z) on C with



finite. It has inner product



 
  is a Hilbert space with orthonormal basis



for n ≥ 0. Moreover the power series expansion of a holomorphic function in 
 
 
 
  gives its expansion with respect to this basis.12
Thus for z in C



so that evaluation at z is gives a continuous linear functional on 
 
 
 
 .
In fact



where13



Thus in particular 
 
 
 
  is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
For f in 
 
 
 
  and z in C define



Then



so this gives a unitary representation of the Weyl commutation relations.14 Now



It follows that the representation 
 
 
 
  is irreducible.
Indeed any function orthogonal to all the Ea must vanish, so that their linear span is dense in 
 
 
 
 .
If P is an orthogonal projection commuting with W(z), let f = P E0. Then



The only holomorphic function satisfying this condition is the constant function. So



with λ = 0 or 1. Since E0 is cyclic, it follows that P = 0 or I.
By the Stone–von Neumann theorem there is a unitary operator 
 
 
 
  from L2(R) onto 
 
 
 
 , unique up to multiplication by a scalar, intertwining the two representations of the Weyl commutation relations. By Schur's lemma and the Gelfand–Naimark construction, the matrix coefficient of any vector determines the vector up to a scalar multiple. Since the matrix coefficients of F = E0 and f = H0 are equal, it follows that the unitary 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined by the properties



and



Hence for f in L2(R)



so that



where



The operator 
 
 
 
  is called the Segal–Bargmann transform15 and B is called the Bargmann kernel.16
The adjoint of 
 
 
 
  is given by the formula:



Fock model
The action of SU(1,1) on holomorphic Fock space was described by  and .
The metaplectic double cover of SU(1,1) can be constructed explicitly as pairs (g, γ) with



and



If g = g1g2, then



using the power series expansion of (1 + z)1/2 for |z| \displaystyle{\pi(g,\gamma) W_{\mathcal F}(z) \pi(g,\gamma)^*= W_{\mathcal F}(g\cdot z),}
where



Since 
 
 
 
  is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, any bounded operator T on it corresponds to a kernel given by a power series of its two arguments. In fact if



and F in 
 
 
 
 , then



The covariance relations and analyticity of the kernel imply that for S = π(g, γ),



for some constant C. Direct calculation shows that



leads to an ordinary representation of the double cover.17
Coherent states can again be defined as the orbit of E0 under the metaplectic group.
For w complex, set



Then Fw lies in 
 
 
 
  if and only if |w| 0 = 1 = E0.
Moreover



where



Similarly the functions zFw lie in 
 
 
 
  and form an orbit of the metaplectic group:



Since (Fw, E0) = 1, the matrix coefficient of the function E0 = 1 is given by18



Disk model
The projective representation of SL(2,R) on L2(R) or on 
 
 
 
  break up as a direct sum of two irreducible representations, corresponding to even and odd functions of x or z. The two representations can be realized on Hilbert spaces of holomorphic functions on the unit disk; or, using the Cayley transform, on the upper half plane.1920
The even functions correspond to holomorphic functions F+ for which



is finite; and the odd functions to holomorphic functions F– for which



is finite. The polarized forms of these expressions define the inner products.
The action of the metaplectic group is given by



if g corresponds to the matrix



This gives the explicit formula



Irreducibility of these representations is established in a standard way.21 Each representation breaks up as a direct sum of one dimensional eigenspaces of the rotation group each of which is generated by a C∞ vector for the whole group. It follows that any closed invariant subspace is generated by the algebraic direct sum of eigenspaces it contains and that this sum is invariant under the infinitesimal action of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand that action is irreducible.
The isomorphism with even and odd functions in 
 
 
 
  can be proved using the Gelfand–Naimark construction since the matrix coefficients associated to 1 and z in the corresponding representations are proportional.  gave another method starting from the maps






from the even and odd parts to functions on the unit disk. These maps intertwine the actions of the metaplectic group given above and send zn to a multiple of wn. Stipulating that U± should be unitary determines the inner products on functions on the disk, which can expressed in the form above.22
Although in these representations the operator L0 has positive spectrum—the feature that distinguishes the holomorphic discrete series representations of SU(1,1)—the representations do not lie in the discrete series of the metaplectic group. Indeed  noted that the matrix coefficients are not square integrable, although their third power is.23
Harmonic oscillator and Hermite functions
Let 
 
 
 
  be the space of functions in L2(R) of the form



with p a polynomial.
The operators



act on 
 
 
 
  and satisfy



X is called the annihilation operator and Y the creation operator.
So



Then the functions



satisfy



Indeed it follows by induction that



so that



since XF0 = 0.
Then



since this is known for n = 0 and the commutation relation above yields



The nth Hermite function is defined by



pn is called the nth Hermite polynomial.
They are thus eigenfunctions of the harmonic oscillator:



Let



Thus



The operators P, Q or equivalently A, A* act irreducibly on 
 
 
 
  by a standard argument.2425
Indeed under the unitary isomorphism with holomorphic Fock space 
 
 
 
  can be identified with C[z], the space of polynomials in z, with



If a subspace invariant under A and A* contains a non-zero polynomial p(z), then, applying a power of A*, it contains a non-zero constant; applying then a power of A, it contains all zn.
Under the isomorphism Fn is sent to a multiple of zn and the operator D is given by



Let



so that



In the terminology of physics A, A* give a single boson and L0 is the energy operator. It is diagonalizable with eigenvalues 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2, ...., each of multiplicity one. Such a representation is called a positive energy representation.
Moreover



so that the Lie bracket with L0 defines a derivation of the Lie algebra spanned by A, A* and I. Adjoining L0 gives the semidirect product. The infinitesimal version of the Stone–von Neumann theorem states that the above representation on C[z] is the unique irreducible positive energy representation of this Lie algebra with L0 = A*A. For A lowers energy and A* raises energy. So any lowest energy vector v is annihilated by A and the module is exhausted by the powers of A* applied to v. It is thus a non-zero quotient of C[z] and hence can be identified with it by irreducibility.
Let



so that



These operators satisfy:



and act by derivations on the Lie algebra spanned by A, A* and I.
They are the infinitesimal operators corresponding to the metaplectic representation of SU(1,1).
The functions Fn are defined by



It follows that the Hermite functions are the orthonormal basis obtained by applying the Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization process to the basis xn exp -x2/2 of 
 
 
 
 .
The completeness of the Hermite functions follows from the fact that the Bargmann transform is unitary and carries the orthonormal basis en(z) of holomorphic Fock space onto the Hn(x).
The heat operator for the harmonic oscillator is the operator on L2(R) defined as the diagonal operator



It corresponds to the heat kernel given by Mehler's formula:



This follows from the formula



To prove this formula note that if s = σ2, then by Taylor's formula



Thus Fσ,x lies in holomorphic Fock space and



an inner product that can be computed directly.
establishes Mehler's formula directly and uses a classical argument to prove that



tends to f in L2(R) as t decreases to 0. This shows the completeness of the Hermite functions and also, since



can be used to derive the properties of the Fourier transform.
There are other elementary methods for proving the completeness of the Hermite functions, for example using Fourier series.26
Sobolev spaces
Let



on 
 
 
 
  and let



be the harmonic oscillator.
The associated Sobolev spaces Hs, sometimes called Hermite-Sobolev spaces, are defined to
be the completions of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the norms



where



is the expansion of f in Hermite functions.27
Thus



The spaces are Hilbert spaces.
Moreover Hs and H–s are in duality under the pairing



For s ≥ 0,



for some positive constant Cs.
Indeed such an inequality can be checked for creation and annihilation operators acting on Hermite functions Hn and this implies the general inequality.28
It follows for arbitrary s by duality.
Consequently for a quadratic polynomial R in P and Q



The Sobolev inequality holds for f in Hs with s > 1/2:



for any k ≥ 0.
Indeed the result for general k follows from the case k = 0 applied to Qkf.
For k = 0 the Fourier inversion formula



implies



If s t in Hs is compact (Rellich's lemma).
It follows from Sobolev's inequality that the intersection of the spaces Hs is 
 
 
 
 . Functions in 
 
 
 
  are characterized by the rapid decay of their Hermite coefficients an.
Standard arguments show that each Sobolev space is invariant under the operators W(z) and the metaplectic group.29
Indeed it is enough to check invariance when g is sufficiently close to the identity.
In that case



with D + A an isomorphism from Ht+2 to Ht.
It follows that



If f is in Hs, then



where the derivatives lie in Hs–½.
Similarly the partial derivatives of total degree k of U(s)V(t)f lie in Sobolev spaces of order s–k/2.
Consequently a monomial in P and Q of order 2k applied to f lies in Hs–k and can be expressed as a linear combination of partial derivatives of U(s)V(t)f of degree ≤ 2k evaluated at 0.
Smooth vectors
The smooth vectors for the Weyl commutation relations are those u in L2(R) such that the map



is smooth. By the uniform boundedness theorem, this is equivalent to the requirement that each matrix coefficient (W(z)u,v) be smooth.
A vector is smooth if and only it lies in 
 
 
 
 .30 Sufficiency is clear. For necessity, smoothness implies that the partial derivatives of W(z)u lie in L2(R) and hence also Dk u for all positive k. Hence u lies in the intersection of the Hk, so in 
 
 
 
 .
It follows that smooth vectors are also smooth for the metaplectic group.
Moreover a vector is in 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is a smooth vector for the rotation subgroup of SU(1,1).
Analytic vectors
If Π(t) is a one parameter unitary group and for f in 
 
 




then the vectors Π(f)ξ form a dense set of smooth vectors for Π.
In fact taking



the vectors v = Π(fε)ξ converge to ξ as ε decreases to 0 and



is an analytic function of t that extends to an entire function on C.
The vector is called an entire vector for Π.
The wave operator associated to the harmonic oscillator is defined by



The operator is diagonal with the Hermite functions Hn as eigenfunctions:



Since it commutes with D, it preserves the Sobolev spaces.
The analytic vectors constructed above can be rewritten in terms of the Hermite semigroup as



The fact that v is an entire vector for Π is equivalent to the summability condition



for all r > 0.
Any such vector is also an entire vector for U(s)V(t), that is the map



defined on R2 extends to an analytic map on C2.
This reduces to the power series estimate



So these form a dense set of entire vectors for U(s)V(t); this can also be checked directly using Mehler's formula.
The spaces of smooth and entire vectors for U(s)V(t) are each by definition invariant under the action of the metaplectic group as well as the Hermite semigroup.
Let



be the analytic continuation of the operators W(x,y) from R2 to C2 such that



Then W leaves the space of entire vectors invariant and satisfies



Moreover for g in SL(2,R)



using the natural action of SL(2,R) on C2.
Formally



Oscillator semigroup
There is a natural double cover of the Olshanski semigroup H, and its closure 
 
 
 
  that extends the double cover of SU(1,1) corresponding to the metaplectic group. It is given by pairs (g, γ) where g is an element of H or its closure



and γ is a square root of a.
Such a choice determines a unique branch of



for |z|  \displaystyle{\pi(g) W(u) =W(g\cdot u) \pi(g), \,\,\, \pi(g)^*W(u) =W(g^{-1}\cdot u)\pi(g)^*}
for u in C2.
An element g of the complexification SL(2,C) is said to implementable if there is a bounded operator T such that it and its adjoint leave the space of entire vectors for W invariant, both have dense images and satisfy the covariance relations



for u in C2. The implementing operator T is uniquely determined up to multiplication by a non-zero scalar.
The implementable elements form a semigroup, containing SL(2,R). Since the representation has positive energy, the bounded compact self-adjoint operators



for t > 0 implement the group elements in exp C1.
It follows that all elements of the Olshanski semigroup and its closure are implemented.
Maximality of the Olshanki semigroup implies that no other elements of SL(2,C) are implemented. Indeed otherwise every element of SL(2,C) would be implemented by a bounded operator, which would condradict the non-invertibility of the operators S0(t) for t > 0.
In the Schrödinger representation the operators S0(t) for t > 0 are given by Mehler's formula. They are contraction operators, positive and in every Schatten class. Moreover they leave invariant each of the Sobolev spaces. The same formula is true for 
 
 
 
  by analytic continuation.
It can be seen directly in the Fock model that the implementing operators can be chosen so that they define an ordinary representation of the double cover of H constructed above. The corresponding semigroup of contraction operators is called the oscillator semigroup. The extended oscillator semigroup is obtained by taking the semidirect product with the operators W(u). These operators lie in every Schatten class and leave invariant the Sobolev spaces and the space of entire vectors for W.
The decomposition



corresponds at the operator level to the polar decomposition of bounded operators.
Moreover since any matrix in H is conjugate to a diagonal matrix by elements in H or H−1, every operator in the oscillator semigroup is quasi-similar to an operator S0(t) with 
 
 
 
 . In particular it has the same spectrum consisting of simple eigenvalues.
In the Fock model, if the element g of the Olshanki semigroup H corresponds to the matrix



the corresponding operator is given by



where



and γ is a square root of a. Operators π(g,γ) for g in the semigroup H are exactly those that are Hilbert–Schmidt operators and correspond to kernels of the form



for which the complex symmetric matrix



has operator norm strictly less than one.
Operators in the extended oscillator semigroup are given by similar expressions with additional linear terms in z and w appearing in the exponential.
In the disk model for the two irreducible components of the metaplectic representation, the corresponding operators are given by



It is also possible to give an explicit formula for the contraction operators corresponding to g in H in the Schrödinger representation, It was by this formula that  introduced the oscillator semigroup as an explicit family of operators on L2(R).31
In fact consider the Siegel upper half plane consisting of symmetric complex 2x2 matrices with positive definite real part:



and define the kernel



with corresponding operator



for f in L2(R).
Then direct computation gives



where



Moreover



where



By Mehler's formula for 
 
 




with



The oscillator semigroup is obtained by taking only matrices with B ≠ 0. From the above, this condition is closed under composition.
A normalized operator can be defined by



The choice of a square root determines a double cover.
In this case SZ corresponds to the element



of the Olshankii semigroup H.
Moreover SZ is a strict contraction:



It follows also that



Weyl calculus
For a function a(x,y) on R2 = C, let



So



where



Defining in general



the product of two such operators is given by the formula



where the twisted convolution or Moyal product is given by



The smoothing operators correspond to W(F) or ψ(a) with F or a Schwartz functions on R2. The corresponding operators T have kernels that are Schwartz functions. They carry each Sobolev space into the Schwartz functions. Moreover every bounded operator on L2 (R) having this property has this form.
For the operators ψ(a) the Moyal product translates into the Weyl symbolic calculus. Indeed if the Fourier transforms of a and b have compact support than



where



This follows because in this case b must extend to an entire function on C2 by the Paley-Wiener theorem.
This calculus can be extended to a broad class of symbols, but the simplest corresponds to convolution by a class of functions or distributions that all have the form T + S where T is a distribution of compact with singular support concentrated at 0 and where S is a Schwartz function. This class contains the operators P, Q as well as D1/2 and D−1/2 where D is the harmonic oscillator.
The mth order symbols Sm are given by smooth functions a satisfying



for all α and Ψm consists of all operators ψ(a) for such a.
If a is in Sm and χ is a smooth function of compact support equal to 1 near 0, then



with T and S as above.
These operators preserve the Schwartz functions and satisfy;



The operators P and Q lie in Ψ1 and D lies in Ψ2.
Properties:

A zeroth order symbol defines a bounded operator on L2(R).


D−1 lies in Ψ−2


If R = R* is smoothing, then D + R has a complete set of eigenvectors fn in 
 
 
 
  with (D + R) fn = λn fn and λn tends to ≈ as n tends to ≈.


D1/2 lies in Ψ1 and hence D−1/2 lies in Ψ−1, since D−1/2 = D1/2 ·D−1


Ψ−1 consists of compact operators, Ψ−s consists of trace-class operators for s > 1 and Ψk carries Hm into Hm–k.






The proof of boundedness of  is particularly simple: if



then



where the bracketed operator has norm less than 
 
 
 
 . So if F is supported in |z| ≤ R, then



The property of D−1 is proved by taking



with



Then R = I – DS lies in Ψ−1, so that



lies in Ψ−2 and T = DA – I is smoothing. Hence



lies in Ψ−2 since D−1 T is smoothing.
The property for D1/2 is established similarly by constructing B in Ψ1/2 with real symbol such that D – B4 is a smoothing operator. Using the holomorphic functional calculus it can be checked that D1/2 – B2 is a smoothing operator.
The boundedness result above was used by  to establish the more general inequality of Alberto Calderón and Remi Vaillancourt for pseudodifferential operators. An alternative proof that applies more generally to Fourier integral operators was given by . He showed that such operators can be expressed as integrals over the oscillator semigroup and then estimated using the Cotlar-Stein lemma.32
Applications and generalizations
Theory for finite abelian groups
noted that the formalism of the Stone–von Neumann theorem and the oscillator representation of the symplectic group extends from the real numbers R to any locally compact abelian group. A particularly simple example is provided by finite abelian groups, where the proofs are either elementary or simplifications of the proofs for R.3334
Let A be a finite abelian group, written additively, and let Q be a non-degenerate quadratic form on A with values in T. Thus



is a symmetric bilinear form on A that is non-degenerate, so permits an identification between A and its dual group A* = Hom (A, T).
Let



the space of complex-valued functions on A with inner product



Define operators on V by



for x, y in A. Then U(x) and V(y) are unitary representations of A on V satisfying the commutation relations



This action is irreducible and is the unique such irreducible representation of these relations.
Let G = A x A and for z = (x, y) in G set



Then



where



a non-degenerate alternating bilinear form on G. The uniqueness result above implies that if W'(z) is another family of unitaries giving a projective reprentation of G such that



then there is a unitary U, unique up to a phase, such that



for some λ(z) in T.
In particular if g is an automorphism of G preserving B, then there is an essentially unique unitary π(g) such that



The group of all such automorphisms is called the symplectic group for B and π gives a projective representation of G on V.
The group SL(2.Z) naturally acts on G = A x A by symplectic automorphisms. It is generated by the matrices



If Z = –I, then Z is central and



These automorphisms of G are implemented on V by the following operators:


 
  (the Fourier transform for A),



and



It follows that



where μ lies in T. Direct calculation shows that μ is given by the Gauss sum



Transformation laws for theta functions
The metaplectic group was defined as the group



The coherent state



defines a holomorphic map of H into L2(R) satisfying



This is in fact a holomorphic map into each Sobolev space Hk and hence also H≈ = 
 
 
 
 .
On the other hand, in H–≈ = 
 
 
 
  (in fact in H–1) there is a finite-dimensional space of distributions invariant under SL(2,Z) and isomorphic to the N-dimensional oscillator representation on 
 
 
 
  where A = Z/NZ.
In fact let m > 0 and set N = 2m. Let



The operators U(x), V(y) with x and y in M all commute and have a finite-dimensional subspace of fixed vectors formed by the distributions



with b in M1, where



The sum defining Ψb converges in H–1 ⊂ 
 
 
 
  and depends only on the class of b in M1/M. On the other hand the operators U(x) and V(y) with 'x, y in M1 commute with all the corresponding operators for M. So M1 leaves the subspace V0 spanned by the Ψb invariant. Hence the group A = M1 acts on V0. This action can immediately be identified with the action on V for the N-dimensional oscillator representation associated with A, since



Since the operators π(R) and π(S) normalise the two sets of operators U and V corresponding to M and M1, it follows that they leave V0 invariant and on V0 must be constant multiples of the operators associated with the oscillator representation of A. In fact they coincide. From R this is immediate from the definitions, which show that



For S it follows from the Poisson summation formula and the commutation properties with the operators U)x) and V(y). The Poisson summation is proved classically as follows.35
For a > 0 and f in 
 
 
 
  let



F is a smooth function on R with period a:



The theory of Fourier series shows that



with the sum absolutely convergent and the Fourier coefficients given by



Hence



the usual Poisson summation formula.
This formula shows that S acts as follows



and so agrees exactly with formula for the oscillator representation on A.
Identifying A with Z/2mZ, with



assigned to an integer n modulo 2m, the theta functions can be defined directly as matrix coefficients:See:











For τ in H and z in C set



so that |q| \Theta_{n,m} (\tau,z) = \sum\nolimits_{k\in \frac{n}{2m} + \mathbf{Z}} q^{mk^2} u^{2mk}.
By definition they define holomorphic functions on H × C. The covariance properties of the function fτ and the distribution Ψb lead immediately to the following transformation laws:












Derivation of law of quadratic reciprocity
Because the operators π(S), π (R) and π(J) on L2(R) restrict to the corresponding operators on V0 for any choice of m, signs of cocycles can be determined by taking m = 1. In this case the representation is 2-dimensional and the relation



on L2(R) can be checked directly on V0.
But in this case



The relation can also be checked directly by applying both sides to the ground state exp - x2/2.
Consequently it follows that for m ≥ 1 the Gauss sum can be evaluated:36



For ''m '' odd, define



If m is odd, then, splitting the previous sum up into two parts, it follows that G(1,m) equals m1/2 if m is congruent to 1 mod 4 and equals i m1/2 otherwise. If p is an odd prime and c is not divisible by p, this implies



where 
 
 
 
  is the Legendre symbol equal to 1 if c is a square mod p and –1 otherwise. Moreover if p and q are distinct odd primes, then



From the formula for G(1,p) and this relation, the law of quadratic reciprocity follows:



Theory in higher dimensions
The theory of the oscillator representation can be extended from R to Rn with the group SL(2,R) replaced by the symplectic group Sp(2n,R). The results can be proved either by straightforward generalisations from the one-dimensional case as in  or by using the fact that the n-dimensional case is a tensor product of n one-dimensional cases, reflecting the decomposition:



Let 
 
 
 
  be the space of Schwartz functions on Rn, a dense subspace of L2(Rn). For s, t in Rn, define U(s) and V(t) on 
 
 
 
  and L2(R) by



From the definition U and V satisfy the Weyl commutation relation



As before this is called the Schrödinger representation.
The Fourier transform is defined on 
 
 
 
  by



The Fourier inversion formula



shows that the Fourier transform is an isomorphism of 
 
 
 
  onto itself extending to a unitary mapping of L2(Rn) onto itself (Plancherel's theorem).
The Stone–von Neumann theorem asserts that the Schrödinger representation is irreducible and is the unique irreducible representation of the commutation relations: any other representation is a direct sum of copies of this representation.
If U and V satisfying the Weyl commutation relations, define



Then



so that W defines a projective unitary representation of R2n with cocycle given by



where



and B is the symplectic form on R2n given by



The symplectic group Sp (2n,R) is defined to be group of automorphisms g of R2n preserving the form B. It follows from the Stone–von Neumann theorem that for each such g there is a unitary π(g) on L2(R) satisfying the covariance relation



By Schur's lemma the unitary π(g) is unique up to multiplication by a scalar ζ with |ζ| = 1, so that π defines a projective unitary representation of Sp(n). Representatives can be chosen for π(g), unique up to a sign, which show that the 2-cocycle for the projective representation of Sp(2n,R) takes values ±1. In fact elements of the group Sp(n,R) are given by 2n × 2n real matrices g satisfying



where



Sp(2n,R) is generated by matrices of the form



and the operators



satisfy the covariance relations above. This gives an oridnary unitary representation of the metaplectic group, a double cover of Sp(2n,R). Indeed Sp(n,R) acts by Möbius transformations on the generalised Siegel upper half plane Hn consisting of symmetric complex n × n matrices Z with strictly imaginary part by



if



The function



satisfies the 1-cocycle relation



The metaplectic group Mp(2n,R) is defined as the group



and is a connected double covering group of Sp(2n,R).
If 
 
 
 
 , then it defines a coherent state



in L2, lying in a single orbit of Sp(2n) generated by



If g lies in Mp(2n,R) then



defines an ordinary unitary representation of the metaplectic group, from which it follows that the cocycle on Sp(2n,R) takes only values ±1.
Holomorphic Fock space is the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  of holomorphic functions f(z) on Cn with finite norm



inner product



and orthonormal basis



for α a multinomial. For f in 
 
 
 
  and z in Cn, the operators



define an irreducible unitary representation of the Weyl commutation relations. By the Stone–von Neumann theorem there is a unitary operator 
 
 
 
  from L2(Rn) onto 
 
 
 
  intertwining the two representations. It is given by the Bargmann transform



where



Its adjoint 
 
 
 
  is given by the formula:



Sobolev spaces, smooth and analytic vectors can be defined as in the one-dimensional case using the sum of n copies of the harmonic oscillator



The Weyl calculus similarly extends to the n-dimensional case.
The complexification Sp(2n,C) of the symplectic group is defined by the same relation, but allowing the matrices A, B, C and D to be complex. The subsemigroup of group elements that take the Siegel upper half plane into itself has a natural double cover. The representations of Mp(2n,R) on L2(Rn) and 
 
 
 
  extend naturally to a representation of this semigroup by contraction operators defined by kernels, which generalise the one-dimensional case (taking determinants where necessary). The action of Mp(2n,R) on coherent states applies equally well to operators in this larger semigroup.37
As in the 1-dimensional case, where the group SL(2,R) has a counterpart SU(1,1) threough the Cayley transform with the upper half plane replaced by the unit disc, the symplectic group has a complex counterpart. Indeed if C is the unitary matrix



then C Sp(2n) C−1 is the group of all matrices



such that



or equivalently



where



The Siegel generalized disk Dn is defined as the set of complex symmetric n x n matrices W with operator norm less than 1.
It consist precisely of Cayley transforms of points Z in the Siegel generalized upper half plane:



Elements g act on Dn



and, as in the one dimensional case this action is transitive. The stabilizer subgroup of 0 consists of matrices with A unitary and B = 0.
For W in Dn the metaplectic coherent states in holomorphic Fock space are defined by



The inner product of two such states is given by



Moreover the metaplectic representation π satisfies



The closed linear span of these states gives the even part of holomorphic Fock space 
 
 
 
 . The embedding of Sp(2n) in Sp(2(n+1)) and the compatible identification



lead to an action on the whole of 
 
 
 
 . It can be verified directly that it is compatible with the action of the operators W(z).38
Since the complex semigroup has as Shilov boundary the symplectic group, the fact that this representation has a well-defined contractive extension to the semigroup follows from the maximum modulus principle and the fact that the semigroup operators are closed under adjoints. Indeed it suffices to check, for two such operators S, T and vectors vi proportional to metaplectic coherent states, that



which follows because the sum depends holomorphically on S and T, which are unitary on the boundary.
Index theorems for Toeplitz operators
Let S denote the unit sphere in Cn and define the Hardy space H2(S) be the closure in L2(S) of the restriction of polynomials in the coordinates z1, ..., zn. Let P be the projection onto Hardy space. It is known that if m(f) denotes multiplication by a continuous function f on S, then the commutator [P,m(f)] is compact. Consequently defining the Toeplitz operator by



on Hardy space, it follows that T(fg) – T(f)T(g) is compact for continuous f and g. The same holds if f and g are matrix-valued functions (so that the corresponding Toeplitz operators are matrices of operators on H2(S)). In particular if f is a function on S taking values in invertible matrices, then



are compact and hence T(f) is a Fredholm operator with an index defined as



The index has been computed using the methods of K-theory by  and coincides up to a sign with the degree of f as a continuous mapping from S into the general linear group.
gave an analytic way to establish this index theorem, simplied later by Howe. Their proof relies on the fact if f is smooth then the index is given by the formula of McKean and Singer:39


 
   noticed that there was a natural unitary isomorphism between H2(S) and L2(Rn) carrying the Toeplitz operators



onto the operators



These are examples of zeroth order operators constructed within the Weyl calculus. The traces in the McKean-Singer formula can be computed directly using the Weyl calculus, leading to another proof of the index theorem.See:



, Chapter XIX This method of proving index theorems was generalised by Alain Connes within the framework of cyclic cohomology.40

Theory in infinite dimensions
The theory of the oscillator representation in infinite dimensions is due to Irving Segal and David Shale.See:





 Graeme Segal used it to give a mathematically rigorous construction of projective representations of loop groups and the group of diffeomorphisms of the circle. At an infinitesimal level the construction of the representations of the Lie algebras, in this case the affine Kac–Moody algebra and the Virasoro algebra, was already known to physicists, through dual resonance theory and later string theory. Only the simplest case will be considered here, involving the loop group LU(1) of smooth maps of the circle into U(1) = T. The oscillator semigroup, developed independently by Neretin and Segal, allows contraction operators to be defined for the semigroup of univalent holomorphic maps of the unit disc into itself, extending the unitary operators corresponding to diffeomorphisms of the circle. When applied to the subgroup SU(1,1) of the diffeomorphism group, this gives a generalization of the oscillator representation on L2(R) and its extension to the Olshanskii semigroup.

The representation of commutation on Fock space is generalized to infinite dimensions by replacing Cn (or its dual space) by an arbitrary complex Hilbert space H. The symmetric group Sk acts on H⊗k. Sk(H) is defined to be the fixed point subspace of Sk and the symmetric algebra is the algebraic direct sum



It has a natural inner product inherited from H⊗k:



Taking the components Sk(H) to be mutually orthogonal, the symmetric Fock space S(H) is defined to be the Hilbert space completion of this direct sum.
For ξ in H define the coherent state eξ by



It follows that their linear span is dense in S(H), that the coherent states corresponding to n distinct vectors are linearly independent and that



When H is finite-dimensional, S(H) can naturally be identified with holomorphic Fock space for H*, since in the standard way Sk(H) are just homogeneous polynomials of degree k on H* and the inner products match up. Moreover S(H) has functorial properties. Most importantly



A similar result hold for finite orthogonal direct sums and extends to infinite orthogonal direct sums, using von Neumman's definition of the infinite tensor product with 1 the reference unit vector in S0(Hi). Any contraction operator between Hilbert spaces induces a contraction operator between the corresponding symmetric Fock spaces in a functorial way.
A unitary operator on S(H) is uniquely determined by it values on coherent states. Moreover for any assignment vξ such that



there is a unique unitary operator U on S(H) such that



As in the finite-dimensional case, this allows the unitary operators W(x) to be defined for x in H:



It follows immediately from the finite-dimensional case that these operators are unitary and satisfy



In particular the Weyl commutation relations are satisfied:



Taking an orthonormal basis en of H, S(H) can be written as an infinite tensor product of the S(C en). The irreducibility of W on each of these spaces implies the irreducibility of W on the whole of S(H). W is called the complex wave representation.
To define the symplectic group in infinite dimensions let HR be the underlying real vector space of H with the symplectic form



and real inner product



The complex structure is then defined by the orthogonal operator



so that



A bounded invertible operator real linear operator T on HR lies in the symplectic group if it and its inverse preserve B. This is equivalent to the conditions:



The operator T is said to be implementable on S(H) provided there is a unitary π(T) such that



The implementable operators form a subgroup of the symplectic group, the restricted symplectic group. By Schur's lemma, π(T) is uniquely determined up to a scalar in T, so π gives a projective unitary representation of this subgroup.
The Segal-Shale quantization criterion states that T is implementable, i.e. lies in the restricted symplectic group, if and only if the commutator TJ – JT is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator.
Unlike the finite-dimensional case where a lifting π could be chosen so that it was multiplicative up to a sign, this is not possible in the infinite-dimensional case. (This can be seen directly using the example of the projective representation of the diffeomorphism group of the circle constructed below.)
The projective representation of the restricted symplectic group can be constructed directly on coherent states as in the finite-dimensional case.41
In fact, choosing a real Hilbert subspace of H of which H is a complexification, for any operator T on H a complex conjugate of T is also defined. Then the infinite-dimensional analogue of SU(1,1) consists of invertible bounded operators



satisfying gKg* = K (or equivalently the same relations as in the finite-dimensional case). These belong to the restricted symplectic group if and only if B is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator. This group acts transitively on the infinite-dimensional analogue D≈ of the Seigel generalized unit disk consisting of Hilbert–Schmidt operators W that are symmetric with operator norm less than 1 via the formula



Again the stsblilizer subgroup of 0 consists of g with A unitary and B = 0. The metaplectic coherent states fW can be defined as before and their inner product is given by the same formula, using the Fredholm determinant:



Define unit vectors by



and set



where μ(ζ) = ζ/|ζ|. As before this defines a projective representation and, if g3 = g1g2, the cocycle is given by



This representation extends by analytic continuation to define contraction operators for the complex semigroup by the same analytic continuation argument as in the finite-dimensional case. It can also be shown that they are strict contractions.
Example Let HR be the real Hilbert space consisting of real-valued functions on the circle with mean 0



and for which



The inner product is given by



An orthogonal basis is given by the function sin(nθ) and cos(nθ) for n > 0. The Hilbert transform on the circle defined by



defines a complex structure on HR. J can also be written



where sign n = ±1 denotes the sign of n. The corresponding symplectic form is proportional to



In particular if φ is an orientation-preserving diffeomorphism of the circle and



then Tφ is implementable.See:





The operators W(f) with f smooth correspond to a subgroup of the loop group LT invariant under the diffeomorphism group of the circle. The infinitesimal operators corresponding to the vector fields



can be computed explicitly. They satisfy the Virasoro relations



In particular they cannor be adjusted by addition of scalar operators to remove the second term on the right hand side. This shows that the cocycle on the restricted symplectic group is not equivalent to one taking only the values ±1.
See also

Invariant convex cone

Notes
References












































"
Category:Operator theory Category:Harmonic analysis Category:Representation theory Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Theta functions



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




