


Coordinate descent




Coordinate descent

Coordinate descent is a non-derivative optimization algorithm. To find a local minimum of a function, one does line search along one coordinate direction at the current point in each iteration. One uses different coordinate directions cyclically throughout the procedure. On non-separable functions the algorithm may fail to find the optimum in a reasonable number of function evaluations. To improve the convergence an appropriate coordinate system can be gradually learned, such that new search coordinates obtained using PCA are as decorrelated as possible with respect to the objective function (see Adaptive coordinate descent for more details).
Description
Coordinate descent is based on the idea that the minimization of a multivariable function 
 
 
 
  can be achieved by minimizing it along one direction at a time. Instead of varying descent direction according to gradient, one fixes descent direction at the outset. For instance, one chooses some basis as the search directions
 
 
 
 . One cyclically iterates through each direction, one at a time, minimizing the objective function with respect to that coordinate direction. It follows that, if 
 
 
 
  is given, the 
 
 
 
 
 th coordinate of 
 
 
 
  is given by



Thus, one begins with an initial guess 
 
 
 
  for a local minimum of 
 
 
 
 , and get a sequence 
 
 
 
 
  iteratively.
By doing line search in each iteration, We automatically have



It can be shown that this sequence has similar convergence properties as steepest descent. No improvement after one cycle of line search along coordinate directions implies a stationary point is reached.
This process is illustrated below.
(Figure)
coordinate descent.jpg

Examples
Coordinate descent has problems with non-smooth functions. The following picture shows that coordinate descent iteration may get stuck at a non-stationary point if the level curves of a function are not smooth.
(Figure)
nonsmooth.jpg

Applications
Coordinate descent algorithms are used in machine learning, e.g. for training linear support vector machines1 (see LIBLINEAR) and non-negative matrix factorization.2
See also

Adaptive coordinate descent
Conjugate gradient
Gradient descent
Newton's method
Mathematical optimization
Line search

References


Bertsekas, Dimitri P. (1999). Nonlinear Programming, Second Edition Athena Scientific, Belmont, Massachusetts. ISBN 1-886529-00-0.

.

.

.

.

.

"
Category:Gradient methods









