


Exponential random graph models




Exponential random graph models

Exponential random graph models (ERGMs) are a family of statistical models for analyzing data about social and other networks.
Background
Many metrics exist to describe the structural features of an observed network such as the density, centrality, or assortativity.12 However, these metrics describe the observed network which is only one instance of a large number of possible alternative networks. This set of alternative networks may have similar or dissimilar structural features. To support statistical inference on the processes influencing the formation of network structure, a statistical model should consider the set of all possible alternative networks weighted on their similarity to an observed network. However because network data is inherently relational, it violates the assumptions of independence and identical distribution of standard statistical models like linear regression.3 Alternative statistical models should reflect the uncertainty associated with a given observation, permit inference about the relative frequency about network substructures of theoretical interest, disambiguating the influence of confounding processes, efficiently representing complex structures, and linking local-level processes to global-level properties.4 Degree Preserving Randomization, for example, is a specific way in which an observed network could be considered in terms of multiple alternative networks.
Definition
The Exponential family is a broad family of models for covering many types of data, not just networks. An ERGM is a model from this family which describes networks.
Formally a random graph

 
 
  consists of a set of 
 
 
 
  nodes and 
 
 
 
  dyads (edges) 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  if the nodes 
 
 
 
 
  are connected and 
 
 
 
  otherwise.
The basic assumption of these models is that the structure in an observed graph 
 
 
 
  can be explained by any statistics 
 
 
 
  depending on the observed network and nodal attributes. This way, it is possible to describe any kind of dependence between the dyadic variables:



where 
 
 
 
 
  is a vector of model parameters associated with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a normalising constant.
These models represent a probability distribution on each possible network on 
 
 
 
  nodes. However, the size of the set of possible networks for an undirected network (simple graph) of size 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 
 . Because the number of possible networks in the set vastly outnumbers the number of parameters which can constrain the model, the ideal probability distribution is the one which maximizes the Gibbs entropy.5
References
Further reading




















"
Category:Network theory












