


Denjoy–Wolff theorem




Denjoy–Wolff theorem

In mathematics, the Denjoy–Wolff theorem is a theorem in complex analysis and dynamical systems concerning fixed points and iterations of holomorphic mappings of the unit disc in the complex numbers into itself. The result was proved independently in 1926 by the French mathematician Arnaud Denjoy and the Dutch mathematician Julius Wolff.
Statement
Theorem. Let D be the open unit disk in C and let f be a holomorphic function mapping D into D which is not an automorphism of D (i.e. a Möbius transformation). Then there is a unique point z in the closure of D such that the iterates of f tend to z uniformly on compact subsets of D. If z lies in D, it is the unique fixed point of f. The mapping f leaves invariant hyperbolic disks centered on z, if z lies in D, and disks tangent to the unit circle at z, if z lies on the boundary of D.
When the fixed point is at z = 0, the hyperbolic disks centred at z are just the Euclidean disks with centre 0. Otherwise f can be conjugated by a Möbius transformation so that the fixed point is zero. An elementary proof of the theorem is given below, taken from  and . Two other short proofs can be found in .
Proof of theorem
Fixed point in the disk
If f has a fixed point z in D then, after conjugating by a Möbius transformation, it can be assumed that z = 0. Let M(r) be the maximum modulus of f on |z| = r 



for |z| ≤ r, where



It follows by iteration that



for |z| ≤ r. These two inequalities imply the result in this case.
No fixed points
When f acts in D without fixed points, Wolff showed that there is a point z on the boundary such that the iterates of f leave invariant each disk tangent to the boundary at that point.
Take a sequence 
 
 
 
  increasing to 1 and set12



By applying Rouché's theorem to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  has exactly one zero 
 
 
 
  in D. Passing to a subsequence if necessary, it can be assumed that 
 
 
 
  The point z cannot lie in D, because, by passing to the limit, z would have to be a fixed point. The result for the case of fixed points implies that the maps 
 
 
 
  leave invariant Euclidean disks. Explicit computation shows that, as k increases, disks can be chosen appropriately so that they tend to any given disk tangent to the boundary at z. By continuity, f leaves each such disk Δ invariant.
To see that 
 
 
 
  converges uniformly on compacta to the constant z, it is enough to show that the same is true for any subsequence 
 
 
 
 , convergent in the same sense to g, say. Such limits exist by Montel's theorem, and if g is non-constant, it can also be assumed that 
 
 
 
  has a limit, h say. But then



for w in D.
Since h is holomorphic and g(D) open,



for all w.
Setting 
 
 
 
 , it can also be assumed that 
 
 
 
  is convergent to F say.
But then f(F(w)) = w = f(F(w)), contradicting the fact that f is not an automorphism.
Hence every subsequence tends to some constant uniformly on compacta in D.
The invariance of Δ implies each such constant lies in the closure of each disk Δ, and hence their intersection, the single point z. By Montel's theorem, it follows that 
 
 
 
  converges uniformly on compacta to the constant z.
Notes
References












"
Category:Theorems in dynamical systems Category:Theorems in complex analysis









