


Born series




Born series

The Born series1 is the expansion of different scattering quantities in quantum scattering theory in the powers of the interaction potential 
 
 
 
  (more precisely in powers of 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the free particle Green's operator). It is closely related to Born approximation, which is the first order term of the Born series. The series can formally be understood as power series introducing the coupling constant by substitution 
 
 
 
 
 . The speed of convergence and radius of convergence of the Born series are related to eigenvalues of the operator 
 
 
 
 . In general the first few terms of the Born series are good approximation to the expanded quantity for "weak" interaction 
 
 
 
  and large collision energy.
Born series for scattering states
The Born series for the scattering states reads


 
  It can be derived by iterating the Lippmann–Schwinger equation


 
  Note that the Green's operator

 
 
  for free partice can be retarded/advanced or standing wave operator for retarded 
 
 
 
  advanced 
 
 
 
  or standing wave scattering states 
 
 
 
 . The first iteration is obtained by replacing the full scattering solution 
 
 
 
  with free particle wave function 
 
 
 
 
  on the right hand side of the Lippmann-Schwinger equation and it gives the first Born approximation. The second iteration substitutes the first Born approximation in the right hand side and the result is called the second Born approximation. In general the n-th Born approximation takes n-terms of the series into account. The second Born approximation is sometimes used, when the first Born approximation vanishes, but the higher terms are rarely used. The Born series can formally be summed as geometric series with the common ratio equal to the operator 
 
 
 
 , giving the formal solution to Lippmann-Schwinger equation in the form



Born series for T-matrix
The Born series can also be written for other scattering quantities like the T-matrix which is closely related to the scattering amplitude. Iterating Lippmann-Schwinger equation for the T-matrix we get


 
  For the T-matrix 
 
 
 
  stands only for retarded Green's operator

 
 
 . The standing wave Green's operator would give the K-matrix instead.
Born series for full Green's operator
The Lippmann-Schwinger equation for Green's operator is called the resolvent identity,


 
  Its solution by iteration leads to the Born series for the full Green's operator 
 
 




See also

Lippmann-Schwinger equation
Quantum scattering theory
T-matrix
Green's operator

Bibliography









References
"
Category:Scattering








