


Laser flash analysis




Laser flash analysis

The laser flash analysis or laser flash method is used to measure thermal diffusivity of a multiplicity of different materials. An energy pulse heats one side of a plane-parallel sample. The temperature rise on the backside due to the energy input is time-dependent detected. The higher the thermal diffusivity of the sample, the faster the energy reaches the backside. A state-of-the-art laser flash apparatus (LFA) to measure thermal diffusivity over a broad temperature range, is shown on the right hand side.
In a one-dimensional,  adiabatic case the thermal diffusivity

 
  is calculated from this temperature rise as follows:


 
  Where



 
  is the thermal diffusivity


 
 
  is the thickness of the sample


 
  is the time to the half maximum

Measurement principle
(Figure)
LFA measurement principle: An energy / laser pulse (red) heats the sample (yellow) on the bottom side and a detector detects the temperaure signal versus time on the top side (green).

The laser flash method was developed by Parker et al. in 1961.1 In a vertical setup a light source (e.g. laser, flashlamp) heats the sample from the bottom side and a detector on top detects the time-dependent temperature rise. For measuring the thermal diffusivity, which is strongly temperature-dependent, at different temperatures the sample can be placed in a furnace at constant temperature.
Perfect conditions are

homogenous material,
a homogenous energy input on the front side
a time-dependent short pulse - in form of a Dirac delta function

Several improvements on the models have been made. In 1963 Cowan takes radiation and convection on the surface into account.2 Cape and Lehman consider transient heat transfer, finite pulse effects and also heat losses in the same year.3 Blumm and Opfermann improved the Cape-Lehman-Model with high order solutions of radial transient heat transfer and facial heat loss, non-linear regression routine in case of high heat losses and an advanced, patented pulse length correction.45
See also

Thermal diffusivity
Thermal conductivity
Thermal conductivity measurement
Thermal physics

References
"
Category:Materials testing Category:Heat transfer Category:Heat conduction



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




