


Hopf lemma




Hopf lemma

In mathematics, the Hopf lemma, named after Eberhard Hopf, states that if a continuous real-valued function in a domain in Euclidean space with sufficiently smooth boundary is harmonic in the interior and the value of the function at a point on the boundary is greater than the values at nearby points inside the domain, then the derivative of the function in the direction of the outward pointing normal is strictly positive. The lemma is an important tool in the proof of the maximum principle and in the theory of partial differential equations. The Hopf lemma has been generalized to describe the behavior of the solution to an elliptic problem as it approaches a point on the boundary where its maximum is attained.
Statement for harmonic functions
Let Ω be a bounded domain in Rn with smooth boundary. Let f be a real-valued function continuous on the closure of Ω and harmonic on Ω. If x is a boundary point such that f(x) > f(y) for all y in Ω sufficiently close to x, then the (one-sided) directional derivative of f in the direction of the outward pointing normal to the boundary at x is strictly positive.
Proof for harmonic functions
Subtracting a constant, it can be assumed that f(x) = 0 and f is strictly negative at interior points near x. Since the boundary of Ω is smooth there is a small ball contained in Ω the closure of which is tangent to the boundary at x and intersects the boundary only at x. It is then sufficient to check the result with Ω replaced by this ball. Scaling and translating, it is enough to check the result for the unit ball in Rn, assuming f(x) is zero for some unit vector x and f(y) \displaystyle{-f(rx)\ge -{1-r\over (1+r)^{n-1}} f(0),}
for r \displaystyle f(0)> -{ f(0)\over 2^{n-1}} >0.}
Hence the directional derivative at x is bounded below by the strictly positive constant on the right hand side.
General discussion
Consider a second order, uniformly elliptic operator of the form


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  is an open, bounded subset of 
 
 
 
 .
The Weak Maximum Principle states that a solution of the equation 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  attains its maximum value on the closure 
 
 
 
  at some point on the boundary 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be such a point, then necessarily


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the outer normal derivative. This is simply a consequence of the fact that 
 
 
 
  must be nondecreasing as 
 
 
 
  approach 
 
 
 
 . The Hopf Lemma strengthens this observation by proving that, under mild assumptions on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we have



A precise statement of the Lemma is as follows. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a bounded region in 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the operator described above. Let 
 
 
 
  be of class 
 
 
 
  and satisfy the differential inequality


 
  Let 
 
 
 
  be given so that 
 
 
 
 . If (i) 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 , and (ii) 
 
 
 
 , then either 
 
 
 
  is a constant, or 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the outward pointing unit normal, as above.
The above result can be generalized in several respects. The regularity assumption on 
 
 
 
  can be replaced with an interior ball condition: the lemma holds provided that there exists an open ball 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . It is also possible to consider functions 
 
 
 
  that take positive values, provided that 
 
 
 
 . For the proof and other discussion, see the references below.
See also

Hopf maximum principle

References





(The Hopf lemma is referred to as "Zaremba's principle" by Taylor.)

"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Mathematical principles


