


McKay graph




McKay graph






 Affine (extended) Dynkin diagrams



In mathematics, the McKay graph of a finite-dimensional representation V of a finite group G is a weighted quiver encoding the structure of the representation theory of G. Each node represents an irreducible representation of G. If 
 
 
 
  are irreducible representations of G then there is an arrow from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is a constituent of the tensor product

 
 . Then the weight nij of the arrow is the number of times this constituent appears in 
 
 
 
 . For finite subgroups H of GL(2, C), the McKay graph of H is the McKay graph of the canonical representation of H.
If G has n irreducible characters, then the Cartan matrix cV of the representation V of dimension d is defined by 
 
 
 
 , where δ is the Kronecker delta. A result by Steinberg states that if g is a representative of a conjugacy class of G, then the vectors 
 
 
 
  are the eigenvectors of cV to the eigenvalues 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the character of the representation V.
The McKay correspondence, named after John McKay, states that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the McKay graphs of the finite subgroups of SL(2, C) and the extended Dynkin diagrams, which appear in the ADE classification of the simple Lie Algebras.
Definition
Let G be a finite group, V be a representation of G and 
 
 
 
  be its character. Let 
 
 
 
  be the irreducible representations of G. If



then define the McKay graph 
 
 
 
  of G as follow:

To each irreducible representation of G corresponds a node in 
 
 
 
 .
There is an arrow from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  if and only if nij > 0 and nij is the weight of the arrow
 
 
 
 .
If nij = nji, then we put an edge between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  instead of a double arrow. Moreover, if nij = 1, then we do not write the weight of the corresponding arrow.

We can calculate the value of nij by considering the inner product. We have the following formula:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the inner product of the characters.
The McKay graph of a finite subgroup of GL(2, C) is defined to be the McKay graph of its canonical representation.
For finite subgroups of SL(2, C), the canonical representation is self-dual, so nij = nji for all i, j. Thus, the McKay graph of finite subgroups of SL(2, C) is undirected.
In fact, by the McKay correspondence, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the finite subgroups of SL(2, C) and the extended Coxeter-Dynkin diagrams of type A-D-E.
We define the Cartan matrix cV of V as follow:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta.
Some results

If the representation V of a finite group G is faithful, then the McKay graph of V is connected.
The McKay graph of a finite subgroup of SL(2, C) has no self-loops, that is, nii = 0 for all i.
The weights of the arrows of the McKay graph of a finite subgroup of SL(2, C) are always less or equal than one.

Examples

Suppose G = A × B, and there are canonical irreducible representations cA and cB of A and B respectively. If 
 
 
 
 , i = 1, ..., k, are the irreducible representations of A and 
 
 
 
 , j = 1, ..., l, are the irreducible representations of B, then




are the irreducible representations of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . In this case, we have



Therefore, there is an arrow in the McKay graph of G between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  if and only if there is an arrow in the McKay graph of A between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and there is an arrow in the McKay graph of B between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In this case, the weight on the arrow in the McKay graph of G is the product of the weights of the two corresponding arrows in the McKay graphs of A and B.

Felix Klein proved that the finite subgroups of SL(2, C) are the binary polyhedral groups. The McKay correspondence states that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the McKay graphs of these binary polyhedral groups and the extended Dynkin diagrams. For example, let 
 
 
 
  be the binary tetrahedral group. Every finite subgroup of SL(2, C) is conjugate to a finite subgroup of SU(2, C). Consider the matrices in SU(2, C):




where ε is a primitive eighth root of unity. Then, 
 
 
 
  is generated by S, U, V. In fact, we have



The conjugacy classes of 
 
 
 
  are the following:





















The character table of 
 
 
 
  is




Conjugacy Classes















































































































































































































































































Here 
 
 
 
 . The canonical representation is represented by c. By using the inner product, we have that the McKay graph of 
 
 
 
  is the extended Coxeter-Dynkin diagram of type 
 
 
 
 
 .
See also

ADE classification
Binary tetrahedral group

References









"
Category:Representation theory


