


Modulation space




Modulation space

Modulation spaces1 are a family of Banach spaces defined by the behavior of the short-time Fourier transform with respect to a test function from the Schwartz space. They were originally proposed by Hans Georg Feichtinger and are recognized to be the right kind of function spaces for time-frequency analysis. Feichtinger's algebra, while originally introduced as a new Segal algebra,2 is identical to a certain modulation space and has become a widely used space of test functions for time-frequency analysis.
Modulation spaces are defined as follows. For 
 
 
 
 , a non-negative function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and a test function 
 
 
 
 
 , the modulation space 
 
 
 
  is defined by



In the above equation, 
 
 
 
  denotes the short-time Fourier transform of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
 
  evaluated at 
 
 
 
 , namely



In other words, 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 . The space 
 
 
 
 
  is the same, independent of the test function 
 
 
 
  chosen. The canonical choice is a Gaussian.
We also have a Besov-type definition of modulation spaces as follows.3


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a suitable unity partition. If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 
 .
Feichtinger's algebra
For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the modulation space 
 
 
 
  is known by the name Feichtinger's algebra and often denoted by 
 
 
 
  for being the minimal Segal algebra invariant under time-frequency shifts, i.e. combined translation and modulation operators. 
 
 
 
 
  is a Banach space embedded in 
 
 
 
 , and is invariant under the Fourier transform. It is for these and more properties that 
 
 
 
  is a natural choice of test function space for time-frequency analysis. Fourier transform 
 
 
 
  is an automorphism on 
 
 
 
 .
References
"
Category:Banach spaces



Foundations of Time-Frequency Analysis by Karlheinz Gröchenig
H. Feichtinger. "On a new Segal algebra" Monatsh. Math. 92:269–289, 1981.
B.X. Wang, Z.H. Huo, C.C. Hao, and Z.H. Guo. Harmonic Analysis Method for Nonlinear Evolution Equations. World Scientific, 2011.




