


S2P (complexity)




S2P (complexity)

In computational complexity theory, S is a complexity class, intermediate between the first and second levels of the polynomial hierarchy. A language 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
  if there exists a polynomial-time predicate P such that

If 
 
 
 
 , then there exists a y such that for all z, 
 
 
 
 ,
If 
 
 
 
 , then there exists a z such that for all y, 
 
 
 
 ,

where size of y and z must be polynomial of x.
Relationship to other complexity classes
It is immediate from the definition that S is closed under union and complement. Comparing the definition with that of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it also follows immediately that S is contained in 
 
 
 
 . This inclusion can in fact be strengthened to ZPPNP.
| url = http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~jyc/papers/S2-j.pdf
| volume = 73
| year = 2007}}. A preliminary version of this paper appeared earlier, in FOCS 2001, , , .
Every language in NP also belongs to  For by definition, a language L is in NP, if and only if there exists a polynomial-time verifier V(x,y), such that for every x in L there exists y for which V answers true, and such that for every x not in L, V always answers false. But such a verifier can easily be transformed into an  predicate P(x,y,z) for the same language that ignores z and otherwise behaves the same as V. By the same token, co-NP belongs to  These straightforward inclusions can be strengthened to show that the class  contains MA (by a generalization of the Sipser–Lautemann theorem) and 
 
 
 
  (more generally, 
 
 
 
 ).
Karp–Lipton theorem
A version of Karp–Lipton theorem states that if every language in NP has polynomial size circuits then the polynomial time hierarchy collapses to S. This result yields a strengthening of Kannan's theorem: it is known that S is not contained in SIZE(nk) for any fixed k.
Symmetric hierarchy
As an extension, it is possible to define 
 
 
 
  as an operator on complexity classes; then 
 
 
 
 . Iteration of 
 
 
 
  operator yields a "symmetric hierarchy"; the union of the classes produced in this way is equal to the Polynomial hierarchy.
References




External links


Complexity Class of the Week: S2P, Lance Fortnow, August 28, 2002.

"
Category:Complexity classes


