


Projector augmented wave method




Projector augmented wave method

The projector augmented wave method (PAW) is a technique used in ab initio electronic structure calculations. It is a generalization of the pseudopotential and linear augmented-plane-wave methods, and allows for density functional theory calculations to be performed with greater computational efficiency.1
Valence wavefunctions tend to have rapid oscillations near ion cores due to the requirement that they be orthogonal to core states; this situation is problematic because it requires many Fourier components (or in the case of grid-based methods, a very fine mesh) to describe the wavefunctions accurately. The PAW approach addresses this issue by transforming these rapidly oscillating wavefunctions into smooth wavefunctions which are more computationally convenient, and provides a way to calculate all-electron properties from these smooth wavefunctions. This approach is somewhat reminiscent of a change from the Schrödinger picture to the Heisenberg picture.
Transforming the wavefunction
The linear transformation

 
  transforms the fictitious pseudo wavefunction 
 
 
 
  to the all-electron wavefunction 
 
 
 
 :



Note that the "all-electron" wavefunction is a Kohn-Sham single particle wavefunction, and should not be confused with the many-body wavefunction. In order to have 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  differ only in the regions near the ion cores, we write


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is non-zero only within some spherical augmentation region 
 
 
 
  enclosing atom 
 
 
 
 .
Around each atom, it is useful to expand the pseudo wavefunction into pseudo partial waves:


 
  within 
 
 
 
 .
Because the operator 
 
 
 
  is linear, the coefficients 
 
 
 
  can be written as an inner product with a set of so-called projector functions, 
 
 
 
 :



where 
 
 
 
 . The all-electron partial waves, 
 
 
 
 , are typically chosen to be solutions to the Kohn-Sham Schrödinger equation for an isolated atom. The transformation 
 
 
 
  is thus specified by three quantities:

a set of all-electron partial waves 
 
 

a set of pseudo partial waves 
 
 

a set of projector functions 
 
 


and we can explicitly write it down as



Outside the augmentation regions, the pseudo partial waves are equal to the all-electron partial waves. Inside the spheres, they can be any smooth continuation, such as a linear combination of polynomials or Bessel functions.
The PAW method is typically combined with the frozen core approximation, in which the core states are assumed to be unaffected by the ion's environment. There are several online repositories of pre-computed atomic PAW data.234
Transforming operators
The PAW transformation allows you to calculate all-electron observables using the pseudo wavefunction from a pseudopotential calculation, conveniently avoiding having to ever represent the all-electron wavefunction explicitly in memory. This is particularly important for the calculation of properties such as NMR,5 which strongly depend on the form of the wavefunction near the nucleus. Starting with the definition of the expectation value of an operator:


 
 ,
where you can substitute in the pseudo wavefunction as you know 
 
 
 
 :


 
 ,
from which you can define the pseudo operator, indicated by a tilde:


 
 .
If the operator 
 
 
 
  is local and well-behaved we can expand this using the definition of 
 
 
 
  to give the PAW operator transform:


 
 .
Where the indices 
 
 
 
  run over all projectors on all atoms. Usually only indices on the same atom are summed over, i.e. off-site contributions are ignored, and this is called the "on-site approximation".
In the original paper, Blöchl notes that there is a degree of freedom in this equation for an arbitrary operator 
 
 
 
 , that is localised inside the spherical augmentation region, to add a term of the form:


 
 ,
which can be seen as the basis for implementation of pseudopotentials within PAW, as the nuclear coulomb potential can now be substituted with a smoother one.
Further reading





Software implementing the projector augmented-wave method

ABINIT
CASTEP (to calculate NMR properties)
CP-PAW
GPAW
ONETEP
PWPAW
S/PHI/nX
Quantum ESPRESSO
VASP

References
"
Category:Electronic structure methods Category:Computational science Category:Condensed matter physics



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




