


Locally profinite group




Locally profinite group

In mathematics, a locally profinite group is a hausdorff topological group in which every neighborhood of the identity element contains a compact open subgroup. Equivalently, a locally profinite group is a topological group that is hausdorff locally compact and totally disconnected. Moreover, a locally profinite group is compact if and only if it is profinite; this explains the terminology. Basic examples of locally profinite groups are discrete groups and p-adic Lie group. Non-examples are real Lie groups which have no small subgroup property.
In a locally profinite group, a closed subgroup is locally profinite, and every compact subgroup is contained in an open compact subgroup.
Examples
Important examples of locally profinite groups come from algebraic number theory. Let F be a non-archimedean local field. Then both F and 
 
 
 
  are locally profinite. More generally, the matrix ring 
 
 
 
  and the general linear group 
 
 
 
  are locally profinite. Another example of a locally profinite group is the absolute Weil group of a non-archimedean local field: this is in contrast to the fact that the absolute Galois group of such is profinite (in particular compact).
Representations of a locally profinite group
Let G be a locally profinite group. Then a group homomorphism 
 
 
 
 
  is continuous if and only if it has open kernel.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a complex representation of G.1

 
  is said to be smooth if V is a union of 
 
 
 
  where K runs over all open compact subgroups K. 
 
 
 
  is said to be admissible if it is smooth and 
 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional for any open compact subgroup K.
We now make a blanket assumption that 
 
 
 
  is at most countable for all open compact subgroups K.
The dual space 
 
 
 
  carries the action 
 
 
 
  of G given by 
 
 
 
 . In general, 
 
 
 
 
  is not smooth. Thus, we set 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is acting through 
 
 
 
  and set 
 
 
 
 . The smooth representation 
 
 
 
 
  is then called the contragredient or smooth dual of 
 
 
 
 .
The contravariant functor


 
  from the category of smooth representations of G to itself is exact. Moreover, the following are equivalent.



 
  is admissible.


 
  is admissible.2
The canonical G-module map 
 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism.

When 
 
 
 
  is admissible, 
 
 
 
  is irreducible if and only if 
 
 
 
  is irreducible.
The countability assumption at the beginning is really necessary, for there exists a locally profinite group that admits an irreducible smooth representation 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  is not irreducible.
Hecke algebra of a locally profinite group




Let 
 
 
 
  be a unimodular locally profinite group such that 
 
 
 
  is at most countable for all open compact subgroups K, and 
 
 
 
  a left Haar measure on 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 
  denote the space of locally constant functions on 
 
 
 
  with compact support. With the multiplicative structure given by



 
  becomes not necessarily unital associative 
 
 
 
 -algebra. It is called the Hecke algebra of G and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 
 . The algebra plays an important role in the study of smooth representations of locally profinite groups. Indeed, one has the following: given a smooth representation 
 
 
 
  of G, we define a new action on V:


 
  Thus, we have the functor 
 
 
 
  from the category of smooth representations of 
 
 
 
  to the category of non-degenerate 
 
 
 
 
 -modules. Here, "non-degenerate" means 
 
 
 
 . Then the fact is that the functor is an equivalence.3
Notes
References

Corinne Blondel, Basic representation theory of reductive p-adic groups 1



"
Category:Topological groups



We do not put a topology on V; so there is no topological condition on the representation.
Blondel, Corollary 2.8.
Blondel, Proposition 2.16.




