


Quantum pendulum




Quantum pendulum

The quantum pendulum is fundamental in understanding hindered internal rotations in chemistry, quantum features of scattering atoms as well as numerous other quantum phenomena. Though a pendulum not subject to the small-angle approximation has an inherent non-linearity, the Schrödinger equation for the quantized system can be solved relatively easily.
Schrödinger Equation
Using Lagrangian theory from classical mechanics, one can develop a Hamiltonian for the system. A simple pendulum has one generalized coordinate (the angular displacement 
 
 
 
 ) and two constraints (the length of the string is constant and there is no motion along the z axis). The kinetic energy and potential energy of the system can be found to be as follows:






This results in the Hamiltonian:



The time-dependent Schrödinger equation for the system is as follows:



One must solve the time-independent Schrödinger equation to find the energy levels and corresponding eigenstates. This is best accomplished by changing the independent variable as follows:






This is simply Mathieu's equation where the solutions are Mathieu functions



Solutions
Energies
Given 
 
 
 
 , for countably many special values of 
 
 
 
 , called characteristic values, the Mathieu equation admits solutions which are periodic with period 
 
 
 
 . The characteristic values of the Mathieu cosine, sine functions respectively are written 
 
 
 
 , where n is a natural number. The periodic special cases of the Mathieu cosine and sine functions are often written 
 
 
 
  respectively, although they are traditionally given a different normalization (namely, that their L2 norm equal 
 
 
 
 ).
The boundary conditions in the quantum pendulum imply that 
 
 
 
  are as follows for a given q:






The energies of the system, 
 
 
 
  for even/odd solutions respectively, are quantized based on the characteristic values found by solving the Mathieu equation
The effective potential depth can be defined as follows:



A depth potential depth yields the dynamics of a particle in an independent potential. In contrast, a shallow potential depth, Bloch waves as well as quantum tunneling become of importance.
General Solution
The general solution of the above differential equation for a given value of a and q is a set of linearly independent Mathieu cosines and Mathieu sines, which are even and odd solutions respectively. In general, the Mathieu functions are aperiodic; however, for characteristic values of 
 
 
 
 , the Mathieu cosine and sine become periodic with a period of 
 
 
 
 .
Eigenstates
For positive values of q, the following is true:





 
  Here are the first few periodic Mathieu cosine functions for q=1:  Note that, for example, 
 
 
 
  (green) resembles a cosine function, but with flatter hills and shallower valleys.
Bibliography




Muhammad Ayub, Atom Optics Quantum Pendulum, 2011, Islamabad, Pakistan., http://lanl.arxiv.org/PS_cache/arxiv/pdf/1012/1012.6011v1.pdf

External links

Atom Optics Quantum Pendulum

"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum models


