


Arithmetic zeta function




Arithmetic zeta function

In mathematics, the arithmetic zeta function is a zeta function associated with a scheme of finite type over integers. The arithmetic zeta function generalizes the Riemann zeta function and Dedekind zeta function to higher dimensions. The arithmetic zeta function is one of the most-fundamental objects of number theory.
Definition
The arithmetic zeta function  is defined by an Euler product analogous to the Riemann zeta function:



where the product is taken over all closed points 
 
 
 
  of the scheme 
 
 
 
 . Equivalently, the product is over all points whose residue field is finite. The cardinality of this field is denoted 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
For example, if 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of a finite field with 
 
 
 
  elements, then



If 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of the ring of integers, then  is the Riemann zeta function. More generally, if 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of the ring of integers of an algebraic number field, then  is the Dedekind zeta function.
The zeta function of affine and projective spaces over a scheme 
 
 
 
  are given by



The latter equation can be deduced from the former using that, for any 
 
 
 
  that is the disjoint union of a closed and open subscheme 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively,



Even more generally, a similar formula holds for infinite disjoint unions. In particular, this shows that the zeta function of 
 
 
 
  is the product of the ones of the reduction of 
 
 
 
  modulo the primes 
 
 
 
 :



Such an expression ranging over each prime number is sometimes called Euler product and each factor is called Euler factor. In many cases of interest, the generic fiber  is smooth. Then, only finitely many  are singular (bad reduction). For almost all primes, namely when 
 
 
 
  has good reduction, the Euler factor is known to agree with the corresponding factor of the Hasse-Weil zeta function of . Therefore, these two functions are closely related.
Main conjectures
There are a number of conjectures concerning the behavior of the zeta function of a regular irreducible equidimensional scheme 
 
 
 
  (of finite type over the integers). Many (but not all) of these conjectures generalize the one-dimensional case of well known theorems about the Euler-Riemann-Dedekind zeta function.
The scheme need not be flat over 
 
 
 
 , in this case it is a scheme of finite type over some . This is referred to as the characteristic 
 
 
 
  case below. In the latter case, many of these conjectures (with the most notable exception of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, i.e. the study of special values) are known. Very little is known for schemes that are flat over 
 
 
 
  and are of dimension two and higher.
Meromorphic continuation and functional equation
Hasse and Weil conjectured that  has a meromorphic continuation to the complex plane and satisfies a functional equation with respect to 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the absolute dimension of 
 
 
 
 .
This is proven for 
 
 
 
  and some very special cases when 
 
 
 
  for flat schemes over 
 
 
 
  and for all 
 
 
 
  in positive characteristic. It is a consequence of the Weil conjectures (more precisely, the Riemann hypothesis part thereof) that the zeta function has a meromorphic continuation up to 
 
 
 
 .
The generalized Riemann hypothesis
According to the generalized Riemann Hypothesis the zeros of  are conjectured to lie inside the critical strip 
 
 
 
  lie on the vertical lines 
 
 
 
  and the poles of  inside the critical strip 
 
 
 
  lie on the vertical lines 
 
 
 
 .
This was proved (Emil Artin, Helmut Hasse, André Weil, Alexander Grothendieck, Pierre Deligne) in positive characteristic for all 
 
 
 
 . It is not proved for any scheme that is flat over 
 
 
 
 . The Riemann hypothesis is a partial case of Conjecture 2.
Pole orders
Subject to the analytic continuation, the order of the zero or pole and the residue of  at integer points inside the critical strip is conjectured to be expressible by important arithmetic invariants of 
 
 
 
 . An argument due to Serre based on the above elementary properties and Noether normalization shows that the zeta function of 
 
 
 
  has a pole at 
 
 
 
  whose order equals the number of irreducible components of 
 
 
 
  with maximal dimension.1 Secondly, Tate conjectured2



i.e., the pole order is expressible by the rank of the groups of invertible regular functions and the Picard group. The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture is a partial case this conjecture. In fact, this conjecture of Tate's is equivalent to a generalization of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer.
More generally, Soulé conjectured3



The right hand side denotes the Adams eigenspaces of algebraic 
 
 
 
 -theory of 
 
 
 
 . These ranks are finite under the Bass conjecture.
These conjectures are known when 
 
 
 
 , that is, the case of number rings and curves over finite fields. As for 
 
 
 
 , partial cases of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture have been proven, but even in positive characteristic the conjecture remains open.
Methods and theories
The arithmetic zeta function of a regular connected equidimensional arithmetic scheme of Kronecker dimension 
 
 
 
  can be factorized into the product of appropriately defined 
 
 
 
 -factors and an auxiliary factor. Hence, results on 
 
 
 
 -functions imply corresponding results for the arithmetic zeta functions. However, there is still very little amount of proven results about the 
 
 
 
 -factors of arithmetic schemes in characteristic zero and dimensions 2 and higher. Ivan Fesenko initiated4 a theory which studies the arithmetic zeta functions directly, without working with their 
 
 
 
 -factors. It is a higher-dimensional generalisation of Tate's thesis, i.e. it uses higher adele groups, higher zeta integral and objects which come from higher class field theory. In this theory, the meromorphic continuation and functional equation of proper regular models of elliptic curves over global fields is related to mean-periodicity property of a boundary function.5 In his joint work with M. Suzuki and G. Ricotta a new correspondence in number theory is proposed, between the arithmetic zeta functions and mean-periodic functions in the space of smooth functions on the real line of not more than exponential growth.6 This correspondence is related to the Langlands correspondence. Two other applications of Fesenko's theory are to the poles of the zeta function of proper models of elliptic curves over global fields and to the special value at the central point.7
References


Sources




"
Category:Zeta and L-functions Category:Number theory



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




