


Signalizer functor




Signalizer functor
In mathematics, a '''signalizer functor''' gives the intersections of a potential subgroup of a finite group  with the [[centralizer]]s of nontrivial elements of an abelian group. The '''signalizer functor theorem''' gives conditions unde
 r which a signalizer functor comes from a subgroup. The idea is to try to construct a 
 
 
 
 -subgroup of a finite group 
 
 
 
 , which has a good chance of being normal in 
 
 
 
 , by taking as generators certain 
 
 
 
 -subgroups of the centralizers of nonidentity elements in one or several given noncyclic elementary abelian 
 
 
 
 -subgroups of 
 
 
 
  The technique has origins in the Feit–Thompson theorem, and was subsequently developed by many people including  who defined signalizer functors,  who proved the Solvable Signalizer Functor Theorem for solvable groups, and  who proved it for all groups. This theorem is needed to prove the so-called "dichotomy" stating that a given nonabelian finite simple group either has local characteristic two, or is of component type. It thus plays a major role in the classification of finite simple groups.
Definition
Let A be a noncyclic elementary abelian p-subgroup of the finite group G. An A-signalizer functor on G or simply a signalizer functor when A and G are clear is a mapping θ from the set of nonidentity elements of A to the set of A-invariant p′-subgroups of G satisfying the following properties:

For every nonidentity 
 
 
 
 , the group 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 

For every nonidentity 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 


The second condition above is called the balance condition. If the subgroups 
 
 
 
  are all solvable, then the signalizer functor 
 
 
 
  itself is said to be solvable.
Solvable signalizer functor theorem
Given 
 
 
 
  certain additional, relatively mild, assumptions allow one to prove that the subgroup 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  generated by the subgroups 
 
 
 
  is in fact a 
 
 
 
 -subgroup. The Solvable Signalizer Functor Theorem proved by Glauberman and mentioned above says that this will be the case if 
 
 
 
  is solvable and 
 
 
 
  has at least three generators. The theorem also states that under these assumptions, 
 
 
 
  itself will be solvable.
Several earlier versions of the theorem were proven:  proved this under the stronger assumption that 
 
 
 
  had rank at least 5.  proved this under the assumption that 
 
 
 
  had rank at least 4 or was a 2-group of rank at least 3.  gave a simple proof for 2-groups using the ZJ theorem, and a proof in a similar spirit has been given for all primes by .  gave the definitive result for solvable signalizer functors. Using the classification of finite simple groups,  showed that 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -group without the assumption that 
 
 
 
  is solvable.
Completeness
The terminology of completeness is often used in discussions of signalizer functors. Let 
 
 
 
  be a signalizer functor as above, and consider the set И of all 
 
 
 
 -invariant 
 
 
 
 -subgroups 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  satisfying the following condition:



 
  for all nonidentity 
 
 


For example, the subgroups 
 
 
 
  belong to И by the balance condition. The signalizer functor 
 
 
 
  is said to be complete if И has a unique maximal element when ordered by containment. In this case, the unique maximal element can be shown to coincide with 
 
 
 
  above, and 
 
 
 
  is called the completion of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is complete, and 
 
 
 
  turns out to be solvable, then 
 
 
 
  is said to be solvably complete.
Thus, the Solvable Signalizer Functor Theorem can be rephrased by saying that if 
 
 
 
  has at least three generators, then every solvable 
 
 
 
 -signalizer functor on 
 
 
 
  is solvably complete.
Examples of signalizer functors
The easiest way to obtain a signalizer functor is to start with an 
 
 
 
 -invariant 
 
 
 
 -subgroup 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and define 
 
 
 
  for all nonidentity 
 
 
 
  In practice, however, one begins with 
 
 
 
  and uses it to construct the 
 
 
 
 -invariant 
 
 
 
 -group.
The simplest signalizer functor used in practice is this: 
 
 

A few words of caution are needed here. First, note that 
 
 
 
  as defined above is indeed an 
 
 
 
 -invariant 
 
 
 
 -subgroup of 
 
 
 
  because 
 
 
 
  is abelian. However, some additional assumptions are needed to show that this 
 
 
 
  satisfies the balance condition. One sufficient criterion is that for each nonidentity 
 
 
 
  the group 
 
 
 
  is solvable (or 
 
 
 
 -solvable or even 
 
 
 
 -constrained). Verifying the balance condition for this 
 
 
 
  under this assumption requires a famous lemma, known as Thompson's

 
 -lemma. (Note, this lemma is also called Thompson's 
 
 
 
 -lemma, but the 
 
 
 
  in this use must not be confused with the 
 
 
 
  appearing in the definition of a signalizer functor!)
Coprime action
To obtain a better understanding of signalizer functors, it is essential to know the following general fact about finite groups:

Let 
 
 
 
  be an abelian noncyclic group acting on the finite group 
 
 
 
  Assume that the orders of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are relatively prime. Then




To prove this fact, one uses the Schur–Zassenhaus theorem to show that for each prime 
 
 
 
  dividing the order of 
 
 
 
  the group 
 
 
 
  has an 
 
 
 
 -invariant Sylow 
 
 
 
 -subgroup. This reduces to the case where 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -group. Then an argument by induction on the order of 
 
 
 
  reduces the statement further to the case where 
 
 
 
  is elementary abelian with 
 
 
 
  acting irreducibly. This forces the group 
 
 
 
  to be cyclic, and the result follows. See either of the books  or  for details.
This is used in both the proof and applications of the Solvable Signalizer Functor Theorem. To begin, notice that it quickly implies the claim that if 
 
 
 
  is complete, then its completion is the group 
 
 
 
  defined above.
Normal completion
The completion of a signalizer functor has a "good chance" of being normal in 
 
 
 
  according to the top of the article. Here, the coprime action fact will be used to motivate this claim. Let 
 
 
 
  be a complete 
 
 
 
 -signalizer functor on 
 
 

Let 
 
 
 
  be a noncyclic subgroup of 
 
 
 
  Then the coprime action fact together with the balance condition imply that 
 
 
 
 .
To see this, observe that because 
 
 
 
  is B-invariant, we have



The equality above uses the coprime action fact, and the containment uses the balance condition. Now, it is often the case that 
 
 
 
  satisfies an "equivariance" condition, namely that for each 
 
 
 
  and nonidentity 
 
 


The superscript denotes conjugation by 
 
 
 
  For example, the mapping 
 
 
 
  (which is often a signalizer functor!) satisfies this condition. If 
 
 
 
  satisfies equivariance, then the normalizer of 
 
 
 
  will normalize 
 
 
 It follows that if 
 
 
 
  is generated by the normalizers of the noncyclic subgroups of 
 
 
 
  then the completion of 
 
 
 
  (i.e. W) is normal in 
 
 

References












"
Signalizer functor


