


Vojta's conjecture




Vojta's conjecture

In mathematics, Vojta's conjecture is a conjecture introduced by  about heights of points on algebraic varieties over number fields. The conjecture was motivated by an analogy between diophantine approximation and Nevanlinna theory (value distribution theory) in complex analysis. It implies many other conjectures in diophantine approximation theory, diophantine equations, arithmetic geometry, and logic.
Statement of the Conjecture
Let 
 
 
 
  be a number field, let 
 
 
 
  be a non-singular algebraic variety, let 
 
 
 
  be an effective divisor on 
 
 
 
  with at worst normal crossings, let 
 
 
 
  be an ample divisor on 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be a canonical divisor on 
 
 
 
 . Choose Weil height functions

 
  and 
 
 
 
  and, for each absolute value

 
  on 
 
 
 
 , a local height function 
 
 
 
 . Fix a finite set of absolute values 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
 . Then there is a constant 
 
 
 
  and a non-empty Zariski open set 
 
 
 
 , depending on all of the above choices, such that






  \quad\hbox{for all } P\in U(F). 
Examples:

Let 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 , so Vojta's conjecture reads 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a variety with trivial canonical bundle, for example, an abelian variety, a K3 surface or a Calabi-Yau variety. Vojta's conjecture predicts that if 
 
 
 
  is an effective ample normal crossings divisor, then the 
 
 
 
 -integral points on the affine variety 
 
 
 
  are not Zariski dense. For abelian varieties, this was conjectured by Lang and proven by .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a variety of general type, i.e., 
 
 
 
  is ample on some non-empty Zariski open subset of 
 
 
 
 . Then taking 
 
 
 
 , Vojta's conjecture predicts that 
 
 
 
  is not Zariski dense in 
 
 
 
 . This last statement for varieties of general type is the Bombieri-Lang conjecture.

Generalizations
There are generalizations in which 
 
 
 
  is allowed to vary over 
 
 
 
 , and there is an additional term in the upper bound that depends on the discriminant of the field extension 
 
 
 
 .
There are generalizations in which the non-archimedean local heights 
 
 
 
  are replaced by truncated local heights, which are local heights in which multiplicities are ignored. These versions of Vojta's conjecture provide natural higher-dimensional analogues of the ABC conjecture.
References






"
Category:Number theory Category:Conjectures


