


Holstein–Herring method




Holstein–Herring method
The Holstein–Herring method,1234 also called the Surface Integral method,56 also called Smirnov's method7 is an effective means of getting the exchange energy splittings of asymptotically degenerate energy states in molecular systems. Although the exchange energy becomes elusive at large internuclear systems, it is of prominent importance in theories of molecular binding and magnetism. This splitting results from the symmetry under exchange of identical nuclei (Pauli Exclusion Principle).
Theory
The basic idea pioneered by Holstein and Herring approach can be illustrated for the hydrogen molecular ion or more generally, atom-ion systems or one-active electron systems, as follows. We consider states that are represented by even or odd functions with respect to behavior under space inversion. This is denoted with the suffixes g and u from the German gerade and ungerade and are standard practice for the designation of electronic states of diatomic molecules, whereas for atomic states the terms even and odd are used. The electronic Schrödinger equation can be written as:


 
  where E is the (electronic) energy of a given quantum mechanical state (eigenstate), with the electronic state function 
 
 
 
  depending on the spatial coordinates of the electron and where 
 
 
 
  is the electron-nuclear Coulomb potential energy function. For the hydrogen molecular ion, this is:


 
  For any gerade (or even) state, the electronic Schrödinger wave equation can be written in atomic units (
 
 
 
 ) as:


 
  For any ungerade (or odd) state, the corresponding wave equation can be written as:


 
  For simplicity, we assume real functions (although the result can be generalized to the complex case). We then multiply the gerade wave equation by 
 
 
 
 on the left and the ungerade wave equation on the left by 
 
 
 
 and subtract to obtain:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the exchange energy splitting. Next, without loss of generality, we define orthogonal single-particle functions, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , located at the nuclei and write:


 
  This is similar to the LCAO (Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals) ansatz used in quantum chemistry, but we emphasize that the functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are in general polarized i.e. they are not pure eigenfunctions of angular momentum with respect to their nuclear center, see also below). Note, however, that in the limit as 
 
 
 
 , these localized functions 
 
 
 
  collapse into the well-known atomic (hydrogenic) psi functions 
 
 
 
 . We denote 
 
 
 
  as the mid-plane located exactly between the two nuclei (see diagram for hydrogen molecular ion for more details), with 
 
 
 
  representing the unit normal vector of this plane (which is parallel to the Cartesian 
 
 
 
 -direction), so that the full 
 
 
 
  space is divided into left (
 
 
 
 ) and right (
 
 
 
 ) halves. By considerations of symmetry:


 
  This implies that:


 
  Also, these localized functions are normalized, which leads to:


 
  and conversely. Integration of the above in the whole space left to the mid-plane yields:


 
  and


 
   From a variation of the divergence theorem on the above, we finally obtain:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a differential surface element of the mid-plane. This is the Holstein-Herring formula. From the latter, Herring was the first to show8 that the lead term for the asymptotic expansion of the energy difference between the two lowest states of the hydrogen molecular ion, namely the first excited state 
 
 
 
  and the ground state 
 
 
 
  (as expressed in molecular notation—see graph for energy curves), was found to be:


 
  Previous calculations based on the LCAO of atomic orbitals had erroneously given a lead coefficient of 
 
 
 
  instead of 
 
 
 
 . While it is true that for the Hydrogen molecular ion, the eigenenergies can be mathematically expressed in terms of a generalization of the Lambert W function, these asymptotic formulae are more useful in the long range and the Holstein–Herring method has a much wider range of applications than this particular molecule.
Applications
The Holstein-Herring formula had limited applications until around 1990 when Tang, Toennies, and Yiu9 demonstrated that 
 
 
 
  can be a polarized wave function, i.e. an atomic wave function localized at a particular nucleus but perturbed by the other nuclear center, and consequently without apparent gerade or ungerade symmetry, and nonetheless the Holstein-Herring formula above can be used to generate the correct asymptotic series expansions for the exchange energies. In this way, one has successfully recast a two-center formulation into an effective one-center formulation. Subsequently, it has been applied with success to one-active electron systems. Later, Scott et al. explained and clarified their results while sorting out subtle but important issues concerning the true convergence of the polarized wave function.101112
The outcome meant that it was possible to solve for the asymptotic exchange energy splittings to any order. The Holstein–Herring method has been extended to the two-active electron case i.e. the hydrogen molecule for the two lowest discrete states of 
 
 
13 and also for general atom-atom systems.14
Physical Interpretation
The Holstein–Herring formula can be physically interpreted as the electron undergoing "quantum tunnelling" between both nuclei, thus creating a current whose flux through the mid-plane allows us to isolate the exchange energy. The energy is thus shared, i.e. exchanged, between the two nuclear centers. Related to the tunnelling effect, a complementary interpretation from Sidney Coleman's "Aspects of Symmetry" (1985) has an "instanton" travelling near and about the classical paths within path integral formulation. Note that the volume integral in the denominator of the Holstein-Herring formula is sub-dominant in 
 
 
 
 . Consequently this denominator is almost unity for sufficiently large internuclear distances 
 
 
 
  and only the surface integral of the numerator need be considered.
See also

Dirac Delta function model ( 1-D version of H2+)
Exchange interaction
Exchange symmetry
Conyers Herring
Hydrogen molecular ion
Lambert W function
Quantum tunneling
List of quantum-mechanical systems with analytical solutions

References
"
Category:Quantum chemistry





















