


Darwin Lagrangian




Darwin Lagrangian

The Darwin Lagrangian (named after Charles Galton Darwin, grandson of the naturalist) describes the interaction to order 
 
 
 
  between two charged particles in a vacuum and is given by1



where the free particle Lagrangian is



and the interaction Lagrangian is



where the Coulomb interaction is



and the Darwin interaction is



Here q1 and q2 are the charges on particles 1 and 2 respectively, m1 and m2 are the masses of the particles, v1 and v2 are the velocities of the particles, c is the speed of light, r is the vector between the two particles, and 
 
 
 
  is the unit vector in the direction of r.
The free Lagrangian is the Taylor expansion of free Lagrangian of two relativistic particles to second order in v. The Darwin interaction term is due to one particle reacting to the magnetic field generated by the other particle. If higher-order terms in v/c are retained, then the field degrees of freedom must be taken into account, and the interaction can no longer be taken to be instantaneous between the particles. In that case  retardation effects must be accounted for.
Derivation of the Darwin interaction in a vacuum
The relativistic interaction Lagrangian for a particle with charge q interacting with an electromagnetic field is2



where u is the relativistic velocity of the particle. The first term on the right generates the Coulomb interaction. The second term generates the Darwin interaction.
The vector potential in the Coulomb gauge is described by3 (Gaussian units)



where the transverse current Jt is the  solenoidal current (see Helmholtz decomposition) generated by a second particle. The divergence of the transverse current is zero.
The current generated by the second particle is



which has a Fourier transform



The transverse component of the current is



It is easily verified that



which must be true if the divergence of the transverse current is zero. We see that



is the component of the Fourier transformed current perpendicular to k.
From the equation for the vector potential, the Fourier transform of the vector potential is



where we have kept only the lowest order term in v/c.
The inverse Fourier transform of the vector potential is



where



(see Common integrals in quantum field theory ).
The Darwin interaction term in the Lagrangian is then
::{|cellpadding="2" style="border:2px solid #ccccff" | 
 
 
 
  |}
where again we kept only the lowest order term in v/c.
Lagrangian equations of motion
The  equation of motion for one of the particles is






where p1 is the momentum of the particle.
Free particle
The equation of motion for a free particle neglecting interactions between the two particles is






Interacting particles
For interacting particles, the equation of motion becomes



::{|cellpadding="2" style="border:2px solid #ccccff" | 
 
 
 
  |}









Darwin Hamiltonian for two particles in a vacuum
The Darwin Hamiltonian for two particles in a vacuum is related to the Lagrangian by a Legendre transformation



The Hamiltonian becomes










Hamiltonian equations of motion
The Hamiltonian equations of motion are



and



which yield



and










Note that the quantum mechanical Breit equation originally used the Darwin Lagrangian with the Darwin Hamiltonian as its classical starting point though the Breit equation would be better vindicated by the Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory and better yet quantum electrodynamics.
See also

Static forces and virtual-particle exchange
Breit equation
Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory

References
"
Category:Magnetostatics Category:Concepts in physics



 pp. 596-598
Jackson, pp. 580-581.
Jackson, p. 242.




