


Reeb stability theorem




Reeb stability theorem

In mathematics, Reeb stability theorem, named after Georges Reeb, asserts that if one leaf of a codimension-one foliation is closed and has finite fundamental group, then all the leaves are closed and have finite fundamental group.
Reeb local stability theorem
Theorem:1 Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
 , codimension 
 
 
foliation of a manifold

 
  and 
 
 
 
  a compact leaf with finite holonomy group. There exists a neighborhood

 
  of 
 
 
 
 , saturated in 
 
 
 
  (also called invariant), in which all the leaves are compact with finite holonomy groups. Further, we can define a retraction

 
  such that, for every leaf 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a covering map with a finite number of sheets and, for each 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is homeomorphic to a disk of dimension k and is transverse to 
 
 
 
 . The neighborhood 
 
 
 
  can be taken to be arbitrarily small.
The last statement means in particular that, in a neighborhood of the point corresponding to a compact leaf with finite holonomy, the space of leaves is Hausdorff. Under certain conditions the Reeb local stability theorem may replace the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem in higher dimensions.2 This is the case of codimension one, singular foliations 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , and some center-type singularity in 
 
 
 
 .
The Reeb local stability theorem also has a version for a noncompact codimension-1 leaf.34
Reeb global stability theorem
An important problem in foliation theory is the study of the influence exerted by a compact leaf upon the global structure of a foliation. For certain classes of foliations, this influence is considerable.
Theorem:5 Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
 , codimension one foliation of a closed manifold 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  contains a compact leaf 
 
 
 
  with finite fundamental group, then all the leaves of 
 
 
 
  are compact, with finite fundamental group. If 
 
 
 
  is transversely orientable, then every leaf of 
 
 
 
  is diffeomorphic to 
 
 
 
 ; 
 
 
 
  is the total space of a fibration

 
  over 
 
 
 
 , with fibre

 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the fibre foliation, 
 
 
 
 .
This theorem holds true even when 
 
 
 
  is a foliation of a manifold with boundary, which is, a priori, tangent on certain components of the boundary and transverse on other components.6 In this case it implies Reeb sphere theorem.
Reeb Global Stability Theorem is false for foliations of codimension greater than one.7 However, for some special kinds of foliations one has the following global stability results:

In the presence of a certain transverse geometric structure:

Theorem:8 Let 
 
 
 
  be a complete conformal foliation of codimension 
 
 
 
  of a connected manifold 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  has a compact leaf with finite holonomy group, then all the leaves of 
 
 
 
  are compact with finite holonomy group.

For holomorphic foliations in complex Kähler manifold:

Theorem:9 Let 
 
 
 
  be a holomorphic foliation of codimension 
 
 
 
  in a compact complex Kähler manifold. If 
 
 
 
  has a compact leaf with finite holonomy group then every leaf of 
 
 
 
  is compact with finite holonomy group.
References

C. Camacho, A. Lins Neto: Geometric theory of foliations, Boston, Birkhauser, 1985
I. Tamura, Topology of foliations: an introduction, Transl. of Math. Monographs, AMS, v.97, 2006, 193 p.

Notes
"
Category:Foliations




J. Palis, jr., W. de Melo, Geometric theory of dinamical systems: an introduction, — New-York, Springer,1982.
T.Inaba, 

 
  Reeb stability of noncompact leaves of foliations,— Proc. Japan Acad. Ser. A Math. Sci., 59:158{160, 1983 [http://projecteuclid.org/DPubS/Repository/1.0/Disseminate?view=body&id;;=pdf_1&handle;=euclid.pja/1195515640]
J. Cantwell and L. Conlon, Reeb stability for noncompact leaves in foliated 3-manifolds, — Proc. Amer.Math.Soc. 33 (1981), no. 2, 408–410.1

C. Godbillon, Feuilletages, etudies geometriques, — Basel, Birkhauser, 1991
W.T.Wu and G.Reeb, Sur les éspaces fibres et les variétés feuillitées, — Hermann, 1952.
R.A. Blumenthal, Stability theorems for conformal foliations, — Proc. AMS. 91, 1984, p. 55–63. 2
J.V. Pereira, Global stability for holomorphic foliations on Kaehler manifolds, — Qual. Theory Dyn. Syst. 2 (2001), 381–384. 




