


Wirtinger derivatives




Wirtinger derivatives
In [[Complex analysis|complex analysis of one]] and [[several complex variables]], '''Wirtinger derivatives''' (sometimes also called '''Wirtinger operators'''See references {{Harvnb|Fichera|1986|p=62}} and {{harvnb|
 Kracht|Kreyszig|1988|p=10}}.), named after Wilhelm Wirtinger who introduced them in 1927 in the course of his studies on the theory of functions of several complex variables, are partial differential operators of the first order which behave in a very similar manner to the ordinary derivatives with respect to one real variable, when applied to holomorphic functions, antiholomorphic functions or simply differentiable functions on complex domains. These operators permit the construction of a differential calculus for such functions that is entirely analogous to the ordinary differential calculus for functions of real variables.1
Historical notes
Early days (1899–1911): the work of Henri Poincaré
Wirtinger derivatives were used in complex analysis at least as early as in the paper , as briefly noted by  and by .2 As a matter of fact, in the third paragraph of his 1899 paper,3 Henri Poincaré first defines the complex variable in ℂn and its complex conjugate as follows



where the index 
 
 
 
  ranges from 1 to 
 
 
 
 . Then he writes the equation defining the functions 
 
 
 
  he calls biharmonique,4 previously written using partial derivatives with respect to the real variables

 
 , 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  ranging from 1 to 
 
 
 
 , exactly in the following way5



This implies that he implicitly used  below: to see this is sufficient to compare equations 2 and 2' of . Apparently, this paper was not noticed by the early savants doing research in the theory of functions of several complex variables: in the papers of ,  (and ) and of  all fundamental partial differential operators of the theory are expressed directly by using partial derivatives respect to the real and imaginary parts of the complex variables involved. In the long survey paper by  (first published in 1913),6 partial derivatives with respect to each complex variable of a holomorphic function of several complex variables seem to be meant as formal derivatives: as a matter of fact when Osgood express the pluriharmonic operator7 and the Levi operator, he follows the established practice of Amoroso, Levi and Levi-Civita.
The work of Dimitrie Pompeiu in 1912 and 1913: a new formulation
According to , a new step in the definition of the concept was taken by Dimitrie Pompeiu: in the paper , given a complex valued differentiable function (in the sense of real analysis) of one complex variable

 
  defined in the neighbourhood of a given point

 
 ∈ℂ, he defines the areolar derivative as the following limit



where 
 
 
 
  is the boundary of a disk of radius 
 
 
 
  entirely contained in the domain of definition of 
 
 
 
 , i.e. his bounding circle.8 This is evidently an alternative definition of Wirtinger derivative respect to the complex conjugate variable:9 it is a more general one, since, as noted a by , the limit may exists for functions that are not even differentiable at 
 
 
 
 .10 According to , the first to identify the areolar derivative as a weak derivative in the sense of Sobolev was Ilia Vekua.11 In his following paper,  uses this newly defined concept in order to introduce his generalization of Cauchy's integral formula, the now called Cauchy–Pompeiu formula.
The work of Wilhelm Wirtinger
The first systematic introduction of Wirtinger derivatives seems due to Wilhelm Wirtinger in the paper  in order to simplify the calculations of quantities occurring in the theory of functions of several complex variables: as a result of the introduction of these differential operators, the form of all the differential operators commonly used in the theory, like the Levi operator and the Cauchy–Riemann operator, is considerably simplified and consequently easier to handle. The paper is deliberately written from a formal point of view, i.e. without giving a rigorous derivation of the properties deduced.
Formal definition
Despite their ubiquitous use,12 it seems that there is no text listing all the properties of Wirtinger derivatives: however, fairly complete references are the short course on multidimensional complex analysis by ,13 the monograph of ,14 and the monograph of 15 which are used as general references in this and the following sections.
Functions of one complex variable
1|Definition 1. Consider the complex plane

 
 . The Wirtinger derivatives are defined as the following linear partial differential operators of first order:



Clearly, the natural domain of definition of these partial differential operators is the space of 

 
  functions on a domain

 
 , but, since these operators are linear and have constant coefficients, they can be readily extended to every space of generalized functions.
Functions of n > 1 complex variables
2|Definition 2. Consider the euclidean space on the complex field

 
 . The Wirtinger derivatives are defined as the following matrix linear partial differential operators of first order:



 
  As for Wirtinger derivatives for functions of one complex variable, the natural domain of definition of these partial differential operators is again the space of 

 
  functions on a domain 

 ⊆ ℝ2n, and again, since these operators are linear and have constant coefficients, they can be readily extended to every space of generalized functions.
Basic properties
In the present section and in the following ones it is assumed that 
 
 
 
 
  is a complex vector and that 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are real vectors, with n ≥ 1: also it is assumed that the subset 

 can be thought of as a domain in the real euclidean space ℝ2n or in his isomorphic complex counterpart ℂn. All the proofs are easy consequences of  and  and of the corresponding properties of the derivatives (ordinary or partial).
Linearity
3|Lemma 1. If 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are complex numbers, then for 
 
 
 
  the following equalities hold



Product rule
4|Lemma 2. If 
 
 
 
 , then for 
 
 
 
 
  the product rule holds



Note that this property implies that Wirtinger derivatives are derivations from the abstract algebra point of view, exactly like ordinary derivatives are.
Chain rule
This property takes two different forms respectively for functions of one and several complex variables: for the n > 1 case, to express the chain rule in its full generality it is necessary to consider two domains

 
  and 
 
 
 
  and two maps

 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  having natural smoothness requirements.16
Functions of one complex variable
5|Lemma 3.1 If 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , then the chain rule holds






Functions of n > 1 complex variables
6|Lemma 3.2 If 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then for 
 
 
 
  the following form of the chain rule holds






Conjugation
7|Lemma 4. If 
 
 
 
 
 , then for 
 
 
 
  the following equalities hold



See also

CR–function
Dolbeault complex
Dolbeault operator
Pluriharmonic function

Notes
Historical references


. "On a boundary value problem" (free translation of the title) is the first paper where a set of (fairly complicate) necessary and sufficient conditions for the solvability of the Dirichlet problem for holomorphic functions of several variables is given.

.

. "Areolar derivative and functions of bounded variation" (free English translation of the title) is an important reference paper in the theory of areolar derivatives.

. "Studies on essential singular points of analytic functions of two or more complex variables" (English translation of the title) is an important paper in the theory of functions of several complex variables, where the problem of determining what kind of hypersurface can be the boundary of a domain of holomorphy.

. "On the hypersurfaces of the 4-dimensional space that can be the boundary of the domain of existence of an analytic function of two complex variables" (English translation of the title) is another important paper in the theory of functions of several complex variables, investigating further the theory started in .

. "On the functions of two or more complex variables" (free English translation of the title) is the first paper where a sufficient condition for the solvability of the Cauchy problem for holomorphic functions of several complex variables is given.

.

, (in German) available at DigiZeitschriften.

.

.

.


, available at DigiZeitschriften. In this important paper, Wirtinger introduces several important concepts in the theory of functions of several complex variables, namely Wirtinger's derivatives and the tangential Cauchy-Riemann condition.

References


. Introduction to complex analysis is a short course in the theory of functions of several complex variables, held on February 1972 at the Centro Linceo Interdisciplinare di Scienze Matematiche e Loro Applicazioni "Beniamino Segre".

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. "Elementary introduction to the theory of functions of complex variables with particular regard to integral representations" (English translation of the title) are the notes form a course, published by the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, held by Martinelli when he was "Professore Linceo".



ISBN 978-0-387-97195-7. A textbook on complex analysis including many historical notes on the subject.

. Notes from a course held by Francesco Severi at the Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica (which at present bears his name), containing appendices of Enzo Martinelli, Giovanni Battista Rizza and Mario Benedicty. An English translation of the title reads as:-"Lectures on analytic functions of several complex variables – Lectured in 1956–57 at the Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica in Rome".

"
Category:Complex analysis Category:Differential operators Category:Mathematical analysis



Some of the basic properties of Wirtinger derivatives are the same ones as the properties characterizing the ordinary (or partial) derivatives and used for the construction of the usual differential calculus.↩
Reference to the work  of Henri Poincaré is precisely stated by , while Reinhold Remmert does not cite any reference to support his assertion.↩
See reference ↩
These functions are precisely pluriharmonic functions, and the linear differential operator defining them, i.e. the operator in equation 2 of , is exactly the n-dimensional pluriharmonic operator.↩
See , equation 2': note that, throughout the paper, the symbol 
 
 
 
  is used to signify partial differentiation respect to a given variable, instead of the now commonplace symbol ∂.↩
The corrected Dover edition of the paper  contains much important historical information on the early development of the theory of functions of several complex variables, and is therefore a useful source.↩
See : curiously, he calls Cauchy–Riemann equations this set of equations.↩
This is the definition given by  in his approach to Pompeiu's work: as  remarks, the original definition of  does not require the domain of integration to be a circle. See the entry areolar derivative for further information.↩
See the section "Formal definition" of this entry.↩
See problem 2 in  for one example of such a function.↩
See also the excellent book by , theorem 1.31: If the generalized derivative 
 
 
 
 ∈

, p>1, then the function 
 
 
 
  has almost everywhere in 
 
 
 
  a derivative in the sense of Pompeiu, the latter being equal to the Generalized derivative in the sense of Sobolev

.↩
With or without the attribution of the concept to Wilhelm Wirtinger: see, for example, the well known monograph .↩
In this course lectures, Aldo Andreotti uses the properties of Wirtinger derivatives in order to prove the closure of the algebra of holomorphic functions under certain operations: this purpose is common to all references cited in this section.↩
This is a classical work on the theory of functions of several complex variables dealing mainly with its sheaf theoretic aspects: however, in the introductory sections, Wirtinger derivatives and a few other analytical tools are introduced and their application to the theory is described.↩
In this work, the authors prove some of the properties of Wirtinger derivatives also for the general case of 
 
 
functions: in this single aspect, their approach is different from the one adopted by the other authors cited in this section, and perhaps more complete.↩
See  and also : Gunning considers the general case of 

 
 
  functions but only for p = 1. References  and , as already pointed out, consider only holomorphic maps with p = 1: however, the resulting formulas are formally very similar.↩




