


Fundamental group scheme




Fundamental group scheme

In mathematics, the fundamental group scheme is a group scheme canonically associated to a scheme over a Dedekind scheme (e.g. the spectrum of a field or the spectrum of a discrete valuation ring). It is a generalisation of the étale fundamental group. Although its existence was conjectured by Alexander Grothendieck, the first construction is due to Madhav Nori,12 who only worked on schemes over fields. A generalisation to schemes over Dedekind schemes is due to Carlo Gasbarri.3
First definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a perfect field and 
 
 
 
  a faithfully flat and proper morphism of schemes with 
 
 
 
  a reduced and connected scheme. Assume the existence of a section 
 
 
 
 
 , then the fundamental group scheme 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is defined as the affine group scheme naturally associated to the neutral tannakian category (over 
 
 
 
 ) of essentially finite vector bundles over 
 
 
 
 
 .
Second definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Dedekind scheme, 
 
 
 
  any connected scheme (not necessarily reduced)4 and 
 
 
 
  a faithfully flat morphism of finite type (not necessarily proper). Assume the existence of a section 
 
 
 
 . Once we prove that the category of isomorphism classes of torsors over 
 
 
 
 
  (pointed over 
 
 
 
 ) under the action of finite and flat 
 
 
 
 -group schemes is cofiltered then we define the universal torsor (pointed over 
 
 
 
 ) as the projective limit of all the torsors of that category. The 
 
 
 
 -group scheme acting on it is called the fundamental group scheme and denoted by 
 
 
 
 
  (when 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of a perfect field the two definitions coincide so that no confusion can arise).
See also

Étale fundamental group
Fundamental group

Notes


"
Category:Scheme theory Category:Topological methods of algebraic geometry



M. V. Nori On the Representations of the Fundamental Group, Compositio Mathematica, Vol. 33, Fasc. 1, (1976), p. 29-42↩
T. Szamuely Galois Groups and Fundamental Groups. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, Vol. 117 (2009)↩
C. Gasbarri, Heights of Vector Bundles and the Fundamental Group Scheme of a Curve, Duke Mathematical Journal, Vol. 117, No. 2, (2003) p. 287-311↩
M. Antei, The fundamental group scheme of a non reduced scheme, Bulletin des Sciences Mathématiques, Volume 135, Issue 5, July–August 2011, Pages 531-539.↩




