


Lagrange, Euler and Kovalevskaya tops




Lagrange, Euler and Kovalevskaya tops

In classical mechanics, the precession of a top under the influence of gravity is not, in general, an integrable problem. There are however three famous cases that are integrable, the Euler, the Lagrange and the Kovalevskaya top.1 In addition to the energy, each of these tops involves three additional constants of motion that give rise to the integrability.
The Euler top describes a free top without any particular symmetry, moving in the absence of any external torque. The Lagrange top is a symmetric top, in which the center of gravity lies on the symmetry axis. The Kovalevskaya top23 is special symmetric top with a unique ratio of the moments of inertia satisfy the relation


 
 ,
and in which the center of gravity is located in the plane perpendicular to the symmetry axis.
Hamiltonian Formulation of Classical tops
A classical top4 is defined by three principal axes, defined by the three orthogonal vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with corresponding moments of inertia 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In a Hamiltonian formulation of classical tops, the conjugate dynamical variables are the components of the angular momentum vector 
 
 
 
  along the principal axes



and the z-components of the three principal axes,



The Poisson algebra of these variables is given by



If the position of the center of mass is given by 
 
 
 
 , then the Hamiltonian of a top is given by



The equations of motion are then determined by



Euler Top
The Euler top is an untorqued top, with Hamiltonian



The four constants of motion are the energy 
 
 
 
  and the three components of angular momentum in the lab frame,



Lagrange Top
The Lagrange top is a symmetric top with the center of mass along the symmetry axis at location, 
 
 
 
 , with Hamiltonian



The four constants of motion are the energy 
 
 
 
 , the angular momentum component along the symmetry axis, 
 
 
 
 , the angular momentum in the z-direction



and the magnitude of the n-vector



Kovalevskaya Top
The Kovalevskaya top 56 is a symmetric top in which 
 
 
 
  and the center of mass lies in the plane perpendicular to the symmetry axis 
 
 
 
 . The Hamiltonian is



The four constants of motion are the energy 
 
 
 
 , the Kovalevskaya invariant



where the variables 
 
 
 
  are defined by



the angular momentum component in the z-direction,



and the magnitude of the n-vector



References
'
Category:Hamiltonian mechanics



Audin, M. Spinning Tops: A Course on Integrable Systems. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
S. Kovalevskaya, Acta Math. 12 177–232 (1889)
A. M. Perelemov, Teoret. Mat. Fiz., Volume 131, Number 2, Pages 197–205 (2002)
Herbert Goldstein Charles P. Poole , John L. Safko, Classical Mechanics, (3rd Edition), Addison-Wesley (2002)






