


Calculus of moving surfaces




Calculus of moving surfaces

(Figure)
The surface of a flag in the wind is an example of a deforming manifold.

The calculus of moving surfaces (CMS) 1 is an extension of the classical tensor calculus to deforming manifolds. Central to the CMS is the 
 
 
 
 -derivative whose original definition 2 was put forth by Jacques Hadamard. It plays the role analogous to that of the covariant derivative

 
  on differential manifolds. In particular, it has the property that it produces a tensor when applied to a tensor.
(Figure)
Jacques Salomon Hadamard, French Mathematician, 1865–1963 CE

Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is the evolution of the surface

 
  indexed by a time-like parameter 
 
 
 
 . The definitions of the surface velocity

 
  and the operator

 
  are the geometric foundations of the CMS. The velocity C is the rate of deformation of the surface 
 
 
 
  in the instantaneous normal direction. The value of 
 
 
 
  at a point 
 
 
 
  is defined as the limit



where 
 
 
 
  is the point on 
 
 
 
  that lies on the straight line perpendicular to 
 
 
 
  at point P. This definition is illustrated in the first geometric figure below. The velocity 
 
 
 
  is a signed quantity: it is positive when 
 
 
 
  points in the direction of the chosen normal, and negative otherwise. The relationship between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is analogous to the relationship between location and velocity in elementary calculus: knowing either quantity allows one to construct the other by differentiation or integration.
 
The 
 
 
 
 -derivative for a scalar field F defined on 
 
 
 
  is the rate of change in 
 
 
 
  in the instantaneously normal direction:



This definition is also illustrated in second geometric figure.
The above definitions are geometric. In analytical settings, direct application of these definitions may not be possible. The CMS gives analytical definitions of C and 
 
 
 
  in terms of elementary operations from calculus and differential geometry.
Analytical definitions
For analytical definitions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , consider the evolution of 
 
 
 
  given by



where 
 
 
 
  are general curvilinear space coordinates and 
 
 
 
  are the surface coordinates. By convention, tensor indices of function arguments are dropped. Thus the above equations contains 
 
 
 
  rather than 
 
 
 
 .The velocity object 
 
 
 
  is defined as the partial derivative



The velocity 
 
 
 
  can be computed most directly by the formula



where 
 
 
 
  are the covariant components of the normal vector 
 
 
 
 .
The definition of the 
 
 
 
 -derivative for an invariant F reads



where 
 
 
 
  is the shift tensor and 
 
 
 
  is the covariant derivative on S.
For tensors, an appropriate generalization is needed. The proper definition for a representative tensor 
 
 
 
  reads



where 
 
 
 
  are Christoffel symbols.
Properties of the δ/δt-derivative
The 
 
 
 
 -derivative commutes with contraction, satisfies the product rule for any collection of indices



and obeys a chain rule for surface restrictions of spatial tensors:



Chain rule shows that the 
 
 
 
 -derivative of spatial "metrics" vanishes



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are covariant and contravariant metric tensors, 
 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta symbol, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Levi-Civita symbols. The main article on Levi-Civita symbols describes them for Cartesian coordinate systems. The preceding rule is valid in general coordinates, where the definition of the Levi-Civita symbols must include the square root of the determinant of the covariant metric tensor 
 
 
 
 .
Differentiation table for the δ/δt-derivative
The 
 
 
 
 -derivative of the key surface objects leads to highly concise and attractive formulas. When applied to the covariant surface metric tensor

 
 
  and the contravariant metric tensor 
 
 
 
 , the following identities result



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the doubly covariant and doubly contravariant curvature tensors. These curvature tensors, as well as for the mixed curvature tensor 
 
 
 
 , satisfy



The shift tensor 
 
 
 
  and the normal 
 
 
 
  satisfy



Finally, the surface Levi-Civita symbols

 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfy



Time differentiation of integrals
The CMS provides rules for time differentiation of volume and surface integrals.
References
"
Category:Tensors Category:Differential geometry Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Curvature_(mathematics) Category:Calculus



Grinfeld, P. (2010). "Hamiltonian Dynamic Equations for Fluid Films". Studies in Applied Mathematics. . ISSN 00222526.↩
J. Hadamard, Lecons Sur La Propagation Des Ondes et Les Equations De l’Hydrodynamique. Paris: Hermann, 1903.↩




