


Landweber exact functor theorem




Landweber exact functor theorem

In mathematics, the Landweber exact functor theorem, named after Peter Landweber, is a theorem in algebraic topology. It is known that a complex orientation of a homology theory leads to a formal group law. The Landweber exact functor theorem (or LEFT for short) can be seen as a method to reverse this process: it constructs a homology theory out of a formal group law.
Statement
The coefficient ring of complex cobordism is 
 
 
 
 , where the degree of 
 
 
 
  is 2i. This is isomorphic to the graded Lazard ring

 
 . This means that giving a formal group law F (of degree −2) over a graded ring 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to giving a graded ring morphism 
 
 
 
 . Multiplication by an integer n >0 is defined inductively as a power series, by


 
  and 
 
 

Let now F be a formal group law over a ring 
 
 
 
 . Define for a topological space X


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  gets its 
 
 
 
 -algebra structure via F. The question is: is E a homology theory? It is obviously a homotopy invariant functor, which fulfills excision. The problem is that tensoring in general does not preserve exact sequences. One could demand that 
 
 
 
  is flat over 
 
 
 
 , but that would be too strong in practice. Peter Landweber found another criterion:

Theorem (Landweber exact functor theorem)
 
For every prime p, there are elements 
 
 
 
  such that we have the following: Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a graded 
 
 
 
 -module and the sequence 
 
 
 
  is regular for M, for every p and n. Then
 
 



is a homology theory on CW-complexes.
 

In particular, every formal group law F over a ring R yields a module over 
 
 
 
  since we get via F a ring morphism 
 
 
 
 .
Remarks

There is also a version for Brown–Peterson cohomology BP. The spectrum BP is a direct summand of 
 
 
 
  with coefficients 
 
 
 
 . The statement of the LEFT stays true if one fixes a prime p and substitutes BP for MU.


The classical proof of the LEFT uses the Landweber–Morava invariant ideal theorem: the only prime ideals of 
 
 
 
  which are invariant under coaction of 
 
 
 
  are the 
 
 
 
 . This allows to check flatness only against the 
 
 
 
  (see Landweber, 1976).


The LEFT can be strengthened as follows: let 
 
 
 
  be the (homotopy) category of Landweber exact 
 
 
 
 -modules and 
 
 
 
  the category of MU-module spectra M such that 
 
 
 
  is Landweber exact. Then the functor 
 
 
 
  is an equivalence of categories. The inverse functor (given by the LEFT) takes 
 
 
 
 -algebras to (homotopy) MU-algebra spectra (see Hovey, Strickland, 1999, Thm 2.7).

Examples
The archetypical and first known (non-trivial) example is complex K-theory K. Complex K-theory is complex oriented and has as formal group law 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding morphism 
 
 
 
  is also known as the Todd genus. We have then an isomorphism


 
  called the Conner–Floyd isomorphism.
While complex K-theory was constructed before by geometric means, many homology theories were first constructed via the Landweber exact functor theorem. This includes elliptic homology, the Johnson–Wilson theories

 
  and the Lubin–Tate spectra

 
 .
While homology with rational coefficients 
 
 
 
  is Landweber exact, homology with integer coefficients 
 
 
 
  is not Landweber exact. Furthermore, Morava K-theory K(n) is not Landweber exact.
Modern reformulation
A module M over 
 
 
 
  is the same as a quasi-coherent sheaf

 
  over 
 
 
 
 , where L is the Lazard ring. If 
 
 
 
 , then M has the extra datum of a 
 
 
 
  coaction. A coaction on the ring level corresponds to that 
 
 
 
  is an equivariant sheaf with respect to an action of an affine group scheme G. It is a theorem of Quillen that 
 
 
 
  and assigns to every ring R the group of power series


 
 . It acts on the set of formal group laws 
 
 
 
  via


 
 . These are just the coordinate changes of formal group laws. Therefore, one can identify the stack quotient 
 
 
 
  with the stack of (1-dimensional) formal groups

 
  and 
 
 
 
  defines a quasi-coherent sheaf over this stack. Now it is quite easy to see that it suffices that M defines a quasi-coherent sheaf 
 
 
 
  which is flat over 
 
 
 
  in order that 
 
 
 
  is a homology theory. The Landweber exactness theorem can then be interpreted as a flatness criterion for 
 
 
 
  (see Lurie 2010).
Refinements to 
 
 
 
 -ring spectra
While the LEFT is known to produce (homotopy) ring spectra out of 
 
 
 
 , it is a much more delicate question to understand when these spectra are actually 

 
 -ring spectra. As of 2010, the best progress was made by Jacob Lurie. If X is an algebraic stack and 
 
 
 
  a flat map of stacks, the discussion above shows that we get a presheaf of (homotopy) ring spectra on X. If this map factors over 
 
 
 
  (the stack of 1-dimensional p-divisible groups of height n) and the map 
 
 
 
  is etale, then this presheaf can be refined to a sheaf of 
 
 
 
 -ring spectra (see Goerss). This theorem is important for the construction of topological modular forms.
References

P. Goerss, Realizing families of Landweber exact homology theories
Hovey, Mark and Strickland, Neil P., Morava K-theories and localisation, Mem.Amer. Math. Soc., 139 (1999), no. 666.
P. S. Landweber, Homological properties of comodules over 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
, American Journal of Mathematics 98 (1976), 591–610.
J. Lurie, Chromatic Homotopy Theory, Lecture Notes (2010)

"
Algebraic Topology


