


Cameron Leigh Stewart




Cameron Leigh Stewart

Cameron Leigh Stewart FRSC is a Canadian mathematician. He is a professor of pure mathematics at the University of Waterloo. He was elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 1989. He was appointed Fellow of the Fields Institute in 2008. Since 2003 he has held a Canada Research Chair (tier 1).1 Since 2005 he has been appointed University Professor at the University of Waterloo.2
He made numerous contributions to number theory, in particular the abc conjecture. In 1976 he obtained, with Alan Baker, an effective improvement to Liouville's Theorem. In 1991 he proved that the number of solutions to a Thue equation

 
  is at most 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a pre-determined positive real number and 
 
 
 
  is the number of distinct primes dividing a large divisor 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . This improves on an earlier result of Enrico Bombieri and Wolfgang M. Schmidt and is close to the best possible result. In 1995 he obtained, along with Jaap Top, the existence of infinitely many quadratic, cubic, and sextic twists of elliptic curves of large rank. In 1991 and 2001 respectively, he obtained, along with Kunrui Yu, the best unconditional estimates for the abc conjecture. In 2013, he solved an old problem of Erdős involving Lucas and Lehmer numbers. In particular, he proved that the largest prime divisor 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
 . He was selected to give the annual Isidore and Hilda Dressler Lecture at Kansas State University in 2015.
Stewart completed a B.Sc. at the University of British Columbia in 1971 and a M.Sc in 1972 from McGill University. He earned his doctorate from the University of Cambridge in 1976, under supervision of Alan Baker.3 While at Cambridge he was awarded the J.T. Knight Prize in 1974.
Stewart has Erdős number 1.
Selected works









References
External links

Website at University of Waterloo


"
Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Living people Category:Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada Category:Canadian mathematicians Category:20th-century mathematicians Category:21st-century mathematicians Category:McGill University alumni Category:Alumni of the University of Cambridge Category:University of Waterloo faculty Category:University of British Columbia alumni Category:Canada Research Chairs



Cameron L. Stewart's Canada Research Chair Profile↩
University Professors of the University of Waterloo http://provost.uwaterloo.ca/universityprofessors.html↩
Curriculum Vitae at University of Waterloo↩




