


Sumner's conjecture




Sumner's conjecture

David Sumner (a graph theorist at the University of South Carolina) conjectured in 1971 that tournaments are universal graphs for polytrees. More precisely, Sumner's conjecture (also called Sumner's universal tournament conjecture) states that every orientation of every 
 
 
 
 -vertex tree is a subgraph of every 
 
 
 
 -vertex tournament.1 The conjecture remains unproven;  call it "one of the most well-known problems on tournaments."
Examples
Let polytree 
 
 
 
  be a star

 
 , in which all edges are oriented outward from the central vertex to the leaves. Then, 
 
 
 
  cannot be embedded in the tournament formed from the vertices of a regular 
 
 
 
 -gon by directing every edge clockwise around the polygon. For, in this tournament, every vertex has indegree and outdegree equal to 
 
 
 
 , while the central vertex in 
 
 
 
  has larger outdegree 
 
 
 
 .2 Thus, if true, Sumner's conjecture would give the best possible size of a universal graph for polytrees.
However, in every tournament of 
 
 
 
  vertices, the average outdegree is 
 
 
 
 , and the maximum outdegree is an integer greater than or equal to the average. Therefore, there exists a vertex of outdegree 
 
 
 
 , which can be used as the central vertex for a copy of 
 
 
 
 .
Partial results
The following partial results on the conjecture are known.

It is true for all sufficiently large values of 
 
 
 
 .3
There is a function 
 
 
 
  with asymptotic growth rate 
 
 
 
  with the property that every 
 
 
 
 -vertex polytree can be embedded as a subgraph of every 
 
 
 
 -vertex tournament. Additionally and more explicitly, 
 
 
 
 .4
There is a function 
 
 
 
  such that tournaments on 
 
 
 
  vertices are universal for polytrees with 
 
 
 
  leaves.5
There is a function 
 
 
 
  such that every 
 
 
 
 -vertex polytree with maximum degree at most 
 
 
 
  forms a subgraph of every tournament with 
 
 
 
  vertices. When 
 
 
 
  is a fixed constant, the asymptotic growth rate of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .6
Every "near-regular" tournament on 
 
 
 
  vertices contains every 
 
 
 
 -vertex polytree.7
Every orientation of an 
 
 
 
 -vertex caterpillar tree with diameter at most four can be embedded as a subgraph of every 
 
 
 
 -vertex tournament.8
Every 
 
 
 
 -vertex tournament contains as a subgraph every 
 
 
 
 -vertex rooted tree.9

Related conjectures
conjectured that every orientation of an 
 
 
 
 -vertex path graph (with 
 
 
 
 ) can be embedded as a subgraph into every 
 
 
 
 -vertex tournament.10 After partial results by  this was proven by .
Havet and Thomassé11 in turn conjectured a strengthening of Sumner's conjecture, that every tournament on 
 
 
 
  vertices contains as a subgraph every polytree with at most 
 
 
 
  leaves.
conjectured that, whenever a graph 
 
 
 
  requires 
 
 
 
  or more colors in a coloring of 
 
 
 
 , then every orientation of 
 
 
 
  contains every orientation of an 
 
 
 
 -vertex tree. Because complete graphs require a different color for each vertex, Sumner's conjecture would follow immediately from Burr's conjecture.12 As Burr showed, orientations of graphs whose chromatic number grows quadratically as a function of 
 
 
 
  are universal for polytrees.
Notes
References


.

. As cited by .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

External links

Sumner's Universal Tournament Conjecture (1971), D. B. West, updated July 2008.

"
Category:Graph theory Category:Conjectures



. However the earliest published citations given by Kühn et al. are to  and .  cites the conjecture as an undated private communication by Sumner.↩
This example is from .↩
.↩
 and . For earlier weaker bounds on 
 
 
 
 , see , , , , and .↩
; ; .↩
.↩
.↩

.↩

In , but jointly credited to Thomassé in that paper.↩
This is a corrected version of Burr's conjecture from .↩




