   Comparison of optimization software      Comparison of optimization software   Given a system transforming a set of inputs to output values, described by a mathematical function  f , optimization refers to the generation and selection of a best solution from some set of available alternatives, 1 by systematically choosing input values from within an allowed set, computing the value of the function, and recording the best value found during the process. Many real-world and theoretical problems may be modeled in this general framework. For example, the inputs can be design parameters of a motor, the output can be the power consumption, or the inputs can be business choices and the output can be the obtained profit, or the inputs can describe the configuration of a physical system and the output can be its energy.  An optimization problem can be represented in the following way   Given: a function  f : A    →   normal-→   \to    R from some set  A to the real numbers   Search for: an element x 0 in A such that f ( x 0 ) ≤ f ( x ) for all x in A ("minimization").   Typically, A is some subset of the Euclidean space  R n , often specified by a set of constraints , equalities or inequalities that the members of A have to satisfy. Maximization can be reduced to minimization by multiplying the function by minus one.  The use of optimization software requires that the function f is defined in a suitable programming language and linked to the optimization software. The optimization software will deliver input values in A , the software module realizing f will deliver the computed value f ( x ). In this manner, a clear separation of concerns is obtained: different optimization software modules can be easily tested on the same function f , or a given optimization software can be used for different functions f .  The following tables provide a comparison of optimization software libraries, either specialized or general purpose libraries with significant optimization coverage.       Language   Latest stable version   Academic/noncommercial use is free   Can be used in proprietary aps   License   Notes       ALGLIB   C++, C#, FreePascal, VBA   3.8.0 / August 2013     Dual (Commercial, GPL)   General purpose library, includes optimization package.     AMPL   C   October 2013     Dual (Commercial, academic)   A popular algebraic modeling language for linear, mixed-integer and nonlinear optimization. Student and AMPL for courses versions are available for free.     GNU Scientific Library   C   1.16 / July 2013     GPL   Free library provided by GNU project.     GNU Linear Programming Kit   C   4.52 / July 2013     GPL   Free library for linear programming (LP) and mixed integer programming (MIP).     IMSL Numerical Libraries   C, Java, C#, Fortran, Python   many components     Proprietary      LIONsolver   C++, Java   2.0.198 / October 2011     Proprietary   Support for interactive and learning optimization, according to RSO principles . {{cite book     MKL   C++, Fortran   11.1 / October 2013     Proprietary   Numerical library from Intel. MKL is specialized on linear algebra, but contains some optimization-related functionality.     NAG Numerical Libraries   C, Fortran   Mark 24 / October 2013     Proprietary      NMath   C#   5.3 / May 2013     Proprietary   C# numerical library built on top of MKL.     OptaPlanner   Java   6.0.1.Final / Dec 2013     ASL   Lightweight optimization solver in Java     SciPy   Python   0.13.1 / November 2013     BSD   General purpose numerical library from Enthought.       References  External links   OR/MS Today: 2013 Linear Programming Software Survey  OR/MS Today: 1998 Nonlinear Programming Software Survey   "       " The Nature of Mathematical Programming ," Mathematical Programming Glossary , INFORMS Computing Society. ↩     