


Active learning (machine learning)




Active learning (machine learning)

Active learning is a special case of semi-supervised machine learning in which a learning algorithm is able to interactively query the user (or some other information source) to obtain the desired outputs at new data points. In statistics literature it is sometimes also called optimal experimental design.12
There are situations in which unlabeled data is abundant but manually labeling is expensive. In such a scenario, learning algorithms can actively query the user/teacher for labels. This type of iterative supervised learning is called active learning. Since the learner chooses the examples, the number of examples to learn a concept can often be much lower than the number required in normal supervised learning. With this approach, there is a risk that the algorithm be overwhelmed by uninformative examples. Recent developments are dedicated to hybrid active learning3 and active learning in a single-pass (on-line) context,4 combining concepts from the field of Machine Learning (e.g., conflict and ignorance) with adaptive, incremental learning policies in the field of Online machine learning.
Definitions
Let 
 
 
 
  be the total set of all data under consideration. For example, in a protein engineering problem, 
 
 
 
  would include all proteins that are known to have a certain interesting activity and all additional proteins that one might want to test for that activity.
During each iteration, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  is broken up into three subsets



 
 : Data points where the label is known.


 
 : Data points where the label is unknown.


 
 : A subset of 
 
 
 
  that is chosen to be labeled.

Most of the current research in active learning involves the best method to choose the data points for 
 
 
 
 
 .
Query strategies
Algorithms for determining which data points should be labeled can be organized into a number of different categories:5

Uncertainty sampling: label those points for which the current model is least certain as to what the correct output should be


Query by committee: a variety of models are trained on the current labeled data, and vote on the output for unlabeled data; label those points for which the "committee" disagrees the most


Expected model change: label those points that would most change the current model


Expected error reduction: label those points that would most reduce the model's generalization error


Variance reduction: label those points that would minimize output variance, which is one of the components of error


Balance exploration and exploitation: the choice of examples to label is seen as a dilemma between the exploration and the exploitation over the data space representation. This strategy manages this compromise by modelling the active learning problem as a contextual bandit problem. For example, Bouneffouf et at. 6 propose a sequential algorithm named Active Thompson Sampling (ATS), which, in each round, assigns a sampling distribution on the pool, samples one point from this distribution, and queries the oracle for this sample point label.

A wide variety of algorithms have been studied that fall into these categories.78
Minimum Marginal Hyperplane
Some active learning algorithms are built upon Support vector machines (SVMs) and exploit the structure of the SVM to determine which data points to label. Such methods usually calculate the margin, 
 
 
 
 , of each unlabeled datum in 
 
 
 
  and treat 
 
 
 
  as an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional distance from that datum to the separating hyperplane.
Minimum Marginal Hyperplane methods assume that the data with the smallest 
 
 
 
 
  are those that the SVM is most uncertain about and therefore should be placed in 
 
 
 
  to be labeled. Other similar methods, such as Maximum Marginal Hyperplane, choose data with the largest 
 
 
 
 . Tradeoff methods choose a mix of the smallest and largest 
 
 
 
 s.
See also

Proactive learning

Notes
Other references

N. Rubens, D. Kaplan, M. Sugiyama. Recommender Systems Handbook: Active Learning in Recommender Systems (eds. F. Ricci, P.B. Kantor, L. Rokach,B. Shapira). Springer, 2011 1, 2.
Active Learning Tutorial, S. Dasgupta and J. Langford.

"
Category:Machine learning



.↩
↩










