


Mean inter-particle distance




Mean inter-particle distance

Mean inter-particle distance (or mean inter-particle separation) is the mean distance between microscopic particles (usually atoms or molecules) in a macroscopic body.
Ambiguity
From the very general considerations, the mean inter-particle distance is proportional to the size of the per-particle volume 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the particle density. However, barring a few simple cases such as the ideal gas model, precise calculations of the proportionality factor are impossible analytically. Therefore, approximate expressions are often used. One such an estimation is the Wigner-Seitz radius


 
  which corresponds to the radius of a sphere having per-particle volume 
 
 
 
 . Another popular definition is


 
 , corresponding to the length of the edge of the cube with the per-particle volume 
 
 
 
 . The two definitions differ by a factor of approximately 
 
 
 
 , so one has to exercise care if an article fails to define the parameter exactly. On the other hand, it is often used in qualitative statements where such a numeric factor is either irrelevant or plays an insignificant role, e.g.,

"a potential energy ... is proportional to some power n of the inter-particle distance r" (Virial theorem)
"the inter-particle distance is much larger than the thermal de Broglie wavelength" (Kinetic theory)

By: Nakul rana
Ideal gas
Nearest neighbor distribution
 We want to calculate probability distribution function of distance to the nearest neighbor (NN) particle. (The problem was first considered by Paul Hertz;1 for a modern derivation see, e.g.,.2) Let us assume 
 
 
 
  particles inside a sphere having volume 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 . Note that since the particles in the ideal gas are non-interacting, the probability to find a particle at a certain distance from another particle is the same as probability to find a particle at the same distance from any other point; we shall use the center of the sphere.
An NN particle at distance 
 
 
 
  means exactly one of the 
 
 
 
  particles resides at that distance while the rest 
 
 
 
  particles are at larger distances, i.e., they are somewhere outside the sphere with radius 
 
 
 
 .
The probability to find a particle at the distance from the origin between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , while the probability to find a particle outside that sphere is 
 
 
 
 . The sought-for expression is then


 
  where we substituted


 
  Finally, taking the 
 
 
 
 
  limit and using 
 
 
 
 , we obtain



One can immediately check that



The distribution peaks at



Mean distance and higher NN distribution moments


 
  or, using the 
 
 
 
  substitution,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the gamma function. Thus,



In particular,



References


See also

Wigner-Seitz radius

by: Nakul rana"
Category:Concepts in physics Category:Density









