


Magnetic mineralogy




Magnetic mineralogy

Magnetic mineralogy is the study of the magnetic properties of minerals. The contribution of a mineral to the total magnetism of a rock depends strongly on the type of magnetic order or disorder. Magnetically disordered minerals (diamagnets and paramagnets) contribute a weak magnetism and have no remanence. The more important minerals for rock magnetism are the minerals that can be magnetically ordered, at least at some temperatures. These are the ferromagnets, ferrimagnets and certain kinds of antiferromagnets. These minerals have a much stronger response to the field and can have a remanence.
Weakly magnetic minerals
Non-iron-bearing minerals
Most minerals with no iron content are diamagnetic.1 Some such minerals may have a significant positive magnetic susceptibility, for example serpentine,2 but this is because the minerals have inclusions containing strongly magnetic minerals such as magnetite. The susceptibility of such minerals is negative and small (Table 1).




Table 1. Susceptibilities of non-iron-bearing minerals 3



Mineral



graphite



calcite



anhydrite



gypsum



ice



orthoclase



magnesite



forsterite



halite



galena



quartz



celestine



sphalerite



Iron-bearing paramagnetic minerals
Most iron-bearing carbonates and silicates are paramagnetic at all temperatures.4 Some sulfides are paramagnetic, but some are strongly magnetic (see below). In addition, many of the strongly magnetic minerals discussed below are paramagnetic above a critical temperature (the Curie temperature or Néel temperature). In Table 2 are given susceptibilities for some iron-bearing minerals. The susceptibilities are positive and an order of magnitude or more larger than diamagnetic susceptibilities.




Table 2. Susceptibilities of some paramagnetic minerals 5



Mineral



garnet



illite



montmorillonite



biotite



siderite



chromite



orthopyroxene



fayalite



olivine



jacobsite



franklinite



Strongly magnetic minerals
Iron-titanium oxides
Many of the most important magnetic minerals on Earth are oxides of iron and titanium. Their compositions are conveniently represented on a ternary plot with axes corresponding to the proportions of 4+, 2+, and 3+. Important regions on the diagram include the titanomagnetites, which form a line of compositions  for 
 
 
 
  between 0 and 1. At the 
 
 
 
  end is magnetite, while the 
 
 
 
  composition is ulvöspinel. The titanomagnetites have an inverse spinel crystal structure and at high temperatures are a solid solution series. Crystals formed from titanomagnetites by cation-deficient oxidation are called titanomaghemites, an important example of which is maghemite. Another series, the titanohematites, have hematite and ilmenite as their end members, and so are also called hemoilmenites.6 The crystal structure of hematite is trigonal-hexagonal. It has the same composition as maghemite; to distinguish between them, their chemical formulae are generally given as γ for hematite and α for maghemite.
Iron sulfides
The other important class of strongly magnetic minerals is the iron sulfides, particularly greigite and pyrrhotite.
See also

Magnetochemistry

Notes
References




"
Category:Geomagnetism













