


Triangular decomposition




Triangular decomposition

In computer algebra, a triangular decomposition of a polynomial system 
 
 
 
  is a set of simpler polynomial systems  such that a point is a solution of 
 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is a solution of one of the systems .
When the purpose is to describe the solution set of 
 
 
 
  in the algebraic closure of its coefficient field, those simpler systems are regular chains. If the coefficient of 
 
 
 
  are real numbers, then the real solutions of 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by a triangular decomposition into regular semi-algebraic systems. In both cases, each of these simpler systems has a triangular shape and remarkable properties, which justifies the terminology.
Formal definitions
Let 
 
 
 
  be a field and  be ordered variables. We denote by  k[x1, ..., xn]}} the corresponding polynomial ring. For 
 
 
 
 
 , regarded as a system of polynomial equations, there are two notions of a triangular decomposition over the algebraic closure of 
 
 
 
 . The first one is to decompose lazily, by representing only the generic points of the algebraic set 
 
 
 
  in the so-called sense of Kalkbrener.



The second is to describe explicitly all the points of 
 
 
 
  in the so-called sense of in Lazard and Wen-Tsun Wu.



In both cases  are finitely many regular chains of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denotes the radical of the saturated ideal of  while  denotes the quasi-component of . Please refer to regular chain for definitions of these notions.
Assume from now on that 
 
 
 
  is a real closed field. Consider 
 
 
 
  a semi-algebraic system with polynomials in 
 
 
 
 
 . There exist1 finitely many regular semi-algebraic systems  such that we have



where  denotes the points of  which solve 
 
 
 
 . The regular semi-algebraic systems  form a triangular decomposition of the semi-algebraic system 
 
 
 
 .
History
The Characteristic Set Method is the first factorization-free algorithm, which was proposed for decomposing an algebraic variety into equidimensional components. Moreover, the Author, Wen-Tsun Wu, realized an implementation of this method and reported experimental data in his 1987 pioneer article titled "A zero structure theorem for polynomial equations solving".2 To put this work into context, let us recall what was the common idea of an algebraic set decomposition at the time this article was written.
Let 
 
 
 
  be an algebraically closed field and 
 
 
 
 
  be a subfield of 
 
 
 
 . A subset  is an (affine) algebraic variety over 
 
 
 
  if there exists a polynomial set  such that the zero set  of 
 
 
 
  equals 
 
 
 
 .
Recall that 
 
 
 
 
  is said irreducible if for all algebraic varieties  the relation  V1 ∪ V2}} implies either  V1}} or  V2}}. A first algebraic variety decomposition result is the famous Lasker–Noether theorem which implies the following.

Theorem (Lasker - Noether). For each algebraic variety  there exist finitely many irreducible algebraic varieties  such that we have
 
 



Moreover, if  holds for 
 
 


The varieties  in the above Theorem are called the irreducible components of 
 
 
 
  and can be regarded as a natural output for a decomposition algorithm, or, in other words, for an algorithm solving a system of equations in .
In order to lead to a computer program, this algorithm specification should prescribe how irreducible components are represented. Such an encoding is introduced by Joseph Ritt3 through the following result.

Theorem (Ritt). If  is a non-empty and irreducible variety then one can compute a reduced triangular set 
 
 
 
 
  contained in the ideal 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
  in  and such that all polynomials 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  reduces to zero by pseudo-division w.r.t 
 
 
 
 
 .
 

We call the set 
 
 
 
  in Ritt's Theorem a Ritt characteristic set of the ideal 
 
 
 
 . Please refer to regular chain for the notion of a triangular set.
Joseph Ritt described a method for solving polynomial systems based on polynomial factorization over field extensions and computation of characteristic sets of prime ideals.
Deriving a practical implementation of this method, however, was and remains a difficult problem. In the 80's, when the Characteristic set Method was introduced, polynomial factorization was an active research area and certain fundamental questions on this subject were solved recently4
Nowadays, decomposing an algebraic variety into irreducible components is not essential to process most application problems, since weaker notions of decompositions, less costly to compute, are sufficient.
The Characteristic Set Method relies on the following variant of Ritt's Theorem.

Theorem (Wen-Tsun Wu). For any finite polynomial set , one can compute a reduced triangular set 
 
 
 
  such that all polynomial 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  reduces to zero by pseudo-division w.r.t 
 
 
 
 .
 

Different concepts and algorithms extended the work of Wen-Tsun Wu. In the early 90's, the notion of a regular chain, introduced independently by Michael Kalkbrener in 1991 in his PhD Thesis and, by Lu Yang and Jingzhong Zhang5 led to important algorithmic discoveries.
In Kalkbrener's vision,6 regular chains are used to represent the generic zeros of the irreducible components of an algebraic variety. In the original work of Yang and Zhang, they are used to decide whether a hypersurface intersects a quasi-variety (given by a regular chain). Regular chains have, in fact, several interesting properties and are the key notion in many algorithms for decomposing systems of algebraic or differential equations.
Regular chains have been investigated in many papers.789
The abundant literature on the subject can be explained by the many equivalent definitions of a regular chain. Actually, the original formulation of Kalkbrener is quite different from that of Yang and Zhang. A bridge between these two notions, the point of view of Kalkbrener and that of Yang and Zhang, appears in Dongming Wang's paper.10
There are various algorithms available for obtaining triangular decomposition of $V ( F )$ both in the sense of Kalkbrener and in the sense of Lazard and Wen-Tsun Wu. The Lextriangular Algorithm by Daniel Lazard11 and the Triade Algorithm by Marc Moreno Maza12 together with the Characteristic Set Method are available in various computer algebra systems, including Axiom.
See also

Wu's method of characteristic set
Regular chain
RegularChains, a software to compute regular chains
Regular semi-algebraic system

References
"
Category:Equations Category:Algebra Category:Polynomials Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Computer algebra Category:Computer algebra systems



Changbo Chen, James H. Davenport, John P. May, Marc Moreno-Maza, Bican Xia, Rong Xiao. Triangular decomposition of semi-algebraic systems. Proceedings of 2010 International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation (ISSAC 2010), ACM Press, pp. 187--194, 2010.
Wu, W. T. (1987). A zero structure theorem for polynomial equations solving. MM Research Preprints, 1, 2–12
Ritt, J. (1966). Differential Algebra. New York, Dover Publications
A. M. Steel Conquering inseparability: Primary decomposition and multivariate factorization over algebraic function fields of positive characteristic
Yang, L., Zhang, J. (1994). Searching dependency between algebraic equations: an algorithm applied to automated reasoning. Artificial Intelligence in Mathematics, pp. 14715, Oxford University Press.
M. Kalkbrener: A Generalized Euclidean Algorithm for Computing Triangular Representations of Algebraic Varieties. J. Symb. Comput. 15(2): 143–167 (1993)
S.C. Chou and X.S. Gao. On the dimension of an arbitrary ascending chain. Chinese Bull. of Sci., 38:799--804, 1991.
Michael Kalkbrener. Algorithmic properties of polynomial rings. J. Symb. Comput.}, 26(5):525--581, 1998.
P. Aubry, D. Lazard, M. Moreno Maza. On the theories of triangular sets. Journal of Symbolic Computation, 28(1–2):105–124, 1999.
D. Wang. Computing Triangular Systems and Regular Systems. Journal of Symbolic Computation 30(2) (2000) 221–236
D. Lazard, Solving zero-dimensional algebraic systems. Journal of Symbolic Computation 13, 1992
M. Moreno Maza: On triangular decomposition of algebraic varieties. MEGA 2000 (2000).




