


Prais–Winsten estimation




Prais–Winsten estimation

In econometrics, Prais–Winsten estimation is a procedure meant to take care of the serial correlation of type AR(1) in a linear model. Conceived by Sigbert Prais and Christopher Winsten in 1954, it is a modification of Cochrane–Orcutt estimation in the sense that it does not lose the first observation and leads to more efficiency as a result.
Theory
Consider the model



where 
 
 
 
  is the time series of interest at time t, 
 
 
 
  is a vector of coefficients, 
 
 
 
  is a matrix of explanatory variables, and 
 
 
 
  is the error term. The error term can be serially correlated over time
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a white noise. In addition to the Cochrane–Orcutt procedure transformation, which is



for t=2,3,...,T, Prais-Winsten procedure makes a reasonable transformation for t=1 in the following form



Then the usual least squares estimation is done.
Estimation procedure
To do the estimation in a compact way it is directive to look at the auto-covariance function of the error term considered in the model above:



Now is easy to see that the variance–covariance matrix, 
 
 
 
 , of the model is


 
  Now having 
 
 
 
  (or an estimate of it), we see that,



where 
 
 
 
  is a matrix of observations on the independent variable (Xt, t = 1, 2, ..., T) including a vector of ones, 
 
 
 
 
  is a vector stacking the observations on the dependent variable (Xt, t = 1, 2, ..., T) and 
 
 
 
  includes the model parameters.
Note
To see why the initial observation assumption stated by Prais–Winsten (1954) is reasonable, considering the mechanics of general least square estimation procedure sketched above is helpful. The inverse of 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed as 
 
 
 
  with


 
  A pre-multiplication of model in a matrix notation with this matrix gives the transformed model of Prais–Winsten.
Restrictions
The error term is still restricted to be of an AR(1) type. If 
 
 
 
  is not known, a recursive procedure may be used to make the estimation feasible. See Cochrane–Orcutt estimation.
References






"
Category:Econometrics Category:Regression with time series structure


