


Regular semi-algebraic system




Regular semi-algebraic system

In computer algebra, a regular semi-algebraic system is a particular kind of triangular system of multivariate polynomials over a real closed field.
Introduction
Regular chains and triangular decompositions are fundamental and well-developed tools for describing the complex solutions of polynomial systems. The notion of a regular semi-algebraic system is an adaptation of the concept of a regular chain focusing on solutions of the real analogue: semi-algebraic systems.
Any semi-algebraic system 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed into finitely many regular semi-algebraic systems 
 
 
 
  such that a point (with real coordinates) is a solution of 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is a solution of one of the systems 
 
 
 
 .1
Formal definition
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a regular chain of 
 
 
 
  for some ordering of the variables 
 
 
 
  and a real closed field

 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  designate respectively the variables of 
 
 
 
  that are free and algebraic with respect to 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be finite such that each polynomial in 
 
 
 
  is regular w.r.t.\ the saturated ideal of 
 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a quantifier-free formula of 
 
 
 
  involving only the variables of 
 
 
 
 . We say that 
 
 
 
 
  is a regular semi-algebraic system if the following three conditions hold.



 
  defines a non-empty open semi-algebraic set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 ,
the regular system 
 
 
 
  specializes well at every point 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 ,
at each point 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the specialized system 
 
 
 
  has at least one real zero.

The zero set of 
 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is defined as the set of points 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is true and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 , for all 
 
 
 
 and all 
 
 
 
 .
See also

RegularChains
Real algebraic geometry

References
"
Category:Equations Category:Algebra Category:Polynomials Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Computer algebra



Changbo Chen, James H. Davenport, John P. May, Marc Moreno-Maza, Bican Xia, Rong Xiao. Triangular decomposition of semi-algebraic systems. Proceedings of 2010 International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation (ISSAC 2010), ACM Press, pp. 187–194, 2010.




