


Chordal problem




Chordal problem

In the book1 there is a generalization of the equichordal point problem attributed to R. Gardner. 

We consider a point 
 
 
 
  inside a Jordan curve with the property that for any chord

 
  of the curve passing through 
 
 
 
  the two parts 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the chord satisfy the following equation, where 
 
 
 
  is a fixed real number:
 
 :


|X-O|^\alpha+|O-Y|^\alpha = c 2 where 
 
 
 
  is a constant not depending on the chord. In this article we will call a point 
 
 
 
  satisfying equation3 a chordal point, or 
 
 
 
 -chordal point.
The template for all chordal problems is this:

Problem: Is there a curve with two or more distinct points with this property?
 

Curves with one equichordal point
The center of the circle is a solution of the chordal equation4 for an arbitrary 
 
 
 
 . One can show a continuum of solutions for many 
 
 
 
 , for example, 
 
 
 
 . The method of construction such solutions is by writing the equation of the curve in the form 
 
 
 
  in polar coordinates. For 
 
 
 
 , the solution may be found in this article.5
An example
This is an example of a curve with one equichordal point. based on an example in.6 The core idea is that we may start with any Jordan arc given in polar coordinates by an equation 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and complement it to a closed Jordan curve given by the equation 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Along the way, we must satisfy some number of conditions to ensure continuity of the resulting curve.
Let us define a function 
 
 
 
  by the formula:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a real parameter and 
 
 
 
 . This function is clearly defined for all real 
 
 
 
 , but we only use its values for 
 
 
 
 . Clearly, 
 
 
 
 .
We define the second function 
 
 
 
  by the formula:


 
  This function has the following properties:



 
 ;


 
  is continuous on 
 
 
 
 ;


 
 , so 
 
 
 
 
  extends uniquely to a 
 
 
 
 -periodic, continuous function on 
 
 
 
 ; from now on, we identify 
 
 
 
  with this extension;


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 
 .

These properties imply that the curve given in polar coordinates by the equation 
 
 
 
  is a closed Jordan curve and that the origin is an equichordal point.
The construction presented here and based on7 results in a curve which is 
 
 
 
  but not 
 
 
 
 , with the exception of 
 
 
 
 , when the curve becomes a circle. Rychlik8 formulated conditions on the Fourier series of 
 
 
 
 
  which easily allow constructing of curves with one equichordal point, including analytic curves. Rychlik gives a specific example of an analytic curve:


 
  Fourier series analysis in Rychlik's paper9 reveals the pattern of Fourier coefficients of all suitable functions 
 
 
 
 .
Special cases
For 
 
 
 
  we obtain the equichordal point problem, and for 
 
 
 
  we obtain the equireciprocal point problem considered by Klee.1011
We may also consider a more general relationship between 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For example, the equiproduct point problem is obtained by considering the equation:



Equivalently,



This naturally leads to a more general class of problems. For a given function 
 
 
 
  we may study the equations:



Even more generally, we could consider a function 
 
 
 
  of two real variables. We need to assume that 
 
 
 
  is symmetric, i.e. 
 
 
 
 . Then we may consider the equation:


 
  Clearly, 
 
 
 
 
  needs only be defined for positive 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the family of chordal problems of this type is parameterized by symmetric functions of two variables.
The status of various special cases
=== The equichordal point problem (α = 1) === This has been the most famous of the chordal problems. In this case, the equation12 states that every chord passing through 
 
 
 
  has the same length. It has become known as the equichordal point problem, and was fully solved in 1996 by Marek Rychlik.
=== The equireciprocal point problem (α = −1)===
Klee13 proved that the ellipse solves the equireciprocal point problem, with the ellipse foci serving as the two equireciprocal points. However, in addition to the ellipses, many solutions of low smoothness also exist, as it was shown in.14 From the point of view of the equichordal point problem, this is due to the lack of hyperbolicity of the fixed points of a certain map of the plane.
Other cases
The method used in Rychlik's proof for the equichordal point problem may only generalize to some rational values of 
 
 
 
 . A reasonable conjecture could be:

Conjecture: There are no solutions of the Chordal Problem for rational 
 
 
 
 
  close to 1.
 

See also

Equichordal point problem

References
"
Category:Convex geometry



H. Croft, K. J. Falconer, and R. K. Guy. Unsolved Problems in Geometry, volume II of 'Problem Books in Mathematics'. Springer-Verlag, New York, Berlin, 1991.↩
The Chordal Equation↩


Marek Rychlik, The Equichordal Point Problem, Electronic Research Announcements of the AMS, 1996, pages 108-123, available on-line at 1↩
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/EquichordalPoint.html↩

Marek Rychlik, The Equichordal Point Problem, Electronic Research Announcements of the AMS, 1996, pages 108-123, available on-line at 2↩


K. J. Falconer. On the equireciprocal point problem. Geom. Dedicata, 14:113–126, 1983↩

V. Klee. Can a plane convex body have two equireciprocal points? American Mathematical Monthly, 76:54–55, 1969, correction in 78:1114, 1971↩





