


Kolmogorov equations (Markov jump process)




Kolmogorov equations (Markov jump process)

In the context of a continuous-time Markov process, the Kolmogorov equations, including Kolmogorov forward equations and Kolmogorov backward equations, are a pair of systems of differential equations that describe the time-evolution of the probability

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  (the state space) and 
 
 
 
  are the final and initial time respectively.
The equations
For the case of enumerable state space we put 
 
 
 
  in place of 
 
 
 
 . Kolmogorov forward equations read



while Kolmogorov backward equations are



The functions 
 
 
 
  are continuous and differentiable in both time arguments. They represent the probability that the system that was in state 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  jumps to state 
 
 
 
  at some later time 
 
 
 
 . The continuous quantities 
 
 
 
  satisfy



Background
The original derivation of the equations by Kolmogorov 1 starts with the Chapman-Kolmogorov equation (Kolmogorov called it Fundamental equation) for time-continuous and differentiable Markov processes on a finite, discrete state space. In this formulation, it is assumed that the probabilities 
 
 
 
  are continuous and differentiable functions of 
 
 
 
 . Also adequate limit properties for the derivatives are assumed. Feller 2 derives the equations under slightly different conditions, starting with the concept of purely discontinuous Markov process and formulating them for more general state spaces. Feller 3 proves the existence of solutions of probabilistic character to the Kolmogorov forward equations and Kolmogorov backward equations under natural conditions.
Relation with the generating function
Still in the discrete state case, letting 
 
 
 
  and assuming that the system initially is found in state 
 
 
 
 , The Kolmogorov forward equations describe an initial value problem for finding the probabilities of the process, given the quantities 
 
 
 
 . We put 
 
 
 
  and



For the case of a pure death process with constant rates the only nonzero coefficients are 
 
 
 
 . Letting



the system of equations can in this case be recast as a partial differential equation for 
 
 
 
  with initial condition 
 
 
 
 . After some manipulations, the system of equations reads,4



History
A brief historical note can be found at Kolmogorov equations
See also

Continuous-time Markov process
Jump process
Master equation
Fokker–Planck equation
Kolmogorov backward equations (diffusion)

References
"
Category:Articles created via the Article Wizard Category:Markov processes



↩
Feller, Willy (1940) "On the Integro-Differential Equations of Purely Discontinuous Markoff Processes", Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 48 (3), 488-515 ↩

Bailey, Norman T.J. (1990) The Elements of Stochastic Processes with Applications to the Natural Sciences, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-52368-2 (page 90)↩




