


Invariant manifold




Invariant manifold

In dynamical systems, a branch of mathematics, an invariant manifold is a topological manifold that is invariant under the action of the dynamical system.1 Examples include the slow manifold, center manifold, stable manifold, unstable manifold, subcenter manifold and inertial manifold.
Typically, although by no means always, invariant manifolds are constructed as a 'perturbation' of an invariant subspace about an equilibrium. In dissipative systems, an invariant manifold based upon the gravest, longest lasting modes forms an effective low-dimensional, reduced, model of the dynamics. 2
Definition
Consider the differential equation

 
  with flow 
 
 
 
  being the solution of the differential equation with 
 
 
 
 . A set 
 
 
 
  is called an invariant set for the differential equation if, for each 
 
 
 
 
 , the solution 
 
 
 
 , defined on its maximal interval of existence, has its image in 
 
 
 
 . Alternatively, the orbit passing through each 
 
 
 
  lies in 
 
 
 
 . In addition, 
 
 
 
 
  is called an invariant manifold if 
 
 
 
  is a manifold. 3
Examples
Simple 2D dynamical system
For any fixed parameter 
 
 
 
 , consider the variables 
 
 
 
  governed by the pair of coupled differential equations


 
  The origin is an equilibrium. This system has two invariant manifolds of interest through the origin.

The vertical line 
 
 
 
 
  is invariant as when 
 
 
 
  the 
 
 
 
 -equation becomes 
 
 
 
  which ensures 
 
 
 
  remains zero. This invariant manifold, 
 
 
 
 
 , is a stable manifold of the origin (when 
 
 
 
 ) as all initial conditions 
 
 
 
  lead to solutions asymptotically approaching the origin.
The parabola 
 
 
 
  is invariant for all parameter 
 
 
 
 . One can see this invariance by considering the time derivative 
 
 
 
 
  and finding it is zero on 
 
 
 
  as required for an invariant manifold. For 
 
 
 
  this parabola is the unstable manifold of the origin. For 
 
 
 
  this parabola is a center manifold, more precisely a slow manifold, of the origin.
For 
 
 
 
  there is only an invariant stable manifold about the origin, the stable manifold including all 
 
 
 
 
 .

See also

Hyperbolic set

References
"
Category:Dynamical systems



Hirsh M.W., Pugh C.C., Shub M., Invariant Manifolds, Lect. Notes. Math., 583, Springer, Berlin — Heidelberg, 1977
A. J. Roberts. The utility of an invariant manifold description of the evolution of a dynamical system. SIAM J. Math. Anal., 20:1447–1458, 1989. http://locus.siam.org/SIMA/volume-20/art_0520094.html
C. Chicone. Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, volume 34 of Texts in Applied Mathematics. Springer, 2006, p.34




