


Grothendieck category




Grothendieck category

In mathematics, a Grothendieck category is a certain kind of abelian category, introduced in Alexander Grothendieck's Tôhoku paper of 19571 in order to develop the machinery of homological algebra for modules and for sheaves in a unified manner.
To every algebraic variety

 
  one can associate a Grothendieck category 
 
 
 
 , consisting of the quasi-coherent sheaves on 
 
 
 
 . This category encodes all the relevant geometric information about 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  can be recovered from 
 
 
 
 . This example gives rise to one approach to noncommutative algebraic geometry: the study of "non-commutative varieties" is then nothing but the study of Grothendieck categories.2
Definition
By definition, a Grothendieck category 
 
 
 
  is an AB5 category with a generator. Spelled out, this means that



 
  is an abelian category;
every (possibly infinite) family of objects in 
 
 
 
  has a coproduct (a.k.a. direct sum) in 
 
 
 
 ;
direct limits (a.k.a. filtered colimits) of exact sequences are exact; this means that if a direct system of short exact sequences in 
 
 
 
  is given, then the induced sequence of direct limits is a short exact sequence as well. (Direct limits are always right-exact; the important point here is that we require them to be left-exact as well.)


 
  possesses a generator, i.e. there is an object 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a faithful functor from 
 
 
 
  to the category of sets. (In our situation, this is equivalent to saying that every object 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  admits an epimorphism

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes a direct sum of copies of 
 
 
 
 , one for each element of the (possibly infinite) set 
 
 
 
 .)

Examples

The prototypical example of a Grothendieck category is the category of abelian groups; the abelian group 
 
 
 
  of integers can serve as a generator.
More generally, given any ring

 
  (associative, with 
 
 
 
 , but not necessarily commutative), the category 
 
 
 
  of all right (or alternatively: left) modules over 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck category; 
 
 
 
  itself can serve as a generator.
Given a topological space

 
 , the category of all sheaves of abelian groups on 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck category. (More generally: the category of all sheaves of left 
 
 
 
 -modules on 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck category for any ring 
 
 
 
 .)
Given a ringed space

 
 , the category of sheaves of OX-modules is a Grothendieck category.
Given an (affine or projective) algebraic variety

 
  (or more generally: a quasi-compact quasi-separated scheme), the category 
 
 
 
  of quasi-coherent sheaves on 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck category.
Any category that's equivalent to a Grothendieck category is itself a Grothendieck category.
Given a small category

 
  and a Grothendieck category 
 
 
 
 , the functor category

 
  is a Grothendieck category; if 
 
 
 
  is preadditive, then the functor category 
 
 
 
  of all additive functors from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck category as well.
If 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck category and 
 
 
 
  is a localizing subcategory of 
 
 
 
 , we can form the Serre quotient category

 
 . This quotient is again a Grothendieck category.

Properties
Every Grothendieck category contains an injective cogenerator. For example, an injective cogenerator of the category of abelian groups is the quotient group

 
 .
Every object in a Grothendieck category 
 
 
 
  has an injective hull in 
 
 
 
 . This allows to construct injective resolutions and thereby the use of the tools of homological algebra in 
 
 
 
 , such as derived functors. (Note that not all Grothendieck categories allow projective resolutions for all objects; examples are categories of sheaves of abelian groups on many topological spaces, such as on the space of real numbers.)
In a Grothendieck category, any family of subobjects

 
  of a given object 
 
 
 
  has a supremum

 
  which is again a subobject of 
 
 
 
 . (Note that an infimum need not exist.) Further, if the family 
 
 
 
  is directed (i.e. for any two objects in the family, there is a third object in the family that contains the two), and 
 
 
 
  is another subobject of 
 
 
 
 , we have



In a Grothendieck category, arbitrary limits (and in particular products) exist. It follows directly from the definition that arbitrary colimits and coproducts (direct sums) exist as well. We can thus say that every Grothendieck category is complete and co-complete. Coproducts in a Grothendieck category are exact (i.e. the coproduct of a family of short exact sequences is again a short exact sequence), but products need not be exact.
The Gabriel–Popescu theorem states that any Grothendieck category 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to a full subcategory of the category 
 
 
 
  of right modules over some unital ring 
 
 
 
  (which can be taken to be the endomorphism ring of a generator of 
 
 
 
 ), and 
 
 
 
  can be obtained as a Serre quotient of 
 
 
 
  by some localizing subcategory.3
References



.

External links


Abelian Categories, notes by Daniel Murfet. Section 2.3 covers Grothendieck categories.

"
Category:Homological algebra Category:Category theory



. English translation.↩
↩
↩




