


Slepian–Wolf coding




Slepian–Wolf coding

__NOTOC__ In information theory and communication, the Slepian–Wolf coding, also known as the Slepian–Wolf bound, is a fundamental result in distributed source coding discovered by David Slepian and Jack Wolf in 1973. It is a method of theoretically coding two lossless compressed correlated sources.
Distributed coding is the coding of two, in this case, or more dependent sources with separate encoders and a joint decoder. Given two statistically dependent i.i.d. finite-alphabet random sequences X and Y, the Slepian–Wolf theorem includes theoretical bound for the lossless coding rate for distributed coding of the two sources as shown below:









If both the encoder and the decoder of the two sources are independent, the lowest rate it can achieve for lossless compression is 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively, where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the entropies of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . However, with joint decoding, if vanishing error probability for long sequences is accepted, the Slepian–Wolf theorem shows that much better compression rate can be achieved. As long as the total rate of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is larger than their joint entropy 
 
 
 
  and none of the sources is encoded with a rate larger than its entropy, distributed coding can achieve arbitrarily small error probability for long sequences.
A special case of distributed coding is compression with decoder side information, where source 
 
 
 
  is available at the decoder side but not accessible at the encoder side. This can be treated as the condition that 
 
 
 
  has already been used to encode 
 
 
 
 , while we intend to use 
 
 
 
  to encode 
 
 
 
 . In other words, two isolated sources can compress data as efficiently as if they were communicating with each other. The whole system is operating in an asymmetric way (compression rate for the two sources are asymmetric).
This bound has been extended to the case of more than two correlated sources by Thomas M. Cover in 1975, and similar results were obtained in 1976 by Aaron D. Wyner and Jacob Ziv with regard to lossy coding of joint Gaussian sources.
See also

Data compression
Data synchronization

Synchronization (computer science)

DISCUS
Timeline of information theory

References
Sources





External links

Wyner-Ziv Coding of Video algorithm for video compression that performs close to the Slepian–Wolf bound (with links to source code).

"
Category:Error detection and correction


