


Sum-of-squares optimization




Sum-of-squares optimization


This article deals with sum-of-squares constraints. For problems with sum-of-squares cost functions, see Least squares.


A sum-of-squares optimization program is an optimization problem with a linear cost function and a particular type of constraint on the decision variables. These constraints are of the form that when the decision variables are used as coefficients in certain polynomials, those polynomials should have the polynomial SOS property. Sum-of-squares optimization techniques have been successfully applied by researchers in the control engineering field.123
Optimization problem
The problem can be expressed as


 
  subject to



Here "SOS" represents the class of SOS polynomials. The vector 
 
 
 
  and polynomials 
 
 
 
  are given as part of the data for the optimization problem. The quantities 
 
 
 
  are the decision variables. SOS programs can be converted to semidefinite programs (SDPs) using the connection between SOS polynomials and positive-semidefinite matrices.
Sum-of-squares background
A polynomial 
 
 
 
  is a sum of squares (SOS) if there exist polynomials 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . For example,


 
  is a sum of squares since


 
  where


 
  Note that if 
 
 
 
  is a sum of squares then 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Detailed descriptions of polynomial SOS are available.456
Quadratic forms can be expressed as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a symmetric matrix. Similarly, polynomials of degree ≤ 2d can be expressed as


 
  where the vector 
 
 
 
  contains all monomials of degree 
 
 
 
 . This is known as the Gram matrix form. An important fact is that 
 
 
 
  is SOS if and only if there exists a symmetric and positive-semidefinite matrix

 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . This provides a connection between SOS polynomials and positive-semidefinite matrices.
Software tools

SOSTOOLS, licensed under the GNU GPL. The reference guide is available at arXiv:1310.4716 [math.OC].

References


"
Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Real algebraic geometry



Tan, W., Packard, A., 2004. "Searching for control Lyapunov functions using sums of squares programming". In: Allerton Conf. on Comm., Control and Computing. pp. 210–219.↩
Tan, W., Topcu, U., Seiler, P., Balas, G., Packard, A., 2008. Simulation-aided reachability and local gain analysis for nonlinear dynamical systems. In: Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control. pp. 4097–4102.↩
A. Chakraborty, P. Seiler, and G. Balas, “Susceptibility of F/A-18 Flight Controllers to the Falling-Leaf Mode: Nonlinear Analysis,” AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, Vol.34 No.1, 2011, 73–85.↩
Parrilo, P., (2000) Structured semidefinite programs and semialgebraic geometry methods in robustness and optimization. Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology.↩
Parrilo, P. (2003) "Semidefinite programming relaxations for semialgebraic problems". Mathematical Programming Ser. B 96 (2), 293–320.↩
Lasserre, J. (2001) "Global optimization with polynomials and the problem of moments". SIAM Journal on Optimization, 11 (3), 796{817.↩




