


Relative utilitarianism




Relative utilitarianism

Let 
 
 
 
  be a set of possible `states of the world' or `alternatives'; society wishes to choose some state from 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite set, representing a collection of people. For each 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be a utility function. A social choice rule (or voting system) is a mechanism which uses the data 
 
 
 
  to select some element(s) from 
 
 
 
  which are `best' for society. (The basic problem of social choice theory is to disambiguate the word `best'.)
The classic utilitarian social choice rule selects the element 
 
 
 
  which maximizes the utilitarian sum





However, for this formula to make sense, we must assume that the utility functions 
 
 
 
  are both cardinal, and interpersonally comparable at a cardinal level.
The notion that individuals have cardinal utility functions is not that problematic. Cardinal utility has been implicitly assumed in decision theory ever since Daniel Bernoulli's analysis of the Saint Petersburg Paradox. Rigorous mathematical theories of cardinal utility (with application to risky decision making) were developed by Frank P. Ramsey, Bruno de Finetti, von Neumann and Morgenstern, and Leonard Savage. However, in these theories, a person's utility function is only well-defined up to an `affine rescaling'. Thus, if the utility function 
 
 
 
  is valid description of her preferences, and if 
 
 
 
  are two constants with 
 
 
 
 , then the `rescaled' utility function 
 
 
 
  is an equally valid description of her preferences. If we define a new package of utility functions 
 
 
 
  using possibly different 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , and we then consider the utilitarian sum





then in general, the maximizer of 
 
 
 
  will not be the same as the maximizer of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, in a sense, classic utilitarian social choice is not well-defined within the standard model of cardinal utility used in decision theory, unless we specify some mechanism to `calibrate' the utility functions of the different individuals.
Relative utilitarianism proposes a natural calibration mechanism. For every 
 
 
 
 , suppose that the values





are well-defined. (For example, this will always be true if 
 
 
 
  is finite, or if 
 
 
 
  is a compact space and 
 
 
 
  is a continuous function.) Then define





for all 
 
 
 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
  is a `rescaled' utility function which has a minimum value of 0 and a maximum value of 1. The Relative Utilitarian social choice rule selects the element in 
 
 
 
  which maximizes the utilitarian sum





As an abstract social choice function, relative utilitarianism has been analyzed by Cao (1982), Dhillon (1998), Karni (1998), Dhillon and Mertens (1999), Segal (2000), Sobel (2001) and Pivato (2008). (Cao (1982) refers to it as the `modified Thomson solution'.) When interpreted as a `voting rule', it is equivalent to Range voting.
See also

Range voting

References





















External links
de:Sozialwahltheorie it:Teoria della scelta sociale ja:社会選択理論 pt:Teoria da escolha social"
Category:Economics Category:Ethics Category:Political science * Category:Voting systems Category:Analysis of collective decision-making Category:Utilitarianism


