


Fictitious domain method




Fictitious domain method

In mathematics, the Fictitious domain method is a method to find the solution of a partial differential equations on a complicated domain

 
 , by substituting a given problem posed on a domain 
 
 
 
 , with a new problem posed on a simple domain 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
 
 .
General formulation
Assume in some area 
 
 
 
  we want to find solution 
 
 
 
  of the equation:



with boundary conditions:



The basic idea of fictitious domains method is to substitute a given problem posed on a domain 
 
 
 
 
 , with a new problem posed on a simple shaped domain

 
  containing 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ). For example, we can choose n-dimensional parallelepiped as 
 
 
 
 .
Problem in the extended domain

 
 
  for the new solution 
 
 
 
 :






It is necessary to pose the problem in the extended area so that the following condition is fulfilled:



Simple example, 1-dimensional problem






Prolongation by leading coefficients


 
  solution of problem:


 
  Discontinuous coefficient

 
  and right part of equation previous equation we obtain from expressions:









Boundary conditions:



Connection conditions in the point 
 
 
 
 :



where 
 
 
 
  means:



Equation (1) has analytical solution therefore we can easily obtain error:



Prolongation by lower-order coefficients


 
  solution of problem:



Where 
 
 
 
  we take the same as in (3), and expression for 
 
 




Boundary conditions for equation (4) same as for (2).
Connection conditions in the point 
 
 
 
 :



Error:



Literature

P.N. Vabishchevich, The Method of Fictitious Domains in Problems of Mathematical Physics, Izdatelstvo Moskovskogo Universiteta, Moskva, 1991.
Smagulov S. Fictitious Domain Method for Navier–Stokes equation, Preprint CC SA USSR, 68, 1979.
Bugrov A.N., Smagulov S. Fictitious Domain Method for Navier–Stokes equation, Mathematical model of fluid flow, Novosibirsk, 1978, p. 79–90

"
Category:Domain decomposition methods Category:Applied mathematics


