


Coupled mode theory




Coupled mode theory

Coupled mode theory (CMT) is a perturbational approach for analyzing the coupling of vibrational systems (mechanical, optical, electrical, etc.) in space or in time. Coupled mode theory allows a wide range of devices and systems to be modeled as one or more coupled resonators. In optics, such systems include laser cavities, photonic crystal slabs, metamaterials, and ring resonators.
History
Coupled mode theory first arose in the 1950s in the works of Miller on microwave transmission lines,1 Pierce on electron beams,2 and Gould on backward wave oscillators.3 This put in place the mathematical foundations for the modern formulation.4
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the field of nanophotonics has revitalized interest in coupled mode theory. Coupled mode theory has been used to account for the fano resonances in photonic crystal slabs5 and has also been modified to account for optical resonators with non-orthogonal modes.6
Overview
The oscillatory systems to which coupled mode theory applies are described by second order partial differential equations (e.g. a mass on a spring, an RLC circuit). CMT allows the second order differential equation to be expressed as one or more uncoupled first order differential equations. The following assumptions are generally made with CMT:

Linearity
Time-reversal symmetry
Time-invariance
Weak mode coupling (small perturbation of uncoupled modes)
Energy conservation

Formulation
The formulation of the coupled mode theory is based on the development of the solution to an electromagnetic problem into modes. Most of the time it is eigenmodes which are taken in order to form a complete base. The choice of the base and the adoption of certain hypothesis like parabolic approximation differs from formulation to formulation. The classification proposed by 7 of the different formulation is as follows:

The choice of starting differential equation. some of the coupled mode theories are derived directly from the Maxwell differential equations 89 (here) although others use simplifications in order to obtain an Helmholtz equation.
The choice of principle to derive the equations of the CMT. Either the reciprocity theorem 1011 or the variational principle have been used.
The choice of orthogonality product used to establish the eigenmode base. Some references use the unconjugated form 12 and others the complex-conjugated form.13
Finally, the choice of the form of the equation, either vectorial 1415 or scalar.

When n modes of an electromagnetic wave propagate through a media in the direction z without loss the power transported by each mode is described by a modal power Pm. At a given frequency ω.



where 
 
 
 
  is the norm of the mth mode and 
 
 
 
  is the modal amplitude.
References
External links

WMM mode solver manual on couple mode theory
Coupled-Mode Theory and Devices (see and listen to Lectures 5 and 6)

"
Category:Electrodynamics



S.E.Miller,"Coupled wave theory and waveguide applications.",Bell Syst.Tech. J.,1954↩
J.R. Pierce, "Coupling of modes of propagations", Journal of Applied Physics, 25, 1954↩
R.W. Gould, "A coupled mode description of the backward-wave oscillator and the Kompfner dip condition" I.R.E. Trans. Electron Devices, vol. PGED-2, pp. 37-42, 1955.↩
H.A. Haus, W.P. Huang. "Coupled Mode Theory."Proceedings of The IEEE, Vol 19, No 10, Oct 1991.↩
S. Fan, W. Suh, J. Joannopoulos, "Temporal coupled-mode theory for the Fano resonance in optical resonators," JOSA A, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 569–572, 2003.↩
W. Suh, Z. Wang, and S. Fan, "Temporal coupled-mode theory and the presence of non-orthogonal modes in lossless multimode cavities," Quantum Electronics, IEEE Journal of, vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 1511–1518, 2004↩
Barybin and Dmitriev,"Modern Electrodynamics and Coupled-mode theory",2002↩
Hardy and Streifer, "Coupled mode theory of parallel waveguides", Journal of Lightwave Technology,1985↩
A. W. Snyder and J. D. Love, "Optical waveguide Theory",Chapman and Hall, 1983↩










