


Adaptive Gabor representation




Adaptive Gabor representation

Adaptive Gabor representation (AGR) is a Gabor representation of a signal where its variance is adjustable. There's always a trade-off between time resolution and frequency resolution in traditional short-time Fourier transform (STFT). A long window leads to high frequency resolution and low time resolution. On the other hand, high time resolution requires shorter window, with the expense of low frequency resolution. By choosing the proper elementary function for signal with different spectrum structure, adaptive Gabor representation is able to accommodate both narrowband and wideband signal.
Gabor expansion
In 1946, Dennis Gabor suggested that a signal can be represented in two dimensions, with time and frequency coordinates. And the signal can be expanded into a discrete set of Gaussian elementary signals.
Definition
The Gabor expansion of signal s(t) is defined by this formula:



where h(t) is the Gaussian elementary function:



Once the Gabor elementary function is determined, the Gabor coefficients 
 
 
 
 can be obtained by the inner product of s(t) and a dual function 
 
 




 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote the sampling steps of time and frequency and satisfy the criteria



Relationship between Gabor representation and Gabor transform
Gabor transform simply computes the Gabor coefficients 
 
 
 
  for the signal s(t).
Adaptive expansion
Adaptive signal expansion is defined as



where the coefficients 
 
 
 
  are obtained by the inner product of the signal s(t) and the elementary function 
 
 




Coeffients 
 
 
 
  represent the similarity between the signal and elementary function.
 Adaptive signal decomposition is an iterative operation, aim to find a set of elementary function 
 
 
 
 , which is most similar to the signal's time-frequency structure.
 First, start with w=0 and 
 
 
 
 . Then find 
 
 
 
  which has the maximum inner product with signal 
 
 
 
  and



Second, compute the residual:



and so on. It will comes out a set of residual (
 
 
 
 ), projection (
 
 
 
 ), and elementary function (
 
 
 
 ) for each different p. The energy of the residual will vanish if we keep doing the decomposition.
Energy conservation equation
If the elementary equation (
 
 
 
 ) is designed to have a unit energy. Then the energy contain in the residual at the pth stage can be determined by the residual at p+1th stage plus (
 
 
 
 ). That is,






similar to the Parseval's theorem in Fourier analysis.
The selection of elementary function is the main task in adaptive signal decomposition. It is natural to choose a Gaussian-type function to achieve the lower bound for the inequality:



where 
 
 
 
  is th mean and 
 
 
 
  is the variance of Gaussian at 
 
 
 
 . And



is called the adaptive Gabor representation.
Changing the variance value will change the duration of the elementary function (window size), and the center of the elementary function is no longer fixed. By adjusting the center point and variance of the elementary function, we are able to match the signal's local time-frequency feature. The better performance of the adaptation is achieved at the cost of matching process. The trade-off between different window length now become the trade-off between computation time and performance.
See also

Gabor transform
Short-time Fourier transform

References

M.J. Bastiaans, "Gabor's expansion of a signal into Gaussian elementary signals", Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 68, Issue:4, pp. 538–539, April 1980
Shie Qian and Dapang Chen, "Signal Representation using adaptive normalized Gaussian functions," Signal Processing, vol. 42, no.3, pp. 687–694, March 1994
Qinye Yin, Shie Qian, and Aigang Feng, "A Fast Refinement for Adaptive Gaussian Chirplet Decomposition," IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 50, no.6, pp. 1298–1306, June 2002
Shie Qian, Introduction to Time-Frequency and Wavelet Transforms, Prentice Hall, 2002

"
Category:Time–frequency analysis


