


De Moivre's law




De Moivre's law

De Moivre's Law is a survival model applied in actuarial science, named for Abraham de Moivre.123 It is a simple law of mortality based on a linear survival function.
Definition
De Moivre's law has a single parameter 
 
 
 
  called the ultimate age. Under de Moivre's law, a newborn has probability of surviving at least x years given by the survival function4


 
  In actuarial notation (x) denotes a status or life that has survived to age x, and T(x) is the future lifetime of (x) (T(x) is a random variable). The conditional probability that (x) survives to age x+t is Pr[T(0) ≥ x+t | T(0) ≥ x] = S(x+t) / S(x), which is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .5 Under de Moivre's law, the conditional probability that a life aged x years survives at least t more years is


 
  and the future lifetime random variable T(x) therefore follows a uniform distribution on 
 
 
 
 .
The actuarial notation for conditional probability of failure is 
 
 
= Pr[0 ≤ T(x) ≤ t|T(0) ≥ x]. Under de Moivre's law, the probability that (x) fails to survive to age x+t is



The force of mortality (hazard rate or failure rate) is 
 
 
 
  where f(x) is the probability density function. Under de Moivre's law, the force of mortality for a life aged x is


 
  which has the property of increasing failure rate (IFR) with respect to age that is usually assumed for humans, or anything subject to aging.
De Moivre's law is applied as a simple analytical law of mortality and the linear assumption is also applied as a model for interpolation for discrete survival models such as life tables.
Linear assumption for fractional years
When applied for interpolation, the linear assumption is called uniform distribution of death (UDD) assumption in fractional years and it is equivalent to linear interpolation. If 
 
 
 
  denotes the number of survivors at exact age x years out of an initial cohort of 
 
 
 
  lives, the UDD assumption for fractional years is that


 
 
  that a life aged x fails within (0,t), is 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 




Abraham de Moivre (1725) Annuities upon Lives. The second edition of Annuities upon Lives was published in 1743.↩
Abraham de Moivre (1752) A Treatise of Annuities on Lives.↩
↩
Bowers, N.L., Gerber, H.U., Hickman, J.C., Jones, D.A. and Nesbitt, C.J. (1997). Actuarial Mathematics (Second Edition), Schaumburg, Illinois, Society of Actuaries.↩
Bowers, et al. (1977). Also see  Actuarial notation:Life tables for explanation of the notation 
 
 
 
  for conditional probability of survival.↩




