


N = 2 superconformal algebra




N = 2 superconformal algebra

In mathematical physics, the N = 2 superconformal algebra is an infinite-dimensional Lie superalgebra, related to supersymmetry, that occurs in string theory and conformal field theory. It has important applications in mirror symmetry. It was introduced by  as a gauge algebra of the U(1) fermionic string.
Definition
There are two slightly different ways to describe the N = 2 superconformal algebra, called the N = 2 Ramond algebra and the N = 2 Neveu–Schwarz algebra, which are isomorphic (see below) but differ in the choice of standard basis. The N = 2 superconformal algebra is the Lie superalgebra with basis of even elements c, Ln, Jn, for n an integer, and odd elements G, G, where 
 
 
 
  (for the Ramond basis) or 
 
 
 
  (for the Neveu–Schwarz basis) defined by the following relations:1


c is in the center
 
























If 
 
 
 
  in these relations, this yields the N = 2 Ramond algebra; while if 
 
 
 
  are half-integers, it gives the N = 2 Neveu–Schwarz algebra. The operators 
 
 
 
  generate a Lie subalgebra isomorphic to the Virasoro algebra. Together with the operators 
 
 
 
 , they generate a Lie superalgebra isomorphic to the super Virasoro algebra, giving the Ramond algebra if 
 
 
 
 
  are integers and the Neveu–Schwarz algebra otherwise. When represented as operators on a complex inner product space, 
 
 
 
  is taken to act as multiplication by a real scalar, denoted by the same letter and called the central charge, and the adjoint structure is as follows:



Properties

The N = 2 Ramond and Neveu–Schwarz algebras are isomorphic by the spectral shift isomorphism 
 
 
 
  of :
















with inverse:
 
















In the N = 2 Ramond algebra, the zero mode operators 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and the constants form a five-dimensional Lie superalgebra. They satisfy the same relations as the fundamental operators in Kähler geometry, with 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the Laplacian, 
 
 
 
  the degree operator, and 
 
 
 
 
  the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  operators.


Even integer powers of the spectral shift give automorphisms of the N = 2 superconformal algebras, called spectral shift automorphisms. Another automorphism 
 
 
 
 , of period two, is given by
















In terms of Kähler operators, 
 
 
 
  corresponds to conjugating the complex structure. Since 
 
 
 
 , the automorphisms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  generate a group of automorphisms of the N = 2 superconformal algebra isomorphic to the infinite dihedral group

 
 .
 


Twisted operators 
 
 
 
  were introduced by  and satisfy:










so that these operators satisfy the Virasoro relation with central charge 0. The constant 
 
 
 
  still appears in the relations for 
 
 
 
 
  and the modified relations
 












Constructions
Free field construction
give a construction using two commuting real bosonic fields

 
 , 
 
 




and a complex fermionic field





 
  is defined to the sum of the Virasoro operators naturally associated with each of the three systems



where normal ordering has been used for bosons and fermions.
The current operator 
 
 
 
 
  is defined by the standard construction from fermions



and the two supersymmetric operators 
 
 
 
  by



This yields an N = 2 Neveu–Schwarz algebra with c = 3.
SU(2) supersymmetric coset construction
gave a coset construction of the N = 2 superconformal algebras, generalizing the coset constructions of  for the discrete series representations of the Virasoro and super Virasoro algebra. Given a representation of the affine Kac–Moody algebra of SU(2) at level 
 
 
 
  with basis 
 
 
 
 
  satisfying











 
  the supersymmetric generators are defined by


 
  This yields the N=2 superconformal algebra with


 
 . The algebra commutes with the bosonic operators


 
  The space of physical states consists of eigenvectors of 
 
 
 
  simultaneously annihilated by the 
 
 
 
 's for positive 
 
 
 
 
  and the supercharge operator


 
  (Neveu–Schwarz)


 
  (Ramond) The supercharge operator commutes with the action of the affine Weyl group and the physical states lie in a single orbit of this group, a fact which implies the Weyl-Kac character formula.2
Kazama–Suzuki supersymmetric coset construction
generalized the SU(2) coset construction to any pair consisting of a simple compact Lie group

 
  and a closed subgroup 
 
 
 
  of maximal rank, i.e. containing a maximal torus

 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , with the additional condition that the dimension of the centre of 
 
 
 
  is non-zero. In this case the compact Hermitian symmetric space

 
  is a Kähler manifold, for example when 
 
 
 
 . The physical states lie in a single orbit of the affine Weyl group, which again implies the Weyl–Kac character formula for the affine Kac–Moody algebra of 
 
 
 
 
 .3
See also

Virasoro algebra
Super Virasoro algebra
Coset construction
Type IIB string theory

Notes
References














"
Category:String theory Category:Conformal field theory Category:Lie algebras Category:Representation theory Category:Supersymmetry



↩
↩
↩




