


PFD allowance




PFD allowance

PFD allowance is the adjustment done to the normal time to obtain the standard time for the purpose to recover the lost time due to personal needs, fatigue, and unavoidable delays.1 By providing a small increase to the normal time in each cycle, the worker can still be able to cover lost time and complete the work assigned to him.
Allowance technique
There are two types of interruption: (1) the interruption related to work (2) the interruption not related to work. For example, machine breakdown, rest break to overcome fatigue and receiving instruction from the manager are the interruption related to work, but personal needs, lunch break and personal calls are the interruption not related to work. However, the two types of interruption are essential for the worker because it seems to be impossible to work continually during a regular shift.
Personal needs, fatigue, and unavoidable delays allowance
The standard time is calculated by multiplying the normal time by 1 plus the PFD allowance:2





 
 standard time.


 
  normal time.


 
 
  PFD allowance.

Personal needs
The personal needs allowance is the time that is associated with workers’ daily personal needs which include restroom, phone call, water fountain and similar interruption of a personal nature. However, it is categorized as 5%,but it is also conditional to work environment in term of uncomfortably and temperature for example.
Fatigue
The fatigue allowance is intended to cover the time that the worker should be given to overcome fatigue due to work related stress and conditions. There are three factors that cause fatigue :(1) physical factor like standing and use of force (2) mental and cognitive factor like mental strain and eye strain (3) environmental and work factor like poor lighting, noise and heat.
Unavoidable Delays
Unavoidable delays are categorized under unavoidable interruption that occurs at random times during the day in work place. They usually refer to work- related events like cleaning up at the end of the shift and machine breakdowns or malfunction. Unavoidable delays occur because of many random events in work stations.
References
"
Category:Industrial engineering



Groover, M. P. (2007). Work Systems: The Methods, Measurement & Management of Work, Prentice Hall, ISBN 978-0-13-140650-6↩
Niebel, B., Freivalds, A. (2008) Methods,Standards and Work design, McGraw-Hill, ISBN 978-0-07-337631-8↩




