


Coppersmith's Attack




Coppersmith's Attack

Coppersmith's attack describes a class of attacks on the public-key cryptosystem RSA based on Coppersmith's theorem (see below). The public key in the RSA system is a tuple of integers

 
 , where N is the product of two primes p and q. The secret key is given by an integer d satisfying 
 
 
 
 ; equivalently, the secret key may be given by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  if the Chinese remainder theorem is used to improve the speed of decryption, see CRT-RSA. Encryption of a message M produces the ciphertext

 
  which can be decrypted using 
 
 
 
  by computing 
 
 
 
 .
Coppersmith's theorem has many applications in attacking RSA specifically if the public exponent e is small or if partial knowledge of the secret key is available.
Low Public Exponent Attack
In order to reduce encryption or signature-verification time, it is useful to use a small public exponent (
 
 
 
 ). In practice, common choices for 
 
 
 
  are 3, 17 and 65537 
 
 
 
 .1 These values for e are Fermat primes, sometimes referred to as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively 
 
 
 
 . They are chosen because they make the modular exponentiation operation faster. Also, having chosen such 
 
 
 
 , it is simpler to test whether 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  while generating and testing the primes in step 1 of the key generation. Values of 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  that fail this test can be rejected there and then. (Even better: if e is prime and greater than 2 then the test 
 
 
 
  can replace the more expensive test 
 
 
 
 .)
 If the public exponent is small and the plaintext

 
  is very short, then the RSA function may be easy to invert which makes certain attacks possible. Padding schemes ensure that messages have full lengths but additionally choosing public exponent 
 
 
 
  is recommended. When this value is used, signature-verification requires 17 multiplications, as opposed to about 25 when a random 
 
 
 
  of similar size is used. Unlike low private exponent (see Wiener's Attack), attacks that apply when a small 
 
 
 
  is used are far from a total break which would recover the secret key d. The most powerful attacks on low public exponent RSA are based on the following theorem which is due to Don Coppersmith.
Theorem 1 (Coppersmith)2

Let N be an integer and 
 
 
 
  be a monic polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  over the integers. Set 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Then, given 
 
 
 
  attacker, Eve, can efficiently find all integers 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . The running time is dominated by the time it takes to run the LLL algorithm on a lattice of dimension O

 
  with 
 
 
 
 .
 

This theorem states the existence of an algorithm which can efficiently find all roots of 
 
 
 
  modulo 
 
 
 
  that are smaller than 
 
 
 
 . As 
 
 
 
  gets smaller, the algorithm's runtime will decrease. This theorem's strength is the ability to find all small roots of polynomials modulo a composite 
 
 
 
 .

Håstad's Broadcast Attack
The simplest form of Håstad's attack is presented to ease understanding. The general case uses Coppersmith's theorem.
How does it work?3
Suppose one sender sends the same message 
 
 
 
  in encrypted form to a number of people 
 
 
 
 , each using the same small public exponent 
 
 
 
 , say 
 
 
 
 , and different moduli 
 
 
 
 . A simple argument shows that as soon as 
 
 
 
  ciphertexts are known, the message 
 
 
 
  is no longer secure: Suppose Eve intercepts 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . We may assume 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  (otherwise, it is possible to compute a factor of one of the 
 
 
 
 ’s by computing 
 
 
 
 .) By the Chinese Remainder Theorem, she may compute 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  ; however, since 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 ', we have 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  holds over the integers, and Eve can compute the cube root of 
 
 
 
  to obtain 
 
 
 
 .
For larger values of 
 
 
 
  more ciphertexts are needed, particularly, 
 
 
 
  ciphertexts are sufficient.
Generalizations
Håstad also showed that applying a linear-padding to 
 
 
 
  prior to encryption does not protect against this attack. Assume the attacker learns that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and some linear function 
 
 
 
 , i.e., Bob applies a pad to the message

 
  prior to encrypting it so that the recipients receive slightly different messages. For instance, if 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  bits long, Bob might encrypt

 
  and send this to the i-th recipient.
If a large enough group of people is involved, the attacker can recover the plaintext

 
  from all the ciphertext with similar methods. In more generality, Håstad proved that a system of univariate equations modulo relatively prime composites, such as applying any fixed polynomial

 
  mod 
 
 
 
 , could be solved if sufficiently many equations are provided. This attack suggests that randomized padding should be used in RSA encryption.
Theorem 2 (Håstad)

Suppose 
 
 
 
  are relatively prime integers and set 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be k polynomials of maximum degree

 
 . Suppose there exists a unique 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 (mod 
 
 
 
 ) for all 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore suppose 
 
 
 
 . There is an efficient algorithm which, given 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , computes 
 
 
 
 .
 

Proof:
 Since the 
 
 
 
  are relatively prime the Chinese Remainder Theorem might be used to compute coefficients

 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Setting 
 
 
 
  we know that 
 
 
 
 . Since the 
 
 
 
  are nonzero we have that 
 
 
 
  is also nonzero. The degree of 
 
 
 
  is at most 
 
 
 
 . By Coppersmith’s Theorem, we may compute all integer roots 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . However, we know that 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  is among the roots found by Coppersmith's theorem.
  This theorem can be applied to the problem of broadcast RSA in the following manner: Suppose the i-th plaintext is padded with a polynomial 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 . Then the polynomials 
 
 
 
  satisfy that relation. The attack succeeds once 
 
 
 
 . The original result used the Håstad method instead of the full Coppersmith method. Its result was required 
 
 
 
  messages, where 
 
 
 
 .4

Franklin-Reiter Related Message Attack
Franklin-Reiter identified a new attack against RSA with public exponent

 
 . If two messages differ only by a known fixed difference between the two messages and are RSA encrypted under the same RSA modulus

 
 , then it is possible to recover both of them.
How does it work?
Let 
 
 
 
  be Alice's public key. Suppose 
 
 
 
  are two distinct messages satisfying 
 
 
 
  for some publicly known polynomial

 
 . To send 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to Alice, Bob may naively encrypt the messages and transmit the resulting ciphertexts

 
 . Eve can easily recover 
 
 
 
  given 
 
 
 
 , by using the following theorem:
Theorem 3 (Franklin-Reiter) 5

Set 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be an RSA public key. Let 
 
 
 
  satisfy 
 
 
 
  for some linear polynomial

 
  with 
 
 
 
 . Then, given 
 
 
 
 , attacker, Eve, can recover 
 
 
 
  in time quadratic in 
 
 
 
 .
 

For an arbitrary

 
  (rather than restricting to 
 
 
 
 ) the time required is quadratic in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ).
Proof:
 Since 
 
 
 
 , we know that 
 
 
 
  is a root of the polynomial

 
 . Similarly, 
 
 
 
  is a root of 
 
 
 
 . The linear factor 
 
 
 
  divides both polynomials. Therefore, Eve calculates the greatest common divisor (gcd) of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , if the gcd turns out to be linear, 
 
 
 
  is found. The gcd can be computed in quadratic time in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  using the Euclidean algorithm.
Coppersmith’s Short Pad Attack
Like Håstad’s and Franklin-Reiter’s attack, this attack exploits a weakness of RSA with public exponent 
 
 
 
 . Coppersmith showed that if randomized padding suggested by Håstad is used improperly then RSA encryption is not secure.
How does it work?
Suppose Bob sends a message 
 
 
 
  to Alice using a small random padding before encrypting it. An attacker, Eve, intercepts the ciphertext and prevents it from reaching its destination. Bob decides to resend 
 
 
 
  to Alice because Alice did not respond to his message. He randomly pads 
 
 
 
  again and transmits the resulting ciphertext. Eve now has two ciphertexts corresponding to two encryptions of the same message using two different random pads.
Even though Eve does not know the random pad being used, she still can recover the message 
 
 
 
  by using the following theorem, if the random padding is too short.
Theorem 4 (Coppersmith)

Let 
 
 
 
  be a public RSA key where 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -bits long. Set 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a message of length at most 
 
 
 
  bits. Define 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are distinct integers with 
 
 
 
 . If Eve is given 
 
 
 
  and the encryptions 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  (but is not given 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , she can efficiently recover 
 
 
 
 .
 

Proof6
 Define 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . We know that when 
 
 
 
 , these polynomials have 
 
 
 
  as a common root. In other words, 
 
 
 
  is a root of the resultant

 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
 . Hence, 
 
 
 
  is a small root of 
 
 
 
  modulo 
 
 
 
 , and Eve can efficiently find it using Theorem 1 (Coppersmith). Once 
 
 
 
  is known, the Franklin-Reiter attack can be used to recover 
 
 
 
  and consequently 
 
 
 
 .

See also
Coppersmith method
References
"
Category:Attacks on public-key cryptosystems



Imad Khaled Salah,Abdullah Darwish and Saleh Oqeili. Mathematical Attacks on RSA Cryptosystem
D. Boneh. Twenty years of attacks on the RSA cryptosystem
Glenn Durfee. CRYPTANALYSIS OF RSA USING ALGEBRAIC AND LATTICE METHODS

D. Boneh. Twenty years of attacks on the RSA cryptosystem





