


Generalized inversive congruential pseudorandom numbers




Generalized inversive congruential pseudorandom numbers

An approach to nonlinear congruential methods of generating uniform pseudorandom numbers in the interval [0,1) is the Inversive congruential generator with prime modulus. A generalization for arbitrary composite moduli 
 
 
 
  with arbitrary distinct primes

 
  will be present here.
Let 
 
 
 
  .For integers

 
  with gcd (a,m) = 1 a generalized inversive congruential sequence 
 
 
 
  of elements of 
 
 
 
  is defined by






where 
 
 
 
  denotes the number of positive integers less than m which are relatively prime to m.
Example
Let take m = 15 = 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Hence 
 
 
 
  and the sequence 
 
 
 
  is not maximum.
The result below shows that these sequences are closely related to the following inversive congruential sequence with prime moduli.
For 
 
 
 
  let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be integers with



Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of elements of 
 
 
 
 , given by



Theorem 1
Let 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  be defined as above. Then



This theorem shows that an implementation of Generalized Inversive Congruential Generator is possible,where exact integer computations have to be performed only in 
 
 
 
  but not in 
 
 

Proof:
First, observe that 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
  which will be shown on induction on 
 
 
 
 .
Recall that 
 
 
 
  is assumed for 
 
 
 
 . Now, suppose that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for some integer 
 
 
 
 . Then straightforward calculations and Fermat's Theorem yield


 
 , which implies the desired result.
Generalized Inversive Congruential Pseudorandom Numbers are well equidistributed in one dimension. A reliable theoretical approach for assessing their statistical independence properties is based on the discrepancy of s-tuples of pseudorandom numbers.
Discrepancy bounds of the GIC Generator
We use the notation 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 


 
  of Generalized Inversive Congruential Pseudorandom Numbers for 
 
 
 
 .
Higher bound

Let 
 
 

Then the discrepancy 
 
 
 
  satisfies
 



 
   m^{-1/2} 
 
 





 
  for any Generalized Inversive Congruential operator.
 

Lower bound:

There exist Generalized Inversive Congruential Generators with
 







 
  :
 
 

 
  for all dimension s

 
  2.
 

For a fixed number r of prime factors of m, Theorem 2 shows that 
 
 
 
  for any Generalized Inversive Congruential Sequence. In this case Theorem 3 implies that there exist Generalized Inversive Congruential Generators having a discrepancy 
 
 
 
  which is at least of the order of magnitude 
 
 
 
  for all dimension 
 
 
 
 . However,if m is composed only of small primes, then r can be of an order of magnitude 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 .1 Therefore, one obtains in the general case 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
 , similar arguments imply that in the general case the lower bound in Theorem 3 is at least of the order of magnitude 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 . It is this range of magnitudes where one also finds the discrepancy of m independent and uniformly distributed random points which almost always has the order of magnitude 
 
 
 
  according to the law of the iterated logarithm for discrepancies.2 In this sense, Generalized Inversive Congruential Pseudo-random Numbers model true random numbers very closely.
See also

Pseudorandom number generator
List of random number generators
Linear congruential generator
Inversive congruential generator
Naor-Reingold Pseudorandom Function

References
Notes



"
Category:Pseudorandom number generators









