


Multivariate stable distribution




Multivariate stable distribution

The multivariate stable distribution is a multivariate probability distribution that is a multivariate generalisation of the univariate stable distribution. The multivariate stable distribution defines linear relations between stable distribution marginals. In the same way as for the univariate case, the distribution is defined in terms of its characteristic function.
The multivariate stable distribution can also be thought as an extension of the multivariate normal distribution. It has parameter, α, which is defined over the range 0  \mathbb{S}  be the unit sphere in 
 
 
 
 . A random vector, 
 
 
 
 , has a multivariate stable distribution - denoted as 
 
 
 
  -, if the joint characteristic function of 
 
 
 
  is1



where 0  y\in\mathbb R



This is essentially the result of Feldheim,2 that any stable random vector can be characterized by a spectral measure 
 
 
 
  (a finite measure on 
 
 
 
 ) and a shift vector 
 
 
 
 .
Parametrization using projections
Another way to describe a stable random vector is in terms of projections. For any vector 
 
 
 
 , the projection 
 
 
 
  is univariate 
 
 
 
 stable with some skewness 
 
 
 
 , scale 
 
 
 
  and some shift 
 
 
 
 . The notation 
 
 
 
  is used if X is stable with 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 . This is called the projection parameterization.
The spectral measure determines the projection parameter functions by:









Special cases
There are special cases where the multivariate characteristic function takes a simpler form. Define the characteristic function of a stable marginal as



Isotropic multivariate stable distribution
The characteristic function is 
 
 
 
  The spectral measure is continuous and uniform, leading to radial/isotropic symmetry.3 For the multinormal case 
 
 
 
 , this corresponds to independent components, but so is not the case when 
 
 
 
 . Isotropy is a special case of ellipticity (see the next paragraph) – just take 
 
 
 
  to be a multiple of the identity matrix.
Elliptically contoured multivariate stable distribution
Elliptically contoured m.v. stable distribution is a special symmetric case of the multivariate stable distribution. If X is α-stable and elliptically contoured, then it has joint characteristic function

 
  for some shift vector 
 
 
 
  (equal to the mean when it exists) and some positive definite matrix 
 
 
 
  (akin to a correlation matrix, although the usual definition of correlation fails to be meaningful). Note the relation to characteristic function of the multivariate normal distribution

 
  obtained when α = 2.
Independent components
The marginals are independent with 
 
 
 
 , then the characteristic function is


 
  Observe that when α = 2 this reduces again to the multivariate normal; note that the iid case and the isotropic case do not coincide when α  Heatmap showing a multivariate (bivariate) independent stable distribution with α = 1 || |
Heatmap showing a multivariate (bivariate) independent stable distribution with α = 2. |}
Discrete
If the spectral measure is discrete with mass 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  the characteristic function is



Linear properties
if 
 
 
 
  is d-dim, and A is a m x d matrix, 
 
 
 
  then AX + b is m dim. 
 
 
 
 -stable with scale function 
 
 
 
  , skewness function 
 
 
 
 , and location function 
 
 

Inference in the independent component model
Recently4 it was shown how to compute inference in closed-form in a linear model (or equivalently a factor analysis model),involving independent component models.
More specifically, let 
 
 
 
  be a set of i.i.d. unobserved univariate drawn from a stable distribution. Given a known linear relation matrix A of size 
 
 
 
 , the observation 
 
 
 
  are assumed to be distributed as a convolution of the hidden factors 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 . The inference task is to compute the most probable 
 
 
 
 , given the linear relation matrix A and the observations 
 
 
 
 . This task can be computed in closed-form in O(n3).
An application for this construction is multiuser detection with stable, non-Gaussian noise.
Resources

Mark Veillette's stable distribution matlab package http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/37514
The plots in this page where plotted using Danny Bickson's inference in linear-stable model Matlab package: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~bickson/stable

Notes
"
Category:Multivariate continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions with non-finite variance Category:Probability distributions



J. Nolan, Multivariate stable densities and distribution functions: general and elliptical case, BundesBank Conference, Eltville, Germany, 11 November 2005. See also http://academic2.american.edu/~jpnolan/stable/stable.html
Feldheim, E. (1937). Etude de la stabilité des lois de probabilité . Ph. D. thesis, Faculté des Sciences de Paris, Paris, France.
User manual for STABLE 5.1 Matlab version, Robust Analysis Inc., http://www.RobustAnalysis.com
D. Bickson and C. Guestrin. Inference in linear models with multivariate heavy-tails. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 2010, Vancouver, Canada, Dec. 2010. http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~bickson/stable/




