


O-minimal theory




O-minimal theory

In mathematical logic, and more specifically in model theory, an infinite structure (M,Knight, Pillay and Steinhorn (1986), Pillay and Steinhorn (1988). This result is remarkable because the complete theory of a minimal structure need not be a strongly minimal theory, that is, there may be an elementarily equivalent structure which is not minimal.
Set-theoretic definition
O-minimal structures can be defined without recourse to model theory. Here we define a structure on a nonempty set M in a set-theoretic manner, as a sequence S = (Sn), n = 0,1,2,... such that

Sn is a boolean algebra of subsets of Mn
if A ∈ Sn then M × A and A ×M are in Sn+1
the set {(x1,...,xn) ∈ Mn : x1 = xn} is in Sn
if A ∈ Sn+1 and π : Mn+1 → Mn is the projection map on the first n coordinates, then π(A) ∈ Sn.

If M has a dense linear order without endpoints on it, say 

the set {(x,y) ∈ M2 : x 2

the sets in S1 are precisely the finite unions of intervals and points.

The "o" stands for "order", since any o-minimal structure requires an ordering on the underlying set.
Model theoretic definition
O-minimal structures originated in model theory and so have a simpler — but equivalent — definition using the language of model theory.1 Specifically if L is a language including a binary relation The condition that the interpretation of  then (M,1,...,Ir with endpoints in M ∪ {±∞} and a finite set X0 such that



Examples
Examples of o-minimal theories are:

The complete theory of dense linear orders in the language with just the ordering.
RCF, the theory of real closed fields.2
The complete theory of the real field with restricted analytic functions added (i.e. analytic functions on a neighborhood of [0,1]n, restricted to [0,1]n; note that the unrestricted sine function has infinitely many roots, and so cannot be definable in an o-minimal structure.)
The complete theory of the real field with a symbol for the exponential function by Wilkie's theorem. More generally, the complete theory of the real numbers with Pfaffian functions added.
The last two examples can be combined: given any o-minimal expansion of the real field (such as the real field with restricted analytic functions), one can define its Pfaffian closure, which is again an o-minimal structure.3 (The Pfaffian closure of a structure is, in particular, closed under Pfaffian chains where arbitrary definable functions are used in place of polynomials.)

In the case of RCF, the definable sets are the semialgebraic sets. Thus the study of o-minimal structures and theories generalises real algebraic geometry. A major line of current research is based on discovering expansions of the real ordered field that are o-minimal. Despite the generality of application, one can show a great deal about the geometry of set definable in o-minimal structures. There is a cell decomposition theorem,4 Whitney and Verdier stratification theorems and a good notion of dimension and Euler characteristic.
See also

Semialgebraic set
Real algebraic geometry
Strongly minimal theory
Weakly o-minimal structure
C-minimal theory

Notes
References










External links

Model Theory preprint server
Real Algebraic and Analytic Geometry Preprint Server

"
Category:Model theory Category:Topology Category:Real algebraic geometry



Marker (2002) p.81↩
Marker (2002) p.99↩
Patrick Speisseger, Pfaffian sets and o-minimality, in: Lecture notes on o-minimal structures and real analytic geometry, C. Miller, J.-P. Rolin, and P. Speissegger (eds.), Fields Institute Communications vol. 62, 2012, pp. 179–218. ↩
Marker (2002) p.103↩




