


V-statistic




V-statistic

V-statistics are a class of statistics named for Richard von Mises who developed their asymptotic distribution theory in a fundamental paper in 1947.1 V-statistics are closely related to U-statistics23 (U for “unbiased”) introduced by Wassily Hoeffding in 1948.4 A V-statistic is a statistical function (of a sample) defined by a particular statistical functional of a probability distribution.
Statistical functions
Statistics that can be represented as functionals 
 
 
 
  of the empirical distribution function

 
  are called statistical functions.5 Differentiability of the functional T plays a key role in the von Mises approach; thus von Mises considers differentiable statistical functionals.6
Examples of statistical functions

The k-th central moment is the functional

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the expected value of X. The associated statistical function is the sample k-th central moment,
 
 


The chi-squared goodness-of-fit statistic is a statistical function T(Fn), corresponding to the statistical functional
 
 


where Ai are the k cells and pi are the specified probabilities of the cells under the null hypothesis.
The Cramér–von-Mises and Anderson–Darling goodness-of-fit statistics are based on the functional
 
 

 
  where w(x; F0) is a specified weight function and F0 is a specified null distribution. If w is the identity function then T(Fn) is the well known Cramér–von-Mises goodness-of-fit statistic; if 
 
 
 
  then T(Fn) is the Anderson–Darling statistic.

Representation as a V-statistic
Suppose x1, ..., xn is a sample. In typical applications the statistical function has a representation as the V-statistic


 
  where h is a symmetric kernel function. Serfling7 discusses how to find the kernel in practice. Vmn is called a V-statistic of degree m.
A symmetric kernel of degree 2 is a function h(x, y), such that h(x, y) = h(y, x) for all x and y in the domain of h. For samples x1, ..., xn, the corresponding V-statistic is defined



Example of a V-statistic

An example of a degree-2 V-statistic is the second central moment m2.
 
 If h(x, y) = (x − y)2/2, the corresponding V-statistic is


 
  which is the maximum likelihood estimator of variance. With the same kernel, the corresponding U-statistic is the (unbiased) sample variance:


 
 .

Asymptotic distribution
In examples 1–3, the asymptotic distribution of the statistic is different: in (1) it is normal, in (2) it is chi-squared, and in (3) it is a weighted sum of chi-squared variables.
Von Mises' approach is a unifying theory that covers all of the cases above.8 Informally, the type of asymptotic distribution of a statistical function depends on the order of "degeneracy," which is determined by which term is the first non-vanishing term in the Taylor expansion of the functional T. In case it is the linear term, the limit distribution is normal; otherwise higher order types of distributions arise (under suitable conditions such that a central limit theorem holds).
There are a hierarchy of cases parallel to asymptotic theory of U-statistics.9 Let A(m) be the property defined by:

A(m):
 


Var(h(X1, ..., Xk)) = 0 for k 1, ..., Xk)) > 0 for k = m;
nm/2Rmn tends to zero (in probability). (Rmn is the remainder term in the Taylor series for T.)

Case m = 1 (Non-degenerate kernel):
If A(1) is true, the statistic is a sample mean and the Central Limit Theorem implies that T(Fn) is asymptotically normal.
In the variance example (4), m2 is asymptotically normal with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 .
Case m = 2 (Degenerate kernel):
Suppose A(2) is true, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then nV2,n converges in distribution to a weighted sum of independent chi-squared variables:



where 
 
 
 
  are independent standard normal variables and 
 
 
 
  are constants that depend on the distribution F and the functional T. In this case the asymptotic distribution is called a quadratic form of centered Gaussian random variables. The statistic V2,n is called a degenerate kernel V-statistic. The V-statistic associated with the Cramer–von Mises functional10 (Example 3) is an example of a degenerate kernel V-statistic.11
See also

U-statistic
Asymptotic distribution
Asymptotic theory (statistics)

Notes
References










"
Category:Estimation theory Category:Asymptotic statistical theory







von Mises (1947), p. 309; Serfling (1980), p. 210.

Serfling (1980, Section 6.5)

Serfling (1980, Ch. 5–6); Lee (1990, Ch. 3)

See Lee (1990, p. 160) for the kernel function.




