


Dynamical mean field theory




Dynamical mean field theory

Dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) is a method to determine the electronic structure of strongly correlated materials. In such materials, the approximation of independent electrons, which is used in density functional theory and usual band structure calculations, breaks down. Dynamical Mean-Field Theory, a non-perturbative treatment of local interactions between electrons, bridges the gap between the nearly free electron gas limit and the atomic limit of condensed-matter physics.1
DMFT consists in mapping a many-body lattice problem to a many-body local problem, called an impurity model.2 While the lattice problem is in general intractable, the impurity model is usually solvable through various schemes. The mapping in itself does not constitute an approximation. The only approximation made in ordinary DMFT schemes is to assume the lattice self-energy to be a momentum-independent (local) quantity. This approximation becomes exact in the limit of lattices with an infinite coordination.3
One of DMFT's main successes is to describe the phase transition between a metal and a Mott insulator when the strength of electronic correlations is increased. It has been successfully applied to real materials, in combination with the local density approximation of density functional theory.45
Relation to mean-field theory
The DMFT treatment of lattice quantum models is similar to the mean-field theory (MFT) treatment of classical models such as the Ising model.6 In the Ising model, the lattice problem is mapped onto an effective single site problem, whose magnetization is to reproduce the lattice magnetization through an effective "mean-field". This condition is called the self-consistency condition. It stipulates that the single-site observables should reproduce the lattice "local" observables by means of an effective field. While the N-site Ising Hamiltonian is hard to solve analytically (to date, analytical solutions exist only for the 1D and 2D case), the single-site problem is easily solved.
Likewise, DMFT maps a lattice problem (e.g. the Hubbard model) onto a single-site problem. In DMFT, the local observable is the local Green's function. Thus, the self-consistency condition for DMFT is for the impurity Green's function to reproduce the lattice local Green's function through an effective mean-field which, in DMFT, is the hybridization function 
 
 
 
  of the impurity model. DMFT owes its name to the fact that the mean-field 
 
 
 
  is time-dependent, or dynamical. This also points to the major difference between the Ising MFT and DMFT: Ising MFT maps the N-spin problem into a single-site, single-spin problem. DMFT maps the lattice problem onto a single-site problem, but the latter fundamentally remains a N-body problem which captures the temporal fluctuations due to electron-electron correlations.
Description of DMFT for the Hubbard model
The DMFT mapping
Single-orbital Hubbard model
The Hubbard model 7 describes the onsite interaction between electrons of opposite spin by a single parameter, 
 
 
 
 . The Hubbard Hamiltonian may take the following form:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denote the creation and annihilation operators of an electron on a localized orbital on site 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
The following assumptions have been made:

only one orbital contributes to the electronic properties (as might be the case of copper atoms in superconducting cuprates, whose 
 
 
 
 -bands are non-degenerate),
the orbitals are so localized that only nearest-neighbor hopping 
 
 
 
  is taken into account

The auxiliary problem: the Anderson impurity model
The Hubbard model is in general intractable under usual perturbation expansion techniques. DMFT maps this lattice model onto the so-called Anderson impurity model (AIM). This model describes the interaction of one site (the impurity) with a "bath" of electronic levels (described by the annihilation and creation operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) through a hybridization function. The Anderson model corresponding to our single-site model is a single-orbital Anderson impurity model, whose hamiltonian formulation is the following:


 
  where



 
  describes the non-correlated electronic levels 
 
 
 
  of the bath


 
  describes the impurity, where two electrons interact with the energetical cost 
 
 



 
  describes the hybridization (or coupling) between the impurity and the bath through hybridization terms 
 
 


The Matsubara Green's function of this model, defined by 
 
 
 
 , is entirely determined by the parameters 
 
 
 
  and the so-called hybridization function 
 
 
 
 , which is the imaginary-time Fourier-transform of 
 
 
 
 .
This hybridization function describes the dynamics of electrons hopping in and out of the bath. It should reproduce the lattice dynamics such that the impurity Green's function is the same as the local lattice Green's function. It is related to the non-interacting Green's function by the relation:


 
  (1)
Solving the Anderson impurity model consists in computing observables such as the interacting Green's function 
 
 
 
  for a given hybridization function 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It is a difficult but not intractable problem. There exists a number of ways to solve the AIM, such as

The Numerical renormalization group
Exact diagonalization
Iterative perturbation theory
Non-crossing approximation
Continuous-Time Quantum Monte Carlo algorithms8910

11
Self-consistency equations
The self-consistency condition requires the impurity Green's function 
 
 
 
  to coincide with the local lattice Green's function 
 
 
 
 :


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the lattice self-energy.
DMFT approximation: locality of the lattice self-energy
The only DMFT approximations (apart from the approximation that can be made in order to solve the Anderson model) consists in neglecting the spatial fluctuations of the lattice self-energy, by equating it to the impurity self-energy:



This approximation becomes exact in the limit of lattices with infinite coordination, that is when the number of neighbors of each site is infinite. Indeed, one can show that in the diagrammatic expansion of the lattice self-energy, only local diagrams survive when one goes into the infinite coordination limit.
Thus, as in classical mean-field theories, DMFT is supposed to get more accurate as the dimensionality (and thus the number of neighbors) increases. Put differently, for low dimensions, spatial fluctuations will render the DMFT approximation less reliable.
The DMFT loop
In order to find the local lattice Green's function, one has to determine the hybridization function such that the corresponding impurity Green's function will coincide with the sought-after local lattice Green's function. An intuitive method would be the following: for a given 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and temperature 
 
 


First, compute the non-interacting lattice Green's function 
 
 
 
 , and extract its local part 
 
 

The self-consistency condition requires it to be equal to the impurity Green's function, 
 
 

Compute the corresponding hybridization function through (1)
Solve the AIM for a new impurity Green's function 
 
 
 
 , extract its self-energy
 
 

Make the DMFT approximation
 
 

Compute the new lattice Green's function, extract its local part and go back to step 2 with a new 
 
 


Self-consistency is reached when 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
The local lattice Green's function and other impurity observables can be used to calculate a number of physical quantities as a function of correlations 
 
 
 
 , bandwidth, filling (chemical potential 
 
 
 
 ), and temperature 
 
 
 
 :

the spectral function (which gives the band structure)
the kinetic energy
the double occupancy of a site
response functions (compressibility, optical conductivity, specific heat)

In particular, the drop of the double-occupancy as 
 
 
 
  increases is a signature of the Mott transition.
Extensions of DMFT
DMFT has several extensions, extending the above formalism to multi-orbital, multi-site problems.
Multi-orbital extension
DMFT can be extended to Hubbard models with multiple orbitals, namely with electron-electron interactions of the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote different orbitals. This is especially relevant for compounds whose 
 
 
 
 -orbitals are degenerate, such as iron in the newly discovered high-temperature iron-based superconductors (pnictides).
Cluster DMFT
In order to improve on the DMFT approximation, the Hubbard model can be mapped on a multi-site impurity (cluster) problem, which allows one to add some spatial dependence to the impurity self-energy. Clusters contain 4 to 8 sites at low T and up to 100 sites at high T.
Extended DMFT
DMFT can be applied to more general models such as the t-J model.
References and notes


See also

Strongly correlated material

External links

Strongly Correlated Materials: Insights From Dynamical Mean-Field Theory G. Kotliar and D. Vollhardt
Lecture notes on the LDA+DMFT approach to strongly correlated materials Eva Pavarini, Erik Koch, Dieter Vollhardt, and Alexander Lichtenstein (eds.)
Lecture notes DMFT at 25: Infinite Dimensions Eva Pavarini, Erik Koch, Dieter Vollhardt, and Alexander Lichtenstein (eds.)

"
Category:Materials science Category:Condensed matter physics Category:Quantum mechanics



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




