


Jacobi polynomials




Jacobi polynomials

In mathematics, Jacobi polynomials (occasionally called hypergeometric polynomials) 
 
 
 
  are a class of classical orthogonal polynomials. They are orthogonal with respect to the weight  on the interval 
 
 
 
 . The Gegenbauer polynomials, and thus also the Legendre, Zernike and Chebyshev polynomials, are special cases of the Jacobi polynomials.1
The Jacobi polynomials were introduced by Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi.
Definitions
Via the hypergeometric function
The Jacobi polynomials are defined via the hypergeometric function as follows:2



where 
 
 
 
  is Pochhammer's symbol (for the rising factorial). In this case, the series for the hypergeometric function is finite, therefore one obtains the following equivalent expression:



Rodrigues' formula
An equivalent definition is given by Rodrigues' formula:34



If 
 
 
 
 , then it reduces to the Legendre polynomials:



Alternate expression for real argument
For real x the Jacobi polynomial can alternatively be written as



and for integer n



where 
 
 
 
  is the Gamma function.
In the special case that the four quantities 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are nonnegative integers, the Jacobi polynomial can be written as
The sum extends over all integer values of s for which the arguments of the factorials are nonnegative.
Basic properties
Orthogonality
The Jacobi polynomials satisfy the orthogonality condition



As defined, they are not orthonormal, the normalization being



Symmetry relation
The polynomials have the symmetry relation



thus the other terminal value is



Derivatives
The kth derivative of the explicit expression leads to



Differential equation
The Jacobi polynomial 
 
 
 
  is a solution of the second order linear homogeneous differential equation5



Recurrence relation
The recurrence relation for the Jacobi polynomials is:6



for n = 2, 3, ....
Generating function
The generating function of the Jacobi polynomials is given by



where



and the branch of square root is chosen so that R(z, 0) = 1.7
Asymptotics of Jacobi polynomials
For x in the interior of 
 
 
 
 , the asymptotics of 
 
 
 
  for large n is given by the Darboux formula8



where



and the "O" term is uniform on the interval [ε, 
 
 
 
 -ε] for every ε > 0.
The asymptotics of the Jacobi polynomials near the points ±1 is given by the Mehler–Heine formula



where the limits are uniform for z in a bounded domain.
The asymptotics outside 
 
 
 
  is less explicit.
Applications
Wigner d-matrix
The expression () allows the expression of the Wigner d-matrix djm’,m(φ) (for 0 ≤ φ ≤ 4
 
 
 
 ) in terms of Jacobi polynomials:9



See also

Askey–Gasper inequality
Big q-Jacobi polynomials
Continuous q-Jacobi polynomials
Little q-Jacobi polynomials
Pseudo Jacobi polynomials
Jacobi process
Gegenbauer polynomials

Notes



Further reading




External links




"
Category:Special hypergeometric functions Category:Orthogonal polynomials



 The definition is in IV.1; the differential equation – in IV.2; Rodrigues' formula is in IV.3; the generating function is in IV.4; the recurrent relation is in IV.5.↩
↩

↩




↩




