


Root of unity modulo n




Root of unity modulo n

In mathematics, namely ring theory, a k-th root of unity modulo n for positive integers k, n ≥ 2, is a solution x to the equation (or congruence) 
 
 
 
 . If k is the smallest such exponent for x, then x is called a primitive k-th root of unity modulo n.1 See modular arithmetic for notation and terminology.
Do not confuse this with a primitive element modulo n, where the primitive element must generate all units of the residue class ring

 
  by exponentiation. That is, there are always roots and primitive roots of unity modulo n for n ≥ 2, but for some n there is no primitive element modulo n. Being a root or a primitive root modulo n always depends on the exponent k and the modulus n, whereas being a primitive element modulo n only depends on the modulus n — the exponent is automatically 
 
 
 
 .
Roots of unity
Properties

If x is a k-th root of unity, then x is a unit (invertible) whose inverse is 
 
 
 
 . That is, x and n are coprime.
If x is a unit, then it is a (primitive) k-th root of unity modulo n, where k is the multiplicative order of x modulo n.
If x is a k-th root of unity and 
 
 
 
  is not a zero divisor, then 
 
 
 
 , because









Number of k-th roots
For the lack of a widely accepted symbol, we denote the number of k-th roots of unity modulo n by 
 
 
 
 . It satisfies a number of properties:



 
  for 
 
 



 
  where λ denotes the Carmichael function and 
 
 
 
  denotes Euler's totient function


 
  is a multiplicative function


 
  where the bar denotes divisibility


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the least common multiple
For prime

 
 , 
 
 
 
 . The precise mapping from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is not known. If it were known, then together with the previous law it would yield a way to evaluate 
 
 
 
  quickly.

Primitive roots of unity
Properties

The maximum possible radix exponent for primitive roots modulo 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , where λ denotes the Carmichael function.
A radix exponent for a primitive root of unity is a divisor of 
 
 
 
 .
Every divisor 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  yields a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity. You can obtain one by choosing a 
 
 
 
 -th primitive root of unity (that must exist by definition of λ), named 
 
 
 
  and compute the power 
 
 
 
 .
If x is a primitive k-th root of unity and also a (not necessarily primitive) ℓ-th root of unity, then k is a divisor of ℓ. This is true, because Bézout's identity yields an integer linear combination of k and ℓ equal to 
 
 
 
 . Since k is minimal, it must be 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a divisor of ℓ.

Number of primitive k-th roots
For the lack of a widely accepted symbol, we denote the number of primitive k-th roots of unity modulo n by 
 
 
 
 . It satisfies the following properties:




Consequently the function 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  values different from zero, where 
 
 
 
  computes the number of divisors.








 
  for 
 
 
 
 , since -1 is always a square root of 1.


 
  for 
 
 



 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 


 
  with 
 
 
 
  being Euler's totient function
The connection between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be written in an elegant way using a Dirichlet convolution:





 
 , i.e. 
 
 



You can compute values of 
 
 
 
  recursively from 
 
 
 
  using this formula, which is equivalent to the Möbius inversion formula.
 

Testing whether x is a primitive k-th root of unity modulo n
By fast exponentiation you can check that 
 
 
 
 . If this is true, x is a k-th root of unity modulo n but not necessarily primitive. If it is not a primitive root, then there would be some divisor ℓ of k, with 
 
 
 
 . In order to exclude this possibility, one has only to check for a few ℓ's equal k divided by a prime. That is, what needs to be checked is:



Finding a primitive k-th root of unity modulo n
Among the primitive k-th roots of unity, the primitive 
 
 
 
 -th roots are most frequent. It is thus recommended to try some integers for being a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root, what will succeed quickly. For a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root x, the number 
 
 
 
  is a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity. If k does not divide 
 
 
 
 , then there will be no k-th roots of unity, at all.
Finding multiple primitive k-th roots modulo n
Once you have a primitive k-th root of unity x, every power 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity, but not necessarily a primitive one. The power 
 
 
 
  is a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity if and only if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coprime. The proof is as follows: If 
 
 
 
  is not primitive, then there exists a divisor 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , and since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coprime, there exists an inverse 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  modulo 
 
 
 
 . This yields 
 
 
 
 , which means that 
 
 
 
  is not a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity because there is the smaller exponent 
 
 
 
 .
That is, by exponentiating x one can obtain 
 
 
 
  different primitive k-th roots of unity, but these may not be all such roots. However, finding all of them is not so easy.
Finding an n with a primitive k-th root of unity modulo n
You may want to know, in what integer residue class rings you have a primitive k-th root of unity. You need it for instance if you want to compute a Discrete Fourier Transform (more precisely a Number theoretic transform) of a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional integer vector. In order to perform the inverse transform, you also need to divide by 
 
 
 
 , that is, k shall also be a unit modulo 
 
 
 
 .
A simple way to find such an n is to check for primitive k-th roots with respect to the moduli in the arithmetic progression

 
 . All of these moduli are coprime to k and thus k is a unit. According to Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions there are infinitely many primes in the progression, and for a prime 
 
 
 
  it holds 
 
 
 
 . Thus if 
 
 
 
  is prime then 
 
 
 
  and thus you have primitive k-th roots of unity. But the test for primes is too strong, you may find other appropriate moduli.
Finding an n with multiple primitive roots of unity modulo n
If you want to have a modulus 
 
 
 
  such that there are primitive 
 
 
 
 -th, 
 
 
 
 -th, ..., 
 
 
 
 -th roots of unity modulo 
 
 
 
 , the following theorem reduces the problem to a simpler one:

For given 
 
 
 
  there are primitive 
 
 
 
 -th, ..., 
 
 
 
 -th roots of unity modulo 
 
 
 
  if and only if there is a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity modulo n.
 


Proof

Backward direction: If there is a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity modulo 
 
 
 
  called 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity modulo 
 
 
 
 .
Forward direction: If there are primitive 
 
 
 
 -th, ..., 
 
 
 
 -th roots of unity modulo 
 
 
 
 , then all exponents 
 
 
 
  are divisors of 
 
 
 
 . This implies 
 
 
 
  and this in turn means there is a primitive 
 
 
 
 -th root of unity modulo 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Root of unity
Primitive root modulo n

References
"
Category:Modular arithmetic








