


Holeum




Holeum

Holeums are hypothetical stable, quantized gravitational bound states of primordial or micro black holes. Holeums were proposed by L.K. Chavda and Abhijit Chavda in 2002.1 They have all the properties associated with cold dark matter. Holeums are not black holes, even though they are made up of black holes.
Properties
The binding energy

 
  of a holeum that consists of two identical micro black holes of mass 
 
 
 
 
  is given by2



in which 
 
 
 
  is the principal quantum number, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the gravitational counterpart of the fine structure constant. The latter is given by



where:


 
  is the Planck constant divided by 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  is the speed of light in vacuum;


 
  is the gravitational constant.
The nth excited state of a holeum then has a mass that is given by



The holeum's atomic transitions cause it to emit gravitational radiation.
The radius of the nth excited state of a holeum is given by



where:


 
  is the Schwarzschild radius of the two identical micro black holes that constitute the holeum.
The holeum is a stable particle. It is the gravitational analogue of the hydrogen atom. It occupies space. Although it is made up of black holes, it itself is not a black hole. As the holeum is a purely gravitational system, it emits only gravitational radiation and no electromagnetic radiation. The holeum can therefore be considered to be a dark matter particle.3
Macro holeums and their properties
A macro holeum is a quantized gravitational bound state of a large number of micro black holes. The energy eigenvalues of a macro holeum consisting of 
 
 
 
  identical micro black holes of mass 
 
 
 
  are given by4



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The system is simplified by assuming that all the micro black holes in the core are in the same quantum state described by 
 
 
 
 , and that the outermost, 
 
 
 
  micro black hole is in an arbitrary quantum state described by the principal quantum number 
 
 
 
 
 .
The physical radius of the bound state is given by



The mass of the macro holeum is given by



The Schwarzschild radius of the macro holeum is given by



The entropy of the system is given by



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the entropy of the individual micro black holes that constitute the macro holeum.
The ground state of macro holeums
The ground state of macro holeums is characterized by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The holeum has maximum binding energy, minimum physical radius, maximum Schwarzschild radius, maximum mass, and maximum entropy in this state.
Such a system can be thought of as consisting of a gas of 
 
 
 
  free (
 
 
 
 ) micro black holes that is bounded and therefore isolated from the outside world by a solitary outermost micro black hole whose principal quantum number is 
 
 
 
 
 .
Stability
It can be seen from the above equations that the condition for the stability of holeums is given by



Substituting the relations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  into this inequality, the condition for the stability of holeums can be expressed as


 
 , which gives us 
 
 
 
  as the condition for stability. Thus, the ground state of holeums is guaranteed to be always stable.
Black holeums
A holeum is a black hole if its physical radius is less than or equal to its Schwarzschild radius, i.e. if



Such holeums are termed black holeums. Substituting the expressions for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and simplifying, we obtain the condition for a holeum to be a black holeum to be



For the ground state, which is characterized by 
 
 
 
 , this reduces to



Black holeums are an example of black holes with internal structure. Black holeums are quantum black holes whose internal structure can be fully predicted by means of the quantities 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and $n_{k}$.
Holeums and cosmology
Holeums are speculated to be the progenitors of a class of short duration gamma ray bursts.56 It is also speculated that holeums give rise to cosmic rays of all energies, including ultra-high-energy cosmic rays.7
See also

Micro black hole
Black hole electron
Planck particle
Dark Matter

References
External links

Acta Physica: Chronicles the development of the theory of holeums
A Stable Holeum
Gravitational Radiation from Holeums
Constructing a Macro Holeum from the Inside Out
The Black Holeum

"
Category:Physical cosmology Category:Dark matter Category:Large-scale structure of the cosmos Category:Astroparticle physics Category:Exotic matter Category:Unsolved problems in physics Category:Particle physics Category:Theoretical physics Category:Hypothetical particles



L.K. Chavda & Abhijit Chavda, Dark matter and stable bound states of primordial black holes↩
L.K. Chavda & Abhijit Chavda, Dark matter and stable bound states of primordial black holes↩
M. Yu. Khlopov, Primordial Black Holes↩
L.K. Chavda & Abhijit Chavda, Quantized Gravitational Radiation from Black Holes and other macro holeums in the Low Frequency Domain↩
S. Al Dallal, [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007AdSpR..40.1236A Holeums as potential candidates for some short-lived gamma ray bursts]↩
S. Al Dallal, [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010AdSpR..46..468D Primordial black holes and holeums as progenitors of galactic diffuse gamma-ray background]↩
L.K. Chavda & Abhijit Chavda, Ultra High Energy Cosmic Rays from decays of holeums in Galactic Halos↩




