


Pseudo-Boolean function




Pseudo-Boolean function

In mathematics and optimization, a pseudo-Boolean function is a function of the form


 
 , where B = {0, 1} is a Boolean domain and n is a nonnegative integer called the arity of the function. Any pseudo-Boolean function can be written uniquely as a multi-linear polynomial: 


 
  that maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Again in this case we can uniquely write 
 
 
 
  as a multi-linear polynomial: 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are Fourier coefficients of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For a nice and simple introduction to Fourier analysis of pseudo-Boolean functions, see.1
Optimization
Minimizing (or, equivalently, maximizing) a pseudo-Boolean function is NP-Hard. This can easily be seen by formulating, for example, the maximum cut problem as maximizing a pseudo-Boolean function.
Submodularity
A pseudo-Boolean function f is said to be submodular if


 
  for every x and y. This is a very important concept, because a submodular pseudo-boolean function can be minimized in polynomial time.
Roof Duality
If f is a quadratic polynomial, a concept called roof duality can be used to obtain a lower bound for its minimum value.2 Roof duality may also provide a partial assignment of the variables, indicating some of the values of a minimizer to the polynomial. Several different methods of obtaining lower bounds were developed only to later be shown to be equivalent to what is now called roof duality.3
Reductions
If the degree of f is greater than 2, one can always employ reductions to obtain an equivalent quadratic problem with additional variables.4 One possible reduction is


 
  There are other possibilities, for example,


 
  Different reductions lead to different results. Take for example the following cubic polynomial:5


 
  Using the first reduction followed by roof duality, we obtain a lower bound of -3 and no indication on how to assign the three variables. Using the second reduction, we obtain the (tight) lower bound of -2 and the optimal assignment of every variable (which is 
 
 
 
 ).
Polynomial Compression Algorithms
Consider a pseudo-Boolean function 
 
 
 
  as a mapping from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  Assume that each coefficient 
 
 
 
  is integral. Then for an integer 
 
 
 
  the problem P of deciding whether 
 
 
 
  is more or equal to 
 
 
 
  is NP-complete. It is proved in 6 that in polynomial time we can either solve P or reduce the number of variables to 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the degree of the above multi-linear polynomial for 
 
 
 
 . Then 7 proved that in polynomial time we can either solve P or reduce the number of variables to $r(k-1)$.
See also

Boolean function

References








Notes


"
Category:Mathematical optimization



O'Donnell, 2008↩
Boros and Hammer, 2002↩

Ishikawa, 2011↩
Kahl and Strandmark, 2011↩
Crowston et al., 2011↩
Crowston et al., 2011↩




