


Geometric stable distribution




Geometric stable distribution

A geometric stable distribution or geo-stable distribution is a type of leptokurtic probability distribution. Geometric stable distributions were introduced in Klebanov, L. B., Maniya, G. M., and Melamed, I. A. (1985). A problem of Zolotarev and analogs of infinitely divisible and stable distributions in a scheme for summing a random number of random variables, Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 29(4):791–794. These distributions are analogues for stable distributions for the case when the number of summands is random, independent on the distribution of summand and having geometric distribution The geometric stable distribution may be symmetric or asymmetric. A symmetric geometric stable distribution is also referred to as a Linnik distribution. The Laplace distribution is a special case of the geometric stable distribution and of a Linnik distribution. The Mittag–Leffler distribution is also a special case of a geometric stable distribution.
The geometric stable distribution has applications in finance theory.123
Characteristics
For most geometric stable distributions, the probability density function and cumulative distribution function have no closed form solution. But a geometric stable distribution can be defined by its characteristic function, which has the form:4



where 
 
 

 
 
 , which must be greater than 0 and less than or equal to 2, is the shape parameter or index of stability, which determines how heavy the tails are.5 Lower 
 
 
 
  corresponds to heavier tails.


 
 , which must be greater than or equal to −1 and less than or equal to 1, is the skewness parameter.6 When 
 
 
 
  is negative the distribution is skewed to the left and when 
 
 
 
  is positive the distribution is skewed to the right. When 
 
 
 
 
  is zero the distribution is symmetric, and the characteristic function reduces to:7



The symmetric geometric stable distribution with 
 
 
 
  is also referred to as a Linnik distribution.89 A completely skewed geometric stable distribution, that is with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  is also referred to as a Mittag–Leffler distribution.10 Although 
 
 
 
  determines the skewness of the distribution, it should not be confused with the typical skewness coefficient or 3rd standardized moment, which in most circumstances is undefined for a geometric stable distribution.


 
  is the scale parameter and 
 
 
 
  is the location parameter.11
When 
 
 
 
  = 2, 
 
 
 
  = 0 and 
 
 
 
  = 0 (i.e., a symmetric geometric stable distribution or Linnik distribution with 
 
 
 
 =2), the distribution becomes the symmetric Laplace distribution with mean of 0,12 which has a probability density function of:



The Laplace distribution has a variance equal to 
 
 
 
 . However, for 
 
 
 
  the variance of the geometric stable distribution is infinite.
Relationship to the stable distribution
The stable distribution has the property that if 
 
 
 
  are independent, identically distributed random variables taken from a stable distribution, the sum 
 
 
 
  has the same distribution as the 
 
 
 
 s for some 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The geometric stable distribution has a similar property, but where the number of elements in the sum is a geometrically distributed random variable. If 
 
 
 
  are independent and identically distributed random variables taken from a geometric stable distribution, the limit of the sum 
 
 
 
  approaches the distribution of the 
 
 
 
 s for some coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as p approaches 0, where 
 
 
 
  is a random variable independent of the 
 
 
 
 s taken from a geometric distribution with parameter p.13 In other words:



The distribution is strictly geometric stable only if the sum 
 
 
 
  equals the distribution of the 
 
 
 
 s for some a.14
There is also a relationship between the stable distribution characteristic function and the geometric stable distribution characteristic function. The stable distribution has a characteristic function of the form:



where



The geometric stable characteristic function can be expressed in terms of a stable characteristic function as:15



References
"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions with non-finite variance Category:Probability distributions






















