


Circuit (computer science)




Circuit (computer science)

In theoretical computer science, a circuit is a model of computation in which input values proceed through a sequence of gates, each of which computes a function. Circuits of this kind provide a generalization of Boolean circuits and a mathematical model for digital logic circuits. Circuits are defined by the gates they contain and the values the gates can produce. For example, the values in a Boolean circuit are boolean values, and the circuit includes conjunction, disjunction, and negation gates. The values in an integer circuit are sets of integers and the gates compute set union, set intersection, and set complement, as well as the arithmetic operations addition and multiplication.
Formal definition
A circuit is a triple 
 
 
 
 , where



 
  is a set of values,


 
  is a set of gate labels, each of which is a function from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  for some non-negative integer 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  represents the number of inputs to the gate), and


 
  is a labelled directed acyclic graph with labels from 
 
 
 
 .

The vertices of the graph are called gates. For each gate 
 
 
 
  of in-degree

 
 , the gate 
 
 
 
  can be labeled by an element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is defined on 
 
 
 
 .
Terminology
The gates of in-degree 0 are called inputs or leaves. The gates of out-degree 0 are called outputs. If there is an edge from gate 
 
 
 
  to gate 
 
 
 
  in the graph 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is called a child of 
 
 
 
 . We suppose there is an order on the vertices of the graph, so we can speak of the 
 
 
 
 th child of a gate when 
 
 
 
  is less than the out-degree of the gate.
The size of a circuit is the number of nodes of a circuit. The depth of a gate

 
  is the length of the longest path in 
 
 
 
  beginning at 
 
 
 
  up to an output gate. In particular, the gates of out-degree 0 are the only gates of depth 1. The depth of a circuit is the maximum depth of any gate.
Level 
 
 
 is the set of all gates of depth 
 
 
 
 . A levelled circuit is a circuit in which the edges to gates of depth 
 
 
 
  comes only from gates of depth 
 
 
 
  or from the inputs. In other words, edges only exist between adjacent levels of the circuit. The width of a levelled circuit is the maximum size of any level.
Evaluation
The exact value 
 
 
 
  of a gate 
 
 
 
  with in-degree 
 
 
 
  and label 
 
 
 
  is defined recursively for all gates 
 
 
 
 .


 
  where each 
 
 
 
  is a parent of 
 
 
 
 .
The value of the circuit is the value of each of the output gates.
Circuits as functions
The labels of the leaves can also be variables which take values in 
 
 
 
 . If there are 
 
 
 
  leaves, then the circuit can be seen as a function from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . It is then usual to consider a family of circuits 
 
 
 
 , a sequence of circuits indexed by the integers where the circuit 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  variables. Families of circuits can thus be seen as functions from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
The notions of size, depth and width can be naturally extended to families of functions, becoming functions from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ; for example, 
 
 
 
  is the size of the 
 
 
 
 th circuit of the family.
Complexity and algorithmic problems
Computing the output of a given Boolean circuit on a specific input is P-complete problem. If the input is an integer circuit, however, it is unknown whether this problem is decidable.
Circuit complexity attempts to classify Boolean functions with respect to the size or depth of circuits that can compute them.
See also

Circuit complexity
NC
AC
TC
Circuits over sets of natural numbers

References




"
Category:Theory of computation Category:Circuit complexity


