


Persistent homology




Persistent homology

See homology for an introduction to the notation.
Persistent homology is a method for computing topological features of a space at different spatial resolutions. More persistent features are detected over a wide range of length and are deemed more likely to represent true features of the underlying space, rather than artifacts of sampling, noise, or particular choice of parameters.1
To find the persistent homology of a space, the space must first be represented as a simplicial complex. A distance function on the underlying space corresponds to a filtration of the simplicial complex, that is a nested sequence of increasing subsets.
Formally, consider a real-valued function on a simplicial complex 
 
 
 
  that is non-decreasing on increasing sequences of faces, so 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
  is a face of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Then for every 
 
 
 
  the sublevel set

 
  is a subcomplex of K, and the ordering of the values of 
 
 
 
  on the simplices in 
 
 
 
  (which is in practice always finite) induces an ordering on the sublevel complexes that defines the filtration


 
  When 
 
 
 
 , the inclusion 
 
 
 
  induces a homomorphism

 
  on the simplicial homology groups for each dimension 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
persistent homology groups are the images of these homomorphisms, and the 
 
 
persistent Betti numbers

 
  are the ranks of those groups.2 Persistent Betti numbers for 
 
 
 
  coincide with the predecessor of persistence homology, i.e. the size function.3
There are various software packages for computing persistence intervals of a finite filtration, such as javaPlex, Dionysus, Perseus, PHAT, Gudhi, and the phom and TDA R packages.
See also

Topological data analysis
Computational topology

References
"
Category:Homology theory



Carlsson, Gunnar (2009). "Topology and data". AMS Bulletin 46(2), 255–308.
Edelsbrunner, H and Harer, J (2010). Computational Topology: An Introduction. American Mathematical Society.
Verri, A, Uras, C, Frosini, P and Ferri, M (1993). On the use of size functions for shape analysis, Biological Cybernetics, 70, 99–107.




