


Determinantal point process




Determinantal point process

In mathematics, a determinantal point process is a stochastic point process, the probability distribution of which is characterized as a determinant of some function. Such processes arise as important tools in random matrix theory, combinatorics, and physics.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a locally compact Polish space and 
 
 
 
  be a Radon measure on 
 
 
 
 . Also, consider a measurable function K:Λ2 → ℂ.
We say that 
 
 
 
 
  is a determinantal point process on 
 
 
 
  with kernel 
 
 
 
  if it is a simple point process on 
 
 
 
  with a joint intensity or correlation function (which is the derivative of its factorial moment measure) given by



for every n ≥ 1 and x1, . . . , xn ∈ Λ.1
Properties
Existence
The following two conditions are necessary and sufficient for the existence of a determinantal random point process with intensities ρk.

Symmetry: ρk is invariant under action of the symmetric group Sk. Thus:










Positivity: For any N, and any collection of measurable, bounded functions φk:Λk → ℝ, k = 1,. . . ,N with compact support:


If
 
 





Then
 
 

2


Uniqueness
A sufficient condition for the uniqueness of a determinantal random process with joint intensities ρk is



for every bounded Borel A ⊆ Λ.3
Examples
Gaussian unitary ensemble
The eigenvalues of a random m × m Hermitian matrix drawn from the Gaussian unitary ensemble (GUE) form a determinantal point process on 
 
 
 
  with kernel



where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 th oscillator wave function defined by



and 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 
 th  Hermite polynomial. 4
Poissonized Plancherel measure
The poissonized Plancherel measure on partitions of integers (and therefore on Young diagrams) plays an important role in the study of the longest increasing subsequence of a random permutation. The point process corresponding to a random Young diagram, expressed in modified Frobenius coordinates, is a determinantal point process on ℤ + 
 
 
 
  with the discrete Bessel kernel, given by:


 
  where





 
  For J the Bessel function of the first kind, and θ the mean used in poissonization.5
This serves as an example of a well-defined determinantal point process with non-Hermitian kernel (although its restriction to the positive and negative semi-axis is Hermitian).6
Uniform spanning trees
Let G be a finite, undirected, connected graph, with edge set E. Define Ie:E → ℓ2(E) as follows: first choose some arbitrary set of orientations for the edges E, and for each resulting, oriented edge e, define Ie to be the projection of a unit flow along e onto the subspace of ℓ2(E) spanned by star flows.Lyons, R. with Peres, Y., Probability on Trees and Networks. Cambridge University Press, In preparation. Current
 version available at http://mypage.iu.edu/~rdlyons/  Then the uniformly random spanning tree of G is a determinantal point process on E, with kernel


 
 .7
References
"
Category:Point processes



Hough, J. B., Krishnapur, M., Peres, Y., and Virág, B., Zeros of Gaussian analytic functions and determinantal point processes. University Lecture Series, 51. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2009.↩
A. Soshnikov, Determinantal random point fields. Russian Math. Surveys, 2000, 55 (5), 923–975.↩

B. Valko. Random matrices, lectures 14–15. Course lecture notes, University of Wisconsin-Madison.↩
A. Borodin, A. Okounkov, and G. Olshanski, On asymptotics of Plancherel measures for symmetric groups, available via http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math/9905032.↩






