


Lyapunov–Schmidt reduction




Lyapunov–Schmidt reduction

In mathematics, the Lyapunov–Schmidt reduction or Lyapunov–Schmidt construction is used to study solutions to nonlinear equations in the case when the implicit function theorem does not work. It permits the reduction of infinite-dimensional equations in Banach spaces to finite-dimensional equations. It is named after Aleksandr Lyapunov and Erhard Schmidt.
Problem setup
Let



be the given nonlinear equation, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are Banach spaces (
 
 
 
  is the parameter space). 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -map from a neighborhood of some point 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and the equation is satisfied at this point



For the case when the linear operator 
 
 
 
  is invertible, the implicit function theorem assures that there exists a solution 
 
 
 
  satisfying the equation 
 
 
 
  at least locally close to 
 
 
 
 .
In the opposite case, when the linear operator 
 
 
 
  is non-invertible, the Lyapunov–Schmidt reduction can be applied in the following way.
Assumptions
One assumes that the operator 
 
 
 
  is a Fredholm operator.


 
  and 
 
 
 
  has finite dimension.
The range of this operator 
 
 
 
  has finite co-dimension and is a closed subspace in 
 
 
 
 .
Without loss of generality, one can assume that 
 
 

Lyapunov–Schmidt construction
Let us split 
 
 
 
  into the direct product 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be the projection operator onto 
 
 
 
 .
Let us consider also the direct product 
 
 
 
 .
Applying the operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to the original equation, one obtains the equivalent system






Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then the first equation



can be solved with respect to 
 
 
 
  by applying the implicit function theorem to the operator



(now the conditions of the implicit function theorem are fulfilled).
Thus, there exists a unique solution 
 
 
 
  satisfying



Now substituting 
 
 
 
  into the second equation, one obtains the final finite-dimensional equation



Indeed, the last equation is now finite-dimensional, since the range of 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional. This equation is now to be solved with respect to 
 
 
 
 , which is finite-dimensional, and parameters 
 
 

References

Louis Nirenberg, Topics in nonlinear functional analysis, New York Univ. Lecture Notes, 1974.

"
Category:Functional analysis


