


Kirchhoff–Love plate theory




Kirchhoff–Love plate theory

thumb | 250px | Deformation of a thin plate highlighting the displacement, the mid-surface (red) and the normal to the mid-surface (blue) The Kirchhoff–Love theory of plates is a two-dimensional mathematical model that is used to determine the stresses and deformations in thin plates subjected to forces and moments. This theory is an extension of Euler-Bernoulli beam theory and was developed in 1888 by Love1 using assumptions proposed by Kirchhoff. The theory assumes that a mid-surface plane can be used to represent a three-dimensional plate in two-dimensional form.
The following kinematic assumptions that are made in this theory:2

straight lines normal to the mid-surface remain straight after deformation
straight lines normal to the mid-surface remain normal to the mid-surface after deformation
the thickness of the plate does not change during a deformation.

Assumed displacement field
Let the position vector of a point in the undeformed plate be 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  The vectors 
 
 
 
  form a Cartesian basis with origin on the mid-surface of the plate, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Cartesian coordinates on the mid-surface of the undeformed plate, and 
 
 
 
  is the coordinate for the thickness direction.
Let the displacement of a point in the plate be 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  This displacement can be decomposed into a vector sum of the mid-surface displacement and an out-of-plane displacement 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
  direction. We can write the in-plane displacement of the mid-surface as


 
  Note that the index 
 
 
 
  takes the values 1 and 2 but not 3.
Then the Kirchhoff hypothesis implies that  If 
 
 
 
  are the angles of rotation of the normal to the mid-surface, then in the Kirchhoff-Love theory


 
  Note that we can think of the expression for 
 
 
 
  as the first order Taylor series expansion of the displacement around the mid-surface.



(Figure)
Displacement of the mid-surface (left) and of a normal (right)




Quasistatic Kirchhoff-Love plates
The original theory developed by Love was valid for infinitesimal strains and rotations. The theory was extended by von Kármán to situations where moderate rotations could be expected.
Strain-displacement relations
For the situation where the strains in the plate are infinitesimal and the rotations of the mid-surface normals are less than 10° the strain-displacement relations are 


 
 
  Using the kinematic assumptions we have  Therefore the only non-zero strains are in the in-plane directions.
Equilibrium equations
The equilibrium equations for the plate can be derived from the principle of virtual work. For a thin plate under a quasistatic transverse load 
 
 
 
  these equations are


 
 
  where the thickness of the plate is 
 
 
 
 . In index notation,  where 
 
 
 
  are the stresses.




(Figure)
Bending moments and normal stresses


(Figure)
Torques and shear stresses












Derivation of equilibrium equations for small rotations





For the situation where the strains and rotations of the plate are small the virtual internal energy is given by


 
 
  where the thickness of the plate is 
 
 
 
  and the stress resultants and stress moment resultants are defined as


 
  Integration by parts leads to


 
 
  The symmetry of the stress tensor implies that 
 
 
 
 . Hence,


 
  Another integration by parts gives


 
  For the case where there are no prescribed external forces, the principle of virtual work implies that 
 
 
 
 . The equilibrium equations for the plate are then given by


 
 
  If the plate is loaded by an external distributed load 
 
 
 
  that is normal to the mid-surface and directed in the positive 
 
 
 
  direction, the external virtual work due to the load is


 
  The principle of virtual work then leads to the equilibrium equations








Boundary conditions
The boundary conditions that are needed to solve the equilibrium equations of plate theory can be obtained from the boundary terms in the principle of virtual work. In the absence of external forces on the boundary, the boundary conditions are


 
 
  Note that the quantity 
 
 
 
  is an effective shear force.
Constitutive relations
The stress-strain relations for a linear elastic Kirchhoff plate are given by


 
 
  Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  do not appear in the equilibrium equations it is implicitly assumed that these quantities do not have any effect on the momentum balance and are neglected. The remaining stress-strain relations, in matrix form, can be written as


 
  Then,


 
  and


 
  The ' extensional stiffnesses' are the quantities


 
  The ' bending stiffnesses' (also called flexural rigidity) are the quantities


 
  The Kirchhoff-Love constitutive assumptions lead to zero shear forces. As a result, the equilibrium equations for the plate have to be used to determine the shear forces in thin Kirchhoff-Love plates. For isotropic plates, these equations lead to


 
  Alternatively, these shear forces can be expressed as


 
  where



Small strains and moderate rotations
If the rotations of the normals to the mid-surface are in the range of 10
 
 
 
  to 15
 
 
 
 , the strain-displacement relations can be approximated as


 
 
  Then the kinematic assumptions of Kirchhoff-Love theory lead to the classical plate theory with von Kármán strains


 
 
  This theory is nonlinear because of the quadratic terms in the strain-displacement relations.
If the strain-displacement relations take the von Karman form, the equilibrium equations can be expressed as



Isotropic quasistatic Kirchhoff-Love plates
For an isotropic and homogeneous plate, the stress-strain relations are


 
  The moments corresponding to these stresses are


 
  In expanded form,


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  for plates of thickness 
 
 
 
 . Using the stress-strain relations for the plates, we can show that the stresses and moments are related by


 
  At the top of the plate where 
 
 
 
 , the stresses are



Pure bending
For an isotropic and homogeneous plate under pure bending, the governing equations reduce to


 
  Here we have assumed that the in-plane displacements do not vary with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In index notation,


 
  and in direct notation  The bending moments are given by









Derivation of equilibrium equations for pure bending





For an isotropic, homogeneous plate under pure bending the governing equations are


 
 
  and the stress-strain relations are


 
  Then,


 
  and


 
  Differentiation gives


 
 
  and


 
 
  Plugging into the governing equations leads to


 
 
  Since the order of differentiation is irrelevant we have 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . Hence


 
 
  In direct tensor notation, the governing equation of the plate is


 
  where we have assumed that the displacements 
 
 
 
  are constant.





Bending under transverse load
If a distributed transverse load 
 
 
 
  is applied to the plate, the governing equation is 
 
 
 
 . Following the procedure shown in the previous section we get3  In rectangular Cartesian coordinates, the governing equation is


 
  and in cylindrical coordinates it takes the form


 
  Solutions of this equation for various geometries and boundary conditions can be found in the article on bending of plates.






Derivation of equilibrium equations for transverse loading





For a transversely loaded plate without axial deformations, the governing equation has the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a distributed transverse load (per unit area). Substitution of the expressions for the derivatives of 
 
 
 
  into the governing equation gives


 
  Noting that the bending stiffness is the quantity


 
  we can write the governing equation in the form {{Equation box 1 |indent =:| equation=








Cylindrical bending
Under certain loading conditions a flat plate can be bent into the shape of the surface of a cylinder. This type of bending is called cylindrical bending and represents the special situation where 
 
 
 
 . In that case


 
  and


 
  and the governing equations become4



Dynamics of Kirchhoff-Love plates
The dynamic theory of thin plates determines the propagation of waves in the plates, and the study of standing waves and vibration modes.
Governing equations
The governing equations for the dynamics of a Kirchhoff-Love plate are  where, for a plate with density 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  and









Derivation of equations governing the dynamics of Kirchhoff-Love plates





The total kinetic energy of the plate is given by


 
  Therefore the variation in kinetic energy is


 
  We use the following notation in the rest of this section.


 
  Then


 
  For a Kirchhof-Love plate


 
  Hence,


 
 
  Define, for constant 
 
 
 
  through the thickness of the plate,


 
  Then


 
  Integrating by parts,


 
  The variations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are zero at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Hence, after switching the sequence of integration, we have


 
  Integration by parts over the mid-surface gives


 
 
  Again, since the variations are zero at the beginning and the end of the time interval under consideration, we have


 
  For the dynamic case, the variation in the internal energy is given by


 
  Integration by parts and invoking zero variation at the boundary of the mid-surface gives


 
  If there is an external distributed force 
 
 
 
 
  acting normal to the surface of the plate, the virtual external work done is


 
  From the principle of virtual work 
 
 
 
 . Hence the governing balance equations for the plate are








Solutions of these equations for some special cases can be found in the article on vibrations of plates. The figures below show some vibrational modes of a circular plate.
Image:Drum vibration mode01.gif|mode k = 0, p = 1 Image:Drum vibration mode02.gif|mode k = 0, p = 2 Image:Drum vibration mode12.gif|mode k = 1, p = 2
Isotropic plates
The governing equations simplify considerably for isotropic and homogeneous plates for which the in-plane deformations can be neglected. In that case we are left with one equation of the following form (in rectangular Cartesian coordinates):


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the bending stiffness of the plate. For a uniform plate of thickness 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  In direct notation


 
  For free vibrations, the governing equation becomes









Derivation of dynamic governing equations for isotropic Kirchhoff-Love plates





For an isotropic and homogeneous plate, the stress-strain relations are


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the in-plane strains. The strain-displacement relations for Kirchhoff-Love plates are


 
  Therefore, the resultant moments corresponding to these stresses are


 
  The governing equation for an isotropic and homogeneous plate of uniform thickness 
 
 
 
  in the absence of in-plane displacements is


 
  Differentiation of the expressions for the moment resultants gives us


 
 
  Plugging into the governing equations leads to


 
 
  Since the order of differentiation is irrelevant we have 
 
 
 
 . Hence


 
 
  If the flexural stiffness of the plate is defined as


 
  we have


 
  For small deformations, we often neglect the spatial derivatives of the transverse acceleration of the plate and we are left with


 
  Then, in direct tensor notation, the governing equation of the plate is








References


See also

Bending
Bending of plates
Infinitesimal strain theory
Linear elasticity
Plate theory
Stress (mechanics)
Stress resultants
Vibration of plates

"
Category:Continuum mechanics



A. E. H. Love, On the small free vibrations and deformations of elastic shells, Philosophical trans. of the Royal Society (London), 1888, Vol. série A, N° 17 p. 491–549.↩
Reddy, J. N., 2007, Theory and analysis of elastic plates and shells, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis.↩
Timoshenko, S. and Woinowsky-Krieger, S., (1959), Theory of plates and shells, McGraw-Hill New York.↩





