


Field strength meter




Field strength meter

In telecommunications, field strength meter is a measuring device which measures the signal strength caused by a transmitter.
The relation between the electric field and the transmitted power
In ideal free space, the electric field strength produced by a transmitter with isotropic radiator is readily calculated.1



where

E is the electric field strength in volts per meter
 
P is the transmitter power output in watts
 
d is the distance from the radiator in meters
 

It is clear that electric field strength is inversely proportional to the distance between the transmitter and the receiver. However, this relation is impractical for calculating the field strength produced by terrestrial transmitters, where reflections and attenuation caused by objects around the transmitter or receiver may affect the electrical field strength considerably.
Field strength meter
Field strength meter is actually a simple receiver. After a tuner circuit, the signal is detected and fed to a microammeter, which is scaled in dBų. The frequency range of the tuner is usually within the terrestrial broadcasting bands. Some FS meters can also receive satellite (TVRO and RRO) frequencies. Most modern FS meters have AF and VF circuits and can be used as standard receivers. Some FS meters are also equipped with printers to record received field strength.
Antennas
When measuring with a field strength meter it is important to use a calibrated antenna such as the standard antenna supplied with the meter. For precision measurements the antenna must be at a standard height. A value of standard height frequently employed for VHF and UHF measurements is . Gain correction tables may be provided with the meter, that take into account the change of antenna gain with frequency.
Minimum field strength criteria
The CCIR defines the minimum field strength for satisfactory reception. These are shown in the table below.2 (Band II is reserved for FM radio broadcasting and the other bands are reserved for TV broadcasting.)




Frequency band

Minimum field strength in dBµV/m

Notes





Band I

48




Band III

55




Band IV

65




Band V

70




Band II

48

Rural area



Band II

60

Urban area



Band II

70

Large towns



References


"
Category:Measuring instruments Category:Broadcast engineering



Reference Data for Radio Engineers, Howard W.Sams Co.Inc.,ISBN 0-672-21218-8, p 27-7
K.H.Kaltbeitzer: Technical Monograph 3104, EBU Technical Centre, 1965, p.24




