


Relative scalar




Relative scalar

In mathematics, a relative scalar (of weight w) is a scalar-valued function whose transform under a coordinate transform,



on an n-dimensional manifold obeys the following equation



where



that is, the determinant of the Jacobian of the transformation. 1 A scalar density refers to the 
 
 
 
 
  case.
Relative scalars are an important special case of the more general concept of a relative tensor.
Ordinary scalar
An ordinary scalar or absolute scalar2 refers to the 
 
 
 
  case.
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  refer to the same point 
 
 
 
  on the manifold, then we desire 
 
 
 
 
 . This equation can be interpreted two ways when 
 
 
 
  are viewed as the "new coordinates" and 
 
 
 
  are viewed as the "original coordinates". The first is as 
 
 
 
 , which "converts the function to the new coordinates". The second is as 
 
 
 
 , which "converts back to the original coordinates. Of course, "new" or "original" is a relative concept.
There are many physical quantities that are represented by ordinary scalars, such as temperature and pressure.
Weight 0 example
Suppose the temperature in a room is given in terms of the function 
 
 
 
 
  in Cartesian coordinates 
 
 
 
  and the function in cylindrical coordinates 
 
 
 
  is desired. The two coordinate systems are related by the following sets of equations:








 
  and









Using 
 
 
 
  allows one to derive 
 
 
 
 
  as the transformed function.
Consider the point 
 
 
 
  whose Cartesian coordinates are 
 
 
 
  and whose corresponding value in the cylindrical system is 
 
 
 
 . A quick calculation shows that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  also. This equality would have held for any chosen point 
 
 
 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
  is the "temperature function in the Cartesian coordinate system" and 
 
 
 
  is the "temperature function in the cylindrical coordinate system".
One way to view these functions is as representations of the "parent" function that takes a point of the manifold as an argument and gives the temperature.
The problem could have been reversed. One could have been given 
 
 
 
  and wished to have derived the Cartesian temperature function 
 
 
 
 
 . This just flips the notion of "new" vs the "original" coordinate system.
Suppose that one wishes to integrate these functions over "the room", which will be denoted by 
 
 
 
 . (Yes, integrating temperature is strange but that's partly what's to be shown.) Suppose the region 
 
 
 
  is given in cylindrical coordinates as 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  (that is, the "room" is a quarter slice of a cylinder of radius and height 2). The integral of 
 
 
 
  over the region 
 
 
 
 
  is


 
 .3 The value of the integral of 
 
 
 
  over the same region is


 
 .4 They are not equal. The integral of temperature is not independent of the coordinate system used. It is non-physical in that sense, hence "strange". Note that if the integral of 
 
 
 
  included a factor of the Jacobian (which is just 
 
 
 
 
 ), we get


 
 ,5 which is equal to the original integral but it is not however the integral of temperature because temperature is a relative scalar of weight 0, not a relative scalar of weight 1.
Weight 1 example
If we had said 
 
 
 
  was representing mass density, however, then its transformed value should include the Jacobian factor that takes into account the geometric distortion of the coordinate system. The transformed function is now 
 
 
 
 . This time 
 
 
 
  but 
 
 
 
 
 . As before is integral (the total mass) in Cartesian coordinates is


 
 . The value of the integral of 
 
 
 
  over the same region is


 
 . They are equal. The integral of mass density gives total mass which is a coordinate-independent concept. Note that if the integral of 
 
 
 
  also included a factor of the Jacobian like before, we get


 
 ,6 which is not equal to the previous case.
Other cases
Weights other than 0 and 1 do not arise as often. It can be shown the determinant of a type (0,2) tensor is a relative scalar of weight 2.
See also

Jacobian matrix and determinant

References
"
Category:Tensors Category:Tensors in general relativity





1
2
3
4




