


Conductivity near the percolation threshold




Conductivity near the percolation threshold

In a mixture between a dielectric and a metallic component, the conductivity

 
  and the dielectric constant

 
  of this mixture show a critical behavior if the fraction of the metallic component reaches the percolation threshold.1 The behavior of the conductivity near this percolation threshold will show a smooth change over from the conductivity of the dielectric component to the conductivity of the metallic component and can be described using two critical exponents s and t, whereas the dielectric constant will diverge if the threshold is approached from either side. To include the frequency dependent behavior, a resistor-capacitor model (R-C model) is used.
Geometrical percolation
For describing such a mixture of a dielectric and a metallic component we use the model of bond-percolation. On a regular lattice, the bond between two nearest neighbors can either be occupied with probability 
 
 
 
  or not occupied with probability 
 
 
 
 . There exists a critical value 
 
 
 
 . For occupation probabilities 
 
 
 
  an infinite cluster of the occupied bonds is formed. This value 
 
 
 
  is called the percolation threshold. The region near to this percolation threshold can be described by the two critical exponents 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (see Percolation critical exponents).
With these critical exponents we have the correlation length, 
 
 


and the percolation probability, P:



Electrical percolation
For the description of the electrical percolation, we identify the occupied bonds of the bond-percolation model with the metallic component having a conductivity 
 
 
 
 . And the dielectric component with conductivity 
 
 
 
  corresponds to non-occupied bonds. We consider the two following well-known cases of a conductor-insulator mixture and a superconductor–conductor mixture.
Conductor-insulator mixture
In the case of a conductor-insulator mixture we have 
 
 
 
 . This case describes the behaviour, if the percolation threshold is approached from above:



for 
 
 

Below the percolation threshold we have no conductivity, because of the perfect insulator and just finite metallic clusters. The exponent t is one of the two critical exponents for electrical percolation.
Superconductor–conductor mixture
In the other well-known case of a superconductor-conductor mixture we have 
 
 
 
 . This case is useful for the description below the percolation threshold:



for 
 
 

Now, above the percolation threshold the conductivity becomes infinite, because of the infinite superconducting clusters. And also we get the second critical exponent s for the electrical percolation.
Conductivity near the percolation threshold
In the region around the percolation threshold, the conductivity assumes a scaling form:2


with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

At the percolation threshold, the conductivity reaches the value:3


with 
 
 

Values for the critical exponents
In different sources there exists some different values for the critical exponents s, t and u in 3 dimensions:




Values for the critical exponents in 3 dimensions


Efros et al.4

Clerc et al.5

Bergman et al.6



t

1,60

1,90

2,00



s

1,00

0,73

0,76



u

0,62

0,72

0,72



Dielectric constant
The dielectric constant also shows a critical behavior near the percolation threshold. For the real part of the dielectric constant we have:7


The R-C model
Within the R-C model, the bonds in the percolation model are represented by pure resistors with conductivity 
 
 
 
  for the occupied bonds and by perfect capacitors with conductivity 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  represents the angular frequency) for the non-occupied bonds. Now the scaling law takes the form:8


This scaling law contains a purely imaginary scaling variable and a critical time scale



which diverges if the percolation threshold is approached from above as well as from below.9
References
See also

Percolation theory
Percolation threshold

"
Category:Critical phenomena
















