


Invariant extended Kalman filter




Invariant extended Kalman filter
The '''invari
 ant extended Kalman filter (IEKF)'''1 is a new version of the extended Kalman filter (EKF) for nonlinear systems possessing symmetries (or invariances). It combines the advantages of both the EKF and the recently introduced symmetry-preserving filters. Indeed, instead of using a linear correction term based on a linear output error, it uses a geometrically adapted correction term based on an invariant output error; in the same way the gain matrix is not updated from a linear state error, but from an invariant state error. The main benefit is that the gain and covariance equations converge to constant values on a much bigger set of trajectories than equilibrium points than is the case for the EKF, which results in a better convergence of the estimation.
Motivation
Most physical systems possess natural symmetries (or invariance), i.e. there exist transformations (e.g. rotations, translations, scalings) that leave the system unchanged. From mathematical and engineering viewpoint, it makes sense that a filter well-designed for the considered system should preserve the same invariance properties. The idea for the IEKF is a modification of the EKF equations to take advantage of the symmetries of the system.
Definition
Consider the system






where 
 
 
 
  are independent white Gaussian noises. Consider 
 
 
 
 
  a Lie group with identity 
 
 
 
 , and (local) transformation groups

 
  (
 
 
 
 ) such that 
 
 
 
 . The previous system with noise is said to be invariant if it is left unchanged by the action the transformations groups 
 
 
 
 
 ; that is, if


 
 .



Filter equations and main result
Since it is a symmetry-preserving filter, the general form of an IEKF reads 2



where



 
  is an invariant output error, which is different from the usual output error 
 
 





 
  is an invariant frame




 
  is an invariant vector




 
  is a freely chosen gain matrix.

To analyze the error convergence, an invariant state error 
 
 
 
  is defined, which is different from the standard output error 
 
 
 
 , since the standard output error usually does not preserve the symmetries of the system.
Given the considered system and associated transformation group, there exists a constructive method to determine 
 
 
 
 , based on the moving frame method.
Similarly to the EKF, the gain matrix 
 
 
 
  is determined from the equations3


 
 ,


 
 ,
where the matrices 
 
 
 
  depend here only on the known invariant vector 
 
 
 
 , rather than on 
 
 
 
  as in the standard EKF. This much simpler dependence and its consequences are the main interests of the IEKF. Indeed, the matices 
 
 
 
  are then constant on a much bigger set of trajectories (so-called permanent trajectories) than equilibrium points as it is the case for the EKF. Near such trajectories, we are back to the "true", i.e. linear, Kalman filter where convergence is guaranteed. Informally, this means the IEKF converges in general at least around any slowly varying permanent trajectory, rather than just around any slowly varying equilibrium point for the EKF.
Application example in aerospace engineering
Invariant extended Kaman filters are for instance used in attitude and heading reference systems. In such systems the orientation, velocity and/or position of a moving rigid body, e.g. an aircraft, are estimated from different embedded sensors, such as inertial sensors, magnetometers, GPS or sonars. The use of an IEKF naturally leads4 to consider the quaternion error 
 
 
 
 , which is often used as an ad hoc trick to preserve the constraints of the quaternion group. The benefits of the IEKF compared to the EKF are experimentally shown for a large set of trajectories.5
References


"
Category:Nonlinear filters Category:Estimation theory



S. Bonnabel, Ph. Martin and E. Salaün, "Invariant Extended Kalman Filter: theory and application to a velocity-aided attitude estimation problem", 48th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 1297–1304, 2009.↩
S. Bonnabel, Ph. Martin, and P. Rouchon, “Symmetry-preserving observers,” IEEE Transaction on Automatic and Control, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 2514–2526, 2008.↩


Ph. Martin and E. Salaün, "Generalized Multiplicative Extended Kalman Filter for Aided Attitude and Heading Reference System", AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference, 2010↩




