


Orthoptic (geometry)




Orthoptic (geometry)

In the geometry of curves, an orthoptic is the set of points for which two tangents of a given curve meet at a right angle.
 

Examples:

The orthoptic of

1) a parabola is its directrix (proof: s. parabola),
 
2) an ellipse

 
  is the director circle

 
  (s. below),
 
3) a hyperbola

 
  is the circle 
 
 
 
 
  (in case of 
 
 
 
  there are no orthogonal tangents, s. below),
 
4) an astroid

 
  is a quadrifolium with the polar equation
 
 

 
  (s. below).



Generalizations:
1) An isoptic is the set of points for which two tangents of a given curve meet at a fixed angle (s. below).
 
2) An isoptic of two plane curves is the set of points for which two tangents meet at a fixed angle.
 
3) Thales' theorem on a chord 
 
 
 
  can be considered as the orthoptic of two circles which are degenerated to the two points 
 
 
 
 
 .
 

Remark: In medicine there exists the term orthoptic, too.
Orthoptic of an ellipse and hyperbola
Ellipse
The ellipse with equation 
 
 
 
  can be represented by the unusual parametric representation1





where 
 
 
 
  is the slope of the tangent at a point of the ellipse. 
 
 
 
  describes the upper half and 
 
 
 
 
  the lower half of the ellipse. The points 
 
 
 
 ) with tangents parallel to the y-axis are excluded. But this is no problem, because these tangents meet orthogonal the tangents parallel to the x-axis in the ellipse points 
 
 
 
  Hence the points 
 
 
 
  are points of the desired orthoptic (circle 
 
 
 
 ).
The tangent at point 
 
 
 
 
  has the equation



If a tangent contains the point 
 
 
 
 , off the ellipse, then the equation


 
  holds. Eliminatig the square root leads to


 
  which has two solutions 
 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the two tangents passing point 
 
 
 
 . The free term of a reduced quadratic equation is always the product of its solutions. Hence, if the tangents meet at point 
 
 
 
  orthogonal, the follwing equations hold:


 
  The last equation is equivalent to


 
  This means:

The intersection points of orthogonal tangents are points of the circle 
 
 
 
 
 .

Hyperbola
The ellipse case can be adopted nearly literally to the hyperbola case. The only changes to be made are: 1) replace 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  and 2) restrict 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . One gets:

The intersection points of orthogonal tangents are points of the circle 
 
 
 
 
 .

Orthoptic of an astroid
 An astroid can be described by the parametric representation


 
 . From the condition 
 
 
 
  one recognizes, at what distance 
 
 
 
  in parameter space an orthogonal tangent to 
 
 
 
  appears. It turns out, that the distance is indepent of parameter 
 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
 . The equations of the (orthogonal) tangents at the points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are:


 
 . There common point has coordinates:


 
 ,


 
 . This is at the same time a parametric representation of the orthoptic.
Elimination of parameter 
 
 
 
  yields the implicit representation


 
  Introducing the new parameter 
 
 
 
  one gets


 
 . (proof uses Angle sum and difference identities.) Herefrom we get the polar representation


 
  of the orthoptic. Hence

The orthoptic of an astroid is a quadrifolium.

Isoptic of a parabola, an ellipse and a hyperbola
   Below isotopics for an angle 
 
 
 
  are listed. They are called 
 
 
 
 -isoptics. For the proofs: s. below.
Equations of the isoptics

parabola :

The 
 
 
 
 -isoptics of the parabola with equation 
 
 
 
 
  are the arms of the hyperbola


 
  The arms of the hyperbola provide the isoptics for the two angles 
 
 
 
  (s. picture).

Ellipse:

The 
 
 
 
 -isoptics of the ellipse with equation 
 
 
 
  are the two parts of the curve of 4. degree


 
  (s. picture).

Hyperbola:

The 
 
 
 
 -isoptics of the hyperbola with the equation 
 
 
 
  are the two parts of the curve of 4. degree



Proofs

Parabola:

A parabola 
 
 
 
  can be parametrized by the slope of its tangents 
 
 
 
 
 :



The tangent with slope 
 
 
 
  has the equation



Point 
 
 
 
  is on the tangent, if



holds. That means, the slopes 
 
 
 
  of the two tangents containing 
 
 
 
  fulfill the quadratic equation



If the tangents meet with angle 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 
 , the equation



has to be fulfilled. Solving the quadratic equation for 
 
 
 
  inserting 
 
 
 
  into the last equation, one gets



This is the equation of the hyperbola above. Its arms bear the two isoptics of the parabola for the two angles 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

Ellipse:

In case of an ellipse 
 
 
 
  one can adopt the idea for the orthoptic until the quadratic equation



Now, as in case of a parabola, the quadratic equation has to be solved and the two solutions 
 
 
 
  to be inserted into the equation 
 
 
 
 
 . Rearranging shows that the isoptics are parts of the curve of 4. degree:




Hyperbola:

The solution for the case of a hyperbola can be adopted from the ellipse case by replacing 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  (as in the case of the orthoptics, s. above).
Remark: For visualizing the isoptics see implicit curve.
External links

Special Plane Curves.
Mathworld
Jan Wassenaar's Curves
"Courbe Isoptique" at Encyclopédie des Formes Mathématiques Remarquables (in French)
"Courbe Orthoptique" at Encyclopédie des Formes Mathématiques Remarquables (in French)

Notes


References


Boris Odehnal: Equioptic Curves of Conic Sections. Journal for Geometry and Graphics, Volume 14 (2010), No. 1, p. 29–43.
Hermann Schaal: Lineare Algebra und Analytische Geometrie. Band III, Vieweg, 1977, ISBN 3 528 03058 5, p. 220.
Jacob Steiner’s Vorlesungen über synthetische Geometrie. B. G. Teubner, Leipzig 1867 (bei Google Books), 2. Teil, p. 186.
Maurizio Ternullo: Two new sets of ellipse related concyclic points. Journal of Geometry 2009, 94, p. 159–173.

"
Category:Curves



P. K. Jain: Textbook of Analytical Geometry of two Dimensions. p. 214.




