


Frozen orbit




Frozen orbit

In orbital mechanics, a frozen orbit is an orbit for an artificial satellite in which the natural drifts due to the Central body's shape have been minimized by carefully choosing the orbital parameters. Typically this is an orbit where over a long time, the altitude is always the same at the same point in each orbit1—changes in the inclination, position of the lowest point of the orbit, and eccentricity have been minimized by choosing initial values so that their perturbations cancel out.2 This results in a long-term stable orbit that minimizes stationkeeping propellant usage.
Background & Reasons for Selecting a Frozen Orbit
For many spacecraft, changes to the orbit are caused by the oblateness of the Earth, gravitational attraction from the Sun and Moon, solar radiation pressure, and air drag. These are called "perturbing forces". They must be counteracted by maneuvers to keep the spacecraft in the desired orbit. For a geostationary spacecraft, correction maneuvers on the order of 40–50 m/s per year are required to counteract these forces.
For Sun-synchronous spacecraft, intentional shifting of the orbit plane (called "precession") can be used for the benefit of the mission. For these missions, a near-circular orbit with an altitude of 600–900 km is used. An appropriate inclination (97.8-99.0 degrees) is selected so that the precession of the orbital plane is equal to the rate of movement of the Earth around the Sun - or about 1 degree per day.
As a result, the spacecraft will pass over points on the Earth that have the same time of day during every orbit. For instance, if the orbit is "square to the Sun", the vehicle will always pass over points at which it is 6 a.m. on the north-bound portion, and 6 p.m. on the south-bound portion. This is called a "Dawn-Dusk" orbit. Alternatively, if the orbit plane is perpendicular to the Sun, the vehicle will always pass over Earth noon on the north-bound leg, and Earth midnight on the south-bound leg. These are called "Noon-Midnight" orbits. Such orbits are desirable for many Earth observation missions such as weather, imagery, and mapping.
Perturbing forces caused by the oblateness of the Earth will also change the shape (called the "eccentricity") of the orbit. To compensate, there are near-circular orbits where there are no secular/long periodic perturbations of the eccentricity, only periodic perturbations with the same period as the orbit. Such an orbit is called a "frozen orbit". These orbits are often the preferred choice for Earth observation missions where repeated observations under constant conditions are desirable.
The Earth observation satellites ERS-1, ERS-2 and Envisat are operated in Sun-synchronous frozen orbits.
Classical theory
The classical theory of frozen orbits is essentially based on the analytical perturbation analysis for artificial satellites of Dirk Brouwer made under contract with NASA and published in 1959.3
This analysis can be carried out as follows:
In the article Orbital perturbation analysis (spacecraft) the secular perturbation of the orbital pole 
 
 
 
  from the 
 
 
 
  term is shown to be



what in terms of orbital elements is expressed as




Making the analogue analysis for the 
 
 
 
  term, one gets



what in terms of orbital elements is expressed as




In the same article the secular perturbation of the components of the eccentricity vector caused by the 
 
 
 
  is shown to be:



where:

The first term is the in-plane perturbation of the eccentricity vector caused by the in-plane component of the perturbing force
The second term is the effect of the new position of the ascending node in the new orbital plane, the orbital plane being perturbed by the out-of-plane force component

Making the analogue analysis for the 
 
 
 
  term one gets for the first term, i.e. for the perturbation of the eccentricity vector from the in-plane force component



For inclinations in the range 97.8–99.0 deg, the 
 
 
 
  value given by () is much smaller than the value given by () and can be ignored. Similarly the quadratic terms of the eccentricity vector components in () can be ignored for almost circular orbits, i.e. () can be approximated with



Adding the 
 
 
 
  contribution 
 
 

to () one gets



This the difference equation saying that the eccentricity vector will describe a circle centered at the point 
 
 
 
 , the polar argument of the eccentricity vector increasing with 
 
 
 
  radians between consecutive orbits.
As









one gets for a polar orbit (
 
 
 
 ) with 
 
 
 
  that the center of the circle is 
 
 
 
  and the change of polar argument is 0.00400 radians per orbit.
The latter figure means that the eccentricity vector will have described a full circle in 1569 orbits. Selecting the initial mean eccentricity vector to 
 
 
 
  the mean eccentricity vector will stay constant for successive orbits, i.e. the orbit is frozen because the secular perturbations of the 
 
 
 
  term given by () and of the 
 
 
 
  term given by () cancel out.
In terms of classical orbital elements this means that a frozen orbit should have the following (mean!) elements:






Modern theory
The modern theory of frozen orbits is based on the algorithm given in.4
For this the analytical expression () is used to iteratively update the initial (mean) eccentricity vector to obtain that the (mean) eccentricity vector several orbits later computed by the precise numerical propagation takes precisely the same value. In this way the secular perturbation of the eccentricity vector caused by the 
 
 
 
  term is used to counteract all secular perturbations, not only those (dominating) caused by the 
 
 
 
  term. One such additional secular perturbation that in this way can be compensated for is the one caused by the solar radiation pressure, this perturbation is discussed in the article "Orbital perturbation analysis (spacecraft)".
Applying this algorithm for the case discussed above, i.e. a polar orbit (
 
 
 
 ) with 
 
 
 
  ignoring all other perturbing forces then the 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  forces for the numerical propagation one gets exactly the same optimal average eccentricity vector as with the "classical theory", i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
Including also the forces due to the higher zonal terms the optimal value changes to 
 
 
 
 .
Assuming in addition a reasonable solar pressure (a "cross-sectional-area" of 0.05 square meters per kg, the direction to the Sun in the direction towards the ascending node) the optimal value for the average eccentricity vector gets 
 
 
 
  what corresponds to 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the optimal value is no more


This algorithm is implemented in the orbit control software used for the Earth observation satellites ERS-1, ERS-2 and Envisat
Derivation of the closed form expressions for the J3 perturbation
The main perturbing force to be counter-acted to have a frozen orbit is the "
 
 
 
  force", i.e. the gravitational force caused by an imperfect symmetry north/south of the Earth, and the "classical theory" is based on the closed form expression for this "
 
 
 
  perturbation". With the "modern theory" this explicit closed form expression is not directly used but it is certainly still worthwhile to derive it.
The derivation of this expression can be done as follows:
The potential from a zonal term is rotational symmetric around the polar axis of the Earth and corresponding force is entirely in a longitudial plane with one component 
 
 
 
  in the radial direction and one component 
 
 
 
  with the unit vector 
 
 
 
  orthogonal to the radial direction towards north. These directions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are illustrated in Figure 1.
(Figure)
Figure 1: The unit vectors 
 
 


In the article Geopotential model it is shown that these force components caused by the 
 
 
 
  term are



To be able to apply relations derived in the article Orbital perturbation analysis (spacecraft) the force component 
 
 
 
  must be split into two orthogonal components 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as illustrated in figure 2
 Let 
 
 
 
  make up a rectangular coordinate system with origin in the center of the Earth (in the center of the Reference ellipsoid) such that 
 
 
 
  points in the direction north and such that 
 
 
 
  are in the equatorial plane of the Earth with 
 
 
 
  pointing towards the ascending node, i.e. towards the blue point of Figure 2.
The components of the unit vectors



making up the local coordinate system (of which 
 
 
 
  are illustrated in figure 2) relative the 
 
 
 
  are



























where 
 
 
 
  is the polar argument of 
 
 
 
  relative the orthogonal unit vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the orbital plane
Firstly



where 
 
 
 
  is the angle between the equator plane and 
 
 
 
  (between the green points of figure 2) and from equation (12) of the article Geopotential model one therefore gets that



Secondly the projection of direction north, 
 
 
 
 , on the plane spanned by 
 
 
 
  is



and this projection is



where 
 
 
 
  is the unit vector 
 
 
 
  orthogonal to the radial direction towards north illustrated in figure 1.
From equation () one therefore gets that



and therefore:




In the article Orbital perturbation analysis (spacecraft) it is further shown that the secular perturbation of the orbital pole 
 
 
 
  is



Introducing the expression for 
 
 
 
  of () in () one gets



The fraction 
 
 
 
  is



where






are the components of the eccentricity vector in the 
 
 
 
  coordinate system.
As all integrals of type


 
  are zero if not both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are even one has that



and



from what follows that



where


 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the base vectors of the rectangular coordinate system in the plane of the reference Kepler orbit with 
 
 
 
  in the equatorial plane towards the ascending node and 
 
 
 
  is the polar argument relative this equatorial coordinate system


 
  is the force component (per unit mass) in the direction of the orbit pole 
 
 

In the article Orbital perturbation analysis (spacecraft) it is shown that the secular perturbation of the eccentricity vector is



where



 
  is the usual local coordinate system with unit vector 
 
 
 
  directed away from the Earth


 
  - the velocity component in direction 
 
 



 
  - the velocity component in direction 
 
 


Introducing the expression for 
 
 
 
  of () and () in () one gets



Using that



the integral above can be split in 8 terms:



As






one gets using that



and that all integrals of type


 
  are zero if not both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are even:
Term 1



Term 2



Term 3



Term 4



Term 5



Term 6



Term 7



Term 8



As



It follows that



References


"
Category:Astrodynamics Category:Orbits Category:Spaceflight concepts





Dirk Brouwer: "Solution of the Problem of the Artificial Satellite Without Drag", Astronomical Journal, 64 (1959)
Mats Rosengren: "Improved technique for Passive Eccentricity Control (AAS 89-155)", Vol. 69, Advances in the Astronautical Sciences




