


Ring of polynomial functions




Ring of polynomial functions

In mathematics, the ring of polynomial functions on a vector space V over an infinite field k gives a coordinate-free analog of a polynomial ring. It is denoted by k[V]. If V has finite dimension and is viewed as an algebraic variety, then k[V] is precisely the coordinate ring of V.
The explicit definition of the ring can be given as follows. If 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial ring, then we can view 
 
 
 
  as coordinate functions on 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  This suggests the following: given a vector space V, let k[V] be the subring generated by the dual space 
 
 
 
  of the ring of all functions 
 
 
 
 . If we fix a basis for V and write 
 
 
 
  for its dual basis, then k[V] consists of polynomials in 
 
 
 
 ; it is a polynomial ring.
In applications, one also defines k[V] when V is defined over some subfield of k (e.g., k is the complex field and V is a real vector space.) The same definition still applies.
Symmetric multilinear maps
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the vector space of multilinear linear functionals 
 
 
 
  that are symmetric; 
 
 
 
  is the same for all permutations of 
 
 
 
 's.
Any λ in 
 
 
 
  gives rise to a homogeneous polynomial function f of degree q: let 
 
 
 
  To see that f is a polynomial function, choose a basis 
 
 
 
  of V and 
 
 
 
  its dual. Then


 
 . Thus, there is a well-defined linear map:


 
  It is an isomorphism:1 choosing a basis as before, any homogeneous polynomial function f of degree q can be written as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are symmetric in 
 
 
 
 . Let


 
  Then ψ is the inverse of φ. (Note: φ is still independent of a choice of basis; so ψ is also independent of a basis.)
Example: A bilinear functional gives rise to a quadratic form in a unique way and any quadratic form arises in this way.
See also

Algebraic geometry of projective spaces
Polynomial ring
Symmetric algebra
Zariski tangent space

Notes
References


.

"
Category:Polynomials Category:Ring theory



There is also a more abstract way to see this: to give a multilinear functional on the product of q copies of V is the same as to give a linear functional on the q-th tensor power of V. The requirement that the multilinear functional to be symmetric translates to the one that the linear functional on the tensor power factors through the q-th symmetric power of V, which is isomorphic to k[V]q.↩




