


Box spline




Box spline

In the mathematical fields of numerical analysis and approximation theory, box splines are piecewise polynomial functions of several variables.1 Box splines are considered as a multivariate generalization of basis splines (B-splines) and are generally used for multivariate approximation/interpolation. Geometrically, a box spline is the shadow (X-ray) of a hypercube projected down to a lower-dimensional space.2 Box splines and simplex splines are well studied special cases of polyhedral splines which are defined as shadows of general polytopes.
Definition
A box spline is a multivariate function (
 
 
 
 ) defined for a set of vectors, 
 
 
 
 , usually gathered in a matrix 
 
 
 
 .
When the number of vectors is the same as the dimension of the domain (i.e., 
 
 
 
 ) then the box spline is simply the (normalized) indicator function of the parallelepiped formed by the vectors in 
 
 
 
 :


 
  Adding a new direction, 
 
 
 
 , to 
 
 
 
 , or generally when 
 
 
 
 , the box spline is defined recursively:3


 
 .
(Figure)
Examples of bivariate box splines corresponding to 1, 2, 3 and 4 vectors in 2-D.

The box spline 
 
 
 
  can be interpreted as the shadow of the indicator function of the unit hypercube in 
 
 
 
  when projected down into 
 
 
 
 . In this view, the vectors 
 
 
 
  are the geometric projection of the standard basis in 
 
 
 
  (i.e., the edges of the hypercube) to 
 
 
 
 .
Considering tempered distributions a box spline associated with a single direction vector is a Dirac-like generalized function supported on 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Then the general box spline is defined as the convolution of distributions associated the single-vector box splines:



Properties

Let 
 
 
 
  be the minimum number of directions whose removal from 
 
 
 
  makes the remaining directions not span 
 
 
 
 . Then the box spline has 
 
 
 
  degrees of continuity
 
 
 
 .4


When 
 
 
 
  (and vectors in 
 
 
 
  span 
 
 
 
 ) the box spline is a compactly supported function whose support is a zonotope in 
 
 
 
  formed by the Minkowski sum of the direction vectors 
 
 
 
 .


Since zonotopes are centrally symmetric, the support of the box spline is symmetric with respect to its center
 
 



Fourier transform of the box spline, in 
 
 
 
  dimensions, is given by









Applications
For applications, linear combinations of shifts of one or more box splines on a lattice are used. Such splines are efficient, more so than linear combinations of simplex splines, because they are refinable and, by definition, shift invariant. They therefore form the starting point for many subdivision surface constructions.
Box splines have been useful in characterization of hyperplane arrangements.5 Also, box splines can be used to compute the volume of polytopes.6
In the context of multidimensional signal processing, box splines can provide multivariate interpolation kernels (reconstruction filters) tailored to non-Cartesian sampling lattices,7 and crystallographic lattices (root lattices) that include many information-theoretically optimal sampling lattices.8 Generally, optimal sphere packing and sphere covering lattices9 are useful for sampling multivariate functions in 2-D, 3-D and higher dimensions.10 In the 2-D setting the three-direction box spline11 is used for interpolation of hexagonally sampled images. In the 3-D setting, four-direction12 and six-direction13 box splines are used for interpolation of data sampled on the (optimal) body centered cubic and face centered cubic lattices respectively.14 The seven-direction box spline15 has been used for modelling surfaces and can be used for interpolation of data on the Cartesian lattice16 as well as the body centered cubic lattice.17 Generalization of the four-18 and six-direction19 box splines to higher dimensions20 can be used to build splines on root lattices.21 Box splines are key ingredients of hex-splines22 and Voronoi splines23 that, however, are not refinable.
Box splines have found applications in high-dimensional filtering, specifically for fast bilateral filtering and non-local means algorithms.24 Moreover, box splines are used for designing efficient space-variant (i.e., non-convolutional) filters.25
Box splines are useful basis functions for image representation in the context of tomographic reconstruction problems as the spline spaces generated by box splines spaces are closed under X-ray and Radon transforms.2627 In this application while the signal is represented in shift-invariant spaces, the projections are obtained, in closed-form, by non-uniform translates of box splines.28
In the context of image processing, box spline frames have been shown to be effective in edge detection.29
References
"
Category:Splines









Entezari, Alireza. Optimal sampling lattices and trivariate box splines. [Vancouver, BC.]: Simon Fraser University, 2007. .

J. H. Conway, N. J. A. Sloane. Sphere packings, lattices and groups. Springer, 1999.




Entezari, Alireza. Optimal sampling lattices and trivariate box splines. [Vancouver, BC.]: Simon Fraser University, 2007. .





Kim, Minho. Symmetric Box-Splines on Root Lattices. [Gainesville, Fla.]: University of Florida, 2008. .













