


Euler substitution




Euler substitution

Euler substitution is a method for evaluating integrals of the form:



where 
 
 
 
  is a rational function of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In such cases, the integrand can be changed to a rational function by using the substitutions of Euler.1
The first substitution of Euler
The first substitution of Euler is used when 
 
 
 
  . We substitute 
 
 
 
  and solve the resulting expression for 
 
 
 
 . We have that 
 
 
 
  and that the 
 
 
 
  term is expressible rationally via 
 
 
 
 .
In this substitution, either the positive sign or the negative sign can be chosen.
The second substitution of Euler
If 
 
 
 
  we take 
 
 
 
  We solve for 
 
 
 
  similarly as above and find, 
 
 

Again, either the positive or the negative sign can be chosen.
The third substitution of Euler
If the polynomial 
 
 
 
 
  has real roots 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we may chose 
 
 
 
 . This yields 
 
 
 
  and as in the preceding cases, we can express the entire integrand rationally via 
 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
In the integral 
 
 
 
  we can use the first substitution and set 
 
 
 
 , thus





 
  Accordingly we obtain:





 
  The cases 
 
 
 
 , give the formulas






Generalizations
The substitutions of Euler can be generalized by allowing the use of imaginary numbers. For example, in the integral 
 
 
 
 
 , the substitution 
 
 
 
  can be used. Extensions to the complex numbers allows us to use every type of Euler substitution regardless of the coefficients on the quadratic.
The substitutions of Euler can be generalized to a larger class of functions. Consider integrals of the form



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are rational functions of 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This integral can be transformed by the substitution 
 
 
 
  into another integral



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are now simply rational functions of 
 
 
 
 . In principle, factorization and partial fraction decomposition can be employed to break the integral down into simple terms which can be integrated analytically through use of the dilogarithm function.2
References
"
Category:Integral calculus



N. Piskunov, Diferentsiaal- ja integraalarvutus körgematele tehnilistele öppeasutustele. Viies, taiendatud trukk. Kirjastus Valgus, Tallinn (1965). Note: Euler substitutions can be found in most Russian calculus textbooks.





