


Symmetric probability distribution




Symmetric probability distribution

In statistics, a symmetric probability distribution is a probability distribution—an assignment of probabilities to possible occurrences—which is unchanged when its probability density function or probability mass function is reflected around a vertical line at some value of the random variable represented by the distribution. This vertical line is the line of symmetry of the distribution. Thus the probability of being any given distance on one side of the value about which symmetry occurs is the same as the probability of being the same distance on the other side of that value.
Formal definition
A probability distribution is said to be symmetric if and only if there exists a value 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  for all real numbers 
 
 

where f is the probability density function if the distribution is continuous or the probability mass function if the distribution is discrete.
Properties

The median and the mean (if it exists) of a symmetric distribution both occur at the point 
 
 
 
 
  about which the symmetry occurs.


If a symmetric distribution is unimodal, the mode coincides with the median.


All odd central moments of a symmetric distribution equal zero (if they exist), because in the calculation of such moments the negative terms arising from negative deviations from 
 
 
 
  exactly balance the positive terms arising from equal positive deviations from 
 
 
 
 .


Every measure of skewness equals zero for a symmetric distribution.

Probability density function
Typically a symmetric continuous distribution's probability density function contains the index value 
 
 
 
  only in the context of a term 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is some positive integer (usually 1). This quadratic or other even-powered term takes on the same value for 
 
 
 
  as for 
 
 
 
 , giving symmetry about 
 
 
 
 . Sometimes the density function contains the term 
 
 
 
 , which also shows symmetry about 
 
 

Partial list of examples
The following distributions are symmetric for all parametrizations. (Many other distributions are symmetric for a particular parametrization.)

Arcsine distribution
Bates distribution
Cauchy distribution
Champernowne distribution
Continuous uniform distribution
Degenerate distribution
Discrete uniform distribution
Elliptical distributions
Gaussian q-distribution
Generalized normal distribution
Hyperbolic secant distribution
Irwin–Hall distribution
Laplace distribution
Logistic distribution
Normal distribution
Normal-exponential-gamma distribution
Rademacher distribution
Raised cosine distribution
Student's t distribution
Tukey lambda distribution
U-quadratic distribution
Uniform distribution
Voigt distribution
von Mises distribution
Wigner semicircle distribution

"
*


