


Nakajima–Zwanzig equation




Nakajima–Zwanzig equation

The Nakajima–Zwanzig equation (named after the physicists Sadao Nakajima and Robert Zwanzig) is an integral equation describing the time evolution of the "relevant" part of a quantum-mechanical system. It is formulated in the density matrix formalism and can be regarded a generalization of the Master equation.
The equation belongs to the Mori–Zwanzig theory within the statistical mechanics of irreversible processes (named after Hazime Mori). By means of a projection operator the dynamics is split into a slow, collective part (relevant part) and a rapidly fluctuating irrelevant part. The goal is to develop dynamical equations for the collective part.
Derivation
The starting point1 is the quantum mechanical Liouville equation (von Neumann equation)


 
  where the Liouville operator 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 
 
 .
The density operator (density matrix) 
 
 
 
 
  is split by means of a projection operator 
 
 
 
  into two parts 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . The projection operator 
 
 
 
  projects onto the aforementioned relevant part, for which an equation of motion is to be derived.
The Liouville – von Neumann equation can thus be represented as



The second line is formally solved as2



By plugging the solution into the first equation, we obtain the Nakajima–Zwanzig equation:



Under the assumption that the inhomogeneous term vanishes3 and using





 
  as well as


 
  we obtain the final form



References

E. Fick, G. Sauermann: The Quantum Statistics of Dynamic Processes Springer-Verlag, 1983, ISBN .
Heinz-Peter Breuer, Francesco Petruccione: Theory of Open Quantum Systems. Oxford, 2002 ISBN 
Hermann Grabert Projection operator techniques in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, Springer Tracts in Modern Physics, Band 95, 1982
R. Kühne, P. Reineker: Nakajima-Zwanzig's generalized master equation: Evaluation of the kernel of the integro-differential equation, Zeitschrift für Physik B (Condensed Matter), Band 31, 1978, S. 105–110, Abstract

Original works



original paper

Notes


"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Statistical mechanics



A derivation analogous to that presented here is found, for instance, in Breuer, Petruccione The theory of open quantum systems, Oxford University Press 2002, S.443ff
To verify the equation it suffices to write the function under the integral as a derivative, deQLt'QeL(t-t') = -eQLt'QLPeL(t-t')dt'.
Such an assumption can be made if we assume that the irrelevant part of the density matrix is 0 at the initial time, so that the projector for t=0 is the identity.




