


Affine bundle




Affine bundle

In mathematics, an affine bundle is a fiber bundle whose typical fiber, fibers, trivialization morphisms and transition functions are affine.1
Formal definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a vector bundle with a typical fiber a vector space

 
 . An affine bundle modelled on a vector bundle 
 
 
 
  is a fiber bundle 
 
 
 
  whose typical fiber 
 
 
 
  is an affine space modelled on 
 
 
 
  so that the following conditions hold:
(i) All the fiber 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  are affine spaces modelled over the corresponding fibers 
 
 
 
  of a vector bundle 
 
 
 
 .
(ii) There is an affine bundle atlas of 
 
 
 
  whose local trivializations morphisms and transition functions are affine isomorphisms.
Dealing with affine bundles, one uses only affine bundle coordinates 
 
 
 
  possessing affine transition functions



There are the bundle morphisms






where 
 
 
 
  are linear bundle coordinates on a vector bundle 
 
 
 
 , possessing linear transition functions 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
An affine bundle has a global section, but in contrast with vector bundles, there is no canonical global section of an affine bundle. Let 
 
 
 
  be an affine bundle modelled on a vector bundle

 
 . Every global section 
 
 
 
  of an affine bundle 
 
 
 
  yields the bundle morphisms



In particular, every vector bundle 
 
 
 
  has a natural structure of an affine bundle due to these morphisms where 
 
 
 
  is the canonical zero-valued section of 
 
 
 
 
 . For instance, the tangent bundle

 
  of a manifold 
 
 
 
  naturally is an affine bundle.
An affine bundle 
 
 
 
  is a fiber bundle with a general affine structure group

 
  of affine transformations of its typical fiber 
 
 
 
 
  of dimension 
 
 
 
 . This structure group always is reducible to a general linear group

 
 , i.e., an affine bundle admits an atlas with linear transition functions.
By a morphism of affine bundles is meant a bundle morphism 
 
 
 
  whose restriction to each fiber of 
 
 
 
  is an affine map. Every affine bundle morphism 
 
 
 
 
  of an affine bundle 
 
 
 
  modelled on a vector bundle 
 
 
 
  to an affine bundle 
 
 
 
  modelled on a vector bundle 
 
 
 
  yields a unique linear bundle morphism



called the linear derivative of 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Fiber bundle
Fibered manifold
Vector bundle
Affine space

Notes
References

S. Kobayashi, K. Nomizu, Foundations of Differential Geometry, Vols. 1 & 2, Wiley-Interscience, 1996, ISBN 0-471-15733-3.

Sardanashvily, G., Advanced Differential Geometry for Theoreticians. Fiber bundles, jet manifolds and Lagrangian theory, Lambert Academic Publishing, 2013, ISBN 978-3-659-37815-7; arXiv: 0908.1886.


"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Fiber bundles



. (page 60)




