


Order tracking (signal processing)




Order tracking (signal processing)

In rotordynamics, order tracking is a family of signal processing tools aimed at transforming a measured signal from time domain to angular (or order) domain. These techniques are applied to asynchronously sampled signals (i.e. with a constant sample rate in Hertz) to obtain the same signal sampled at constant angular increments of a reference shaft. In some cases the outcome of the Order Tracking is directly the Fourier transform of such angular domain signal, whose frequency counterpart is defined as "order". Each order represents a fraction of the angular velocity of the reference shaft.
Order tracking is based on a velocity measurement, generally obtained by means of a tachometer or encoder, needed to estimate the instantaneous velocity and/or the angular position of the shaft.
Three main families of computed order tracking techniques have been developed in the past: Computed Order Tracking (COT), Vold-Kalman Filter (VKF) and Order Tracking Transforms.
Computed order tracking
Computed order tracking1 is a resampling technique based on interpolation.
 The procedure begins by estimating the time instants 
 
 

 
  corresponding to integer rotations of the shaft (i.e. angle equal to 
 
 
 
 ). Then an angular rotation vector is defined:



accordingly to the desired angular resolution:



A corresponding vector of time instants is obtained by means of a first interpolation step



A second interpolation step is then applied to obtain the angular resampled signal 
 
 
 
  from the original time domain signal 
 
 
 
 :



Vold-Kalman filter
Vold-Kalman2 filter is a particular formulation of Kalman filter, able to estimate both instantaneous speed and amplitude of a series of harmonics of the shaft rotational velocity.
Order tracking transforms
Order tracking transforms are mathematical transforms which perform in a single step both the order tracking (synchronization of the signal domain with the reference shaft) and the Fourier transform to assess amplitude and phase of each order of the so obtained spectrum. With such transforms it is possible to directly assess the amplitude of a synchronous, sub-synchronous or super-synchronous shaft-locked harmonics, without an additional resampling step.
The most recent formulation of such transforms is the Velocity Synchronous Discrete Fourier Transform,3 defined as follows:



where 
 
 
 
  is the order of the harmonics to be estimated, 
 
 
 
  is the total angular rotation of the shaft in the acquisition window, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are respectively the instantaneous angular rotation and velocity of the reference shaft.
References
"
Category:Dynamics (mechanics) Category:Signal processing



K.R. Fyfe, E.D.S. Munck, ANALYSIS OF COMPUTED ORDER TRACKING, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, Volume 11, Issue 2, March 1997, Pages 187-205
H. Vold, J. Leuridan, High resolution order tracking using Kalman tracking filters-theory and applications, SAE Paper No. 951332, 1995.
P. Borghesani, P. Pennacchi, S. Chatterton, R. Ricci, The velocity synchronous discrete Fourier transform for order tracking in the field of rotating machinery, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, Available online 18 April 2013, ISSN 0888-3270, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2013.03.026




