


Iacono's working set structure




Iacono's working set structure

{| class="infobox" style="width: 20em" ! Iacono's working set data structure |- ! Invented | 2001 |- ! Invented by | John Iacono |- ! Asymptotic complexity
 in big O notation |- ! Space | O(n) |- ! Search | O(log w(x)) |- ! Insert | O(log n) |- ! Delete | O(log n) |}
In computer science, Iacono's working set structure1 is a comparison based dictionary. It supports insertion, deletion and access operation to maintain a dynamic set of 
 
 
 
  elements. The working set of an item 
 
 
 
  is the set of elements that have been accessed in the structure since the last time that 
 
 
 
  was accessed (or inserted if it was never accessed). Inserting and deleting in the working set structure takes 
 
 
 
  time while accessing an element 
 
 
 
  takes 
 
 
 
 . Here, 
 
 
 
  represents the size of the working set of 
 
 
 
 .
Structure
 To store a dynamic set of 
 
 
 
  elements, this structure consists of a series of Red–black trees, or other Self-balancing binary search trees

 
 , and a series of deques (Double-ended queues) 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . For every 
 
 
 
 , tree 
 
 
 
  and deque 
 
 
 
  share the same contents and pointers are maintained between their corresponding elements. For every 
 
 
 
 , the size of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . Tree 
 
 
 
  and deque 
 
 
 
  consist of the remaining elements, i.e., their size is 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, the number of items in all trees and the number of elements in all deques both add up to 
 
 
 
 . Every element that has been inserted in the data structure is stored in exactly one of the trees and its corresponding deque.
Working set Invariant
In the deques of this structure, elements are kept in sorted order according to their working set size. Formally, element 
 
 
 
  lies after 
 
 
 
  in deque 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, for every 
 
 
 
 , the elements in deque 
 
 
 
  have a smaller working sets than the elements in deque 
 
 
 
 . This property is referred to as the Working set invariant. Every operation in the data structure maintains the Working set invariant.
Operations
The basic operation in this structure is called shift from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are indices of some trees in the structure. Two cases are considered in a shift from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 : If 
 
 
 
 , then for every 
 
 
 
 , taken in increasing order, an item is dequeued from 
 
 
 
  and enqueued into 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding item is deleted from 
 
 
 
  and inserted into 
 
 
 
 . The running time of this operation is 
 
 
 
 . Analogously, if 
 
 
 
 , then for every 
 
 
 
 , taken in decreasing order, an item is dequeued from 
 
 
 
  and enqueued into 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding item is deleted from 
 
 
 
  and inserted into 
 
 
 
 . The running time of this operation is 
 
 
 
 . Regardless of the case, after a shift operation, the size of 
 
 
 
  decreases by one whereas the size of 
 
 
 
  increases by one. Since that elements in the deques are sorted with respect to their working sets sizes, a shift operation maintains the Working set invariant.
Search
To search for an element 
 
 
 
 , search for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , in increasing order, until finding a tree 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
 . If no tree is found, the search is unsuccessful. If 
 
 
 
  is found, it is deleted from 
 
 
 
  and then inserted into 
 
 
 
 , i.e., it is moved to the front of the structure. The search finishes by performing a shift from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  which restores the size of every tree and every deque to their size prior to the search operation. The running time of this search is 
 
 
 
  if the search was successful, or 
 
 
 
  otherwise. By the Working set property, every element in trees 
 
 
 
  belongs to the working set of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, every element in 
 
 
 
  belongs to the working set of 
 
 
 
  and hence, 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the running time of a successful search is 
 
 
 
 .
Insert
Inserting an element 
 
 
 
  into the structure is performed by inserting 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  and enqueuing it into 
 
 
 
 . Insertion is completed by performing a shift from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . To avoid overflow, if 
 
 
 
  before the shift, i.e., if the last tree is full, then 
 
 
 
  is incremented and a new empty 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is created. The running time of this operation is dominated by the shift from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  whose running time is 
 
 
 
 . Since element 
 
 
 
 , whose working set is the smallest, is enqueued in 
 
 
 
 , the Working set invariant is preserved after the shift.
Delete
Deleting an element 
 
 
 
  is done by searching for 
 
 
 
  on each tree in the structure, in increasing order, until finding a tree 
 
 
 
  that contains it (if non is found the deletion is unsuccessful). Item 
 
 
 
  is deleted from 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Finally, a shift from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  maintains the size of 
 
 
 
  equal to 
 
 
 
 . The running time of this operation is 
 
 
 
 . The working set invariant is preserved as deleting an element does not change the order of the working set of the elements.
Discussion
Splay trees are self adjusting search trees introduced by Sleator and Tarjan2 in 1985. Using restructuring heuristic, splay trees are able to achieve insert and delete operations in 
 
 
amortized time, without storing any balance information at the nodes. Moreover, the Working Set Theorem for splay trees states that the cost to access an element in a splay tree is 
 
 
amortized. Iacono's workings set structure obtains the same running time for search, insert and delete in the worst-case. Therefore, offering an alternative to splay trees.
References
"
Category:Trees (data structures)









