


World manifold




World manifold

In  gravitation theory, a world manifold endowed with some  Lorentzian  pseudo-Riemannian metric and an associated space-time structure is a  space-time. Gravitation theory is formulated as classical field theory on  natural bundles over a world manifold.
Topology
A world manifold is a four-dimensional orientable real smooth manifold. It is assumed to be a Hausdorff and  second countable topological space. Consequently, it is a locally compact space which is a union of a countable number of compact subsets, a separable space, a  paracompact and completely regular space. Being paracompact, a world manifold admits a partition of unity by smooth functions. It should be emphasized that paracompactness is an essential characteristic of a world manifold. It is necessary and sufficient in order that a world manifold admits a  Riemannian metric and necessary for the existence of a pseudo-Riemannian metric. A world manifold is assumed to be  connected and, consequently, it is  arcwise connected.
Riemannian structure
The tangent bundle

 
  of a world manifold 
 
 
 
  and the associated  principal frame bundle

 
  of linear tangent frames in 
 
 
 
  possess a general linear group structure group

 
 . A world manifold 
 
 
 
  is said to be  parallelizable if the tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  and, accordingly, the frame bundle 
 
 
 
  are trivial, i.e., there exists a global section (a frame field) of 
 
 
 
 . It is essential that the tangent and associated bundles over a world manifold admit a bundle atlas of finite number of trivialization charts.
Tangent and frame bundles over a world manifold are  natural bundles characterized by general covariant transformations. These transformations are  gauge symmetries of gravitation theory on a world manifold.
By virtue of the well-known theorem on  structure group reduction, a structure group 
 
 
 
  of a frame bundle 
 
 
 
  over a world manifold 
 
 
 
  is always reducible to its maximal compact subgroup 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding global section of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
  is a Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . Thus, a world manifold always admits a Riemannian metric which makes 
 
 
 
  a  metric topological space.
Lorentzian structure
In accordance with the  geometric Equivalence Principle, a world manifold possesses a  Lorentzian structure, i.e., a structure group of a frame bundle 
 
 
 
  must be reduced to a Lorentz group

 
 . The corresponding global section of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
  is a pseudo-Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  of signature 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . It is treated as a gravitational field in General Relativity and as a  classical Higgs field in gauge gravitation theory.
A Lorentzian structure need not exist. Therefore a world manifold is assumed to satisfy a certain topological condition. It is either a noncompact topological space or a compact space with a zero Euler characteristic. Usually, one also requires that a world manifold admits a spinor structure in order to describe  Dirac fermion fields in gravitation theory. There is the additional topological obstruction to the existence of this structure. In particular, a noncompact world manifold must be parallelizable.
Space-time structure
If a structure group of a frame bundle 
 
 
 
  is reducible to a Lorentz group, the latter is always reducible to its maximal compact subgroup 
 
 
 
 . Thus, there is the commutative diagram









of the reduction of structure groups of a frame bundle 
 
 
 
  in gravitation theory. This reduction diagram results in the following.
(i) In gravitation theory on a world manifold 
 
 
 
 , one can always choose an atlas of a frame bundle 
 
 
 
  (characterized by local frame fields 
 
 
 
 ) with 
 
 
 
 -valued transition functions. These transition functions preserve a time-like component 
 
 
 
  of local frame fields which, therefore, is globally defined. It is a nowhere vanishing vector field on 
 
 
 
 . Accordingly, the dual time-like covector field 
 
 
 
  also is globally defined, and it yields a spatial  distribution

 
  on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Then the tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  of a world manifold 
 
 
 
  admits a space-time decomposition 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a one-dimensional fibre bundle spanned by a time-like vector field 
 
 
 
 . This decomposition, is called the 
 
 
 
 -compatible space-time structure. It makes a world manifold the  space-time.
(ii) Given the above mentioned diagram of reduction of structure groups, let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the corresponding pseudo-Riemannian and Riemannian metrics on 
 
 
 
 . They form a triple 
 
 
 
  obeying the relation


 
 .
Conversely, let a world manifold 
 
 
 
  admit a nowhere vanishing one-form 
 
 
 
  (or, equivalently, a nowhere vanishing vector field). Then any Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  yields the pseudo-Riemannian metric


 
 .
It follows that a world manifold 
 
 
 
  admits a pseudo-Riemannian metric if and only if there exists a nowhere vanishing vector (or covector) field on 
 
 
 
 .
Let us note that a 
 
 
 
 -compatible Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  in a triple 
 
 
 
  defines a 
 
 
 
 -compatible distance function on a world manifold 
 
 
 
 . Such a function brings 
 
 
 
  into a metric space whose locally Euclidean topology is equivalent to a manifold topology on 
 
 
 
 . Given a gravitational field 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -compatible Riemannian metrics and the corresponding distance functions are different for different spatial distributions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It follows that physical observers associated with these different spatial distributions perceive a world manifold 
 
 
 
  as different Riemannian spaces. The well-known relativistic changes of sizes of moving bodies exemplify this phenomenon.
However, one attempts to derive a world topology directly from a space-time structure (a  path topology, an  Alexandrov topology). If a space-time satisfies the  strong causality condition, such topologies coincide with a familiar manifold topology of a world manifold. In a general case, they however are rather extraordinary.
Causality conditions
A space-time structure is called integrable if a spatial distribution 
 
 
 
  is involutive. In this case, its integral manifolds constitute a spatial foliation of a world manifold whose leaves are spatial three-dimensional subspaces. A spatial foliation is called causal if no curve transversal to its leaves intersects each leave more than once. This condition is equivalent to the  stable causality of Stephen Hawking. A space-time foliation is causal if and only if it is a foliation of level surfaces of some smooth real function on 
 
 
 
  whose differential nowhere vanishes. Such a foliation is a fibred manifold

 
 . However, this is not the case of a compact world manifold which can not be a fibred manifold over 
 
 
 
 .
The stable causality does not provide the simplest causal structure. If a fibred manifold 
 
 
 
  is a fibre bundle, it is trivial, i.e., a world manifold 
 
 
 
  is a globally hyperbolic manifold

 
 . Since any oriented three-dimensional manifold is parallelizable, a globally hyperbolic world manifold is parallelizable.
See also

Spacetime
Mathematics of general relativity
Gauge gravitation theory

References

S.W. Hawking, G.F.R. Ellis, The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1973) ISBN 0-521-20016-4
C.T.G. Dodson, Categories, Bundles, and Spacetime Topology (Shiva Publ. Ltd., Orpington, UK, 1980) ISBN 0-906812-01-1

External links

 G. Sardanashvily, Classical gauge gravitation theory, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys. 8 (2011) 1869; arXiv: 1110.1176

"
Category:Gravitation Category:Theoretical physics


