


Minimum rank of a graph




Minimum rank of a graph

In mathematics, the minimum rank is a graph parameter 
 
 
 
  for any graph G. It was motivated by the Colin de Verdière's invariant.
Definition
The adjacency matrix of a given undirected graph is a symmetric matrix whose rows and columns both correspond to the vertices of the graph. Its coefficients are all 0 or 1, and the coefficient in row i and column j is nonzero whenever vertex i is adjacent to vertex j in the graph. More generally, one can define a generalized adjacency matrix to be any matrix of real numbers with the same pattern of nonzeros. The minimum rank of the graph 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
  and is defined as the smallest rank of any generalized adjacency matrix of the graph.
Properties

The minimum rank of a graph is always at most equal to n − 1, where n is the number of vertices in the graph.1
For every induced subgraph H of a given graph G, the minimum rank of H is at most equal to the minimum rank of G.2
If a given graph is not connected, then its minimum rank is the sum of the minimum ranks of its connected components.3
The minimum rank is a graph invariant: any two isomorphic graphs necessarily have the same minimum rank.

Characterization of known graph families
Several families of graphs may be characterized in terms of their minimum ranks.

For 
 
 
 
 , the complete graph Kn on n vertices has minimum rank one. The only graphs that are connected and have minimum rank one are the complete graphs.4
A path graph Pn on n vertices has minimum rank n − 1. The only n-vertex graphs with minimum rank n − 1 are the path graphs.5
A cycle graph Cn on n vertices has minimum rank n − 2.6
Let 
 
 
 
  be a 2-connected graph. Then 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is a linear 2-tree.7
A graph 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  if and only if the complement of 
 
 
 
  is of the form 
 
 
 
  for appropriate nonnegative integers 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .8

Notes
References


.

"
Category:Algebraic graph theory Category:Graph invariants



Fallat-Hogben, Observation 1.2.
Fallat-Hogben, Observation 1.6.
Fallat-Hogben, Observation 1.6.
Fallat-Hogben, Observation 1.2.
Fallat-Hogben, Corollary 1.5.
Fallat-Hogben, Observation 1.6.
Fallat-Hogben, Theorem 2.10.
Fallat-Hogben, Theorem 2.9.




