


Geometrothermodynamics




Geometrothermodynamics

In physics, geometrothermodynamics (GTD) is a formalism developed recently by Hernando Quevedo to describe the properties of thermodynamic systems in terms of concepts of differential geometry.1 Consider a thermodynamic system in the framework of classical equilibrium thermodynamics. The states of thermodynamic equilibrium are considered as points of an abstract equilibrium space in which a Riemannian metric can be introduced in several ways. In particular, one can introduce Hessian metrics like the Fisher information metric, the Weinhold metric, the Ruppeiner metric and others, whose components are calculated as the Hessian of a particular thermodynamic potential. Another possibility is to introduce metrics which are independent of the thermodynamic potential, a property which is shared by all thermodynamic systems in classical thermodynamics.2 Since a change of thermodynamic potential is equivalent to a Legendre transformation, and Legendre transformations do not act in the equilibrium space, it is necessary to introduce an auxiliary space to correctly handle the Legendre transformations. This is the so-called thermodynamic phase space. If the phase space is equipped with a Legendre invariant Riemannian metric, a smooth map can be introduced that induces a thermodynamic metric in the equilibrium manifold. The thermodynamic metric can then be used with different thermodynamic potentials without changing the geometric properties of the equilibrium manifold. One expects the geometric properties of the equilibrium manifold to be related to the macroscopic physical properties. The details of this relation can be summarized in three main points:

Curvature is a measure of the thermodynamical interaction.
Curvature singularities correspond to curvature phase transitions.
Thermodynamic geodesics correspond to quasi-static processes.

Geometric aspects
The main ingredient of GTD is a (2n + 1)-dimensional manifold 
 
 
 
  with coordinates 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary thermodynamic potential, 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , are the extensive variables, and 
 
 
 
  the intensive variables. It is also possible to introduce in a canonical manner the fundamental one-form 
 
 
 
  (summation over repeated indices) with 
 
 
 
 , which satisfies the condition 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the number of thermodynamic degrees of freedom of the system, and is invariant with respect to Legendre transformations3



where 
 
 
 
  is any disjoint decomposition of the set of indices 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . In particular, for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we obtain the total Legendre transformation and the identity, respectively. It is also assumed that in 
 
 
 
  there exists a metric 
 
 
 
  which is also invariant with respect to Legendre transformations. The triad 
 
 
 
  defines a Riemannian contact manifold which is called the thermodynamic phase space (phase manifold). The space of thermodynamic equilibrium states (equilibrium manifold) is an n-dimensional Riemannian submanifold

 
  induced by a smooth map 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  holds, where 
 
 
 
  is the pullback of 
 
 
 
 . The manifold 
 
 
 
  is naturally equipped with the Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
 . The purpose of GTD is to demonstrate that the geometric properties of 
 
 
 
  are related to the thermodynamic properties of a system with fundamental thermodynamic equation 
 
 
 
 . The condition of invariance with respect total Legendre transformations leads to the metrics






where 
 
 
 
  is a constant diagonal matrix that can be expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary Legendre invariant function of 
 
 
 
 . The metrics 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have been used to describe thermodynamic systems with first and second order phase transitions, respectively. The most general metric which is invariant with respect to partial Legendre transformations is



The components of the corresponding metric for the equilibrium manifold 
 
 
 
  can be computed as



Applications
GTD has been applied to describe laboratory systems like the ideal gas, van der Waals gas, the Ising model, etc., more exotic systems like black holes in different gravity theories,4 in the context of relativistic cosmology,5 and to describe chemical reactions .6
References


"
Category:Branches of thermodynamics Category:Geometry Category:Information













