


Supermetric




Supermetric

Supersymmetry gauge theory including supergravity is mainly developed as a Yang - Mills type theory with  spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetries. There are various superextensions of pseudo-orthogonal Lie algebras and the  Poincaré Lie algebra. The nonlinear realization of some  Lie superalgebras have been studied. However, supergravity introduced in SUSY gauge theory has no geometric feature as a supermetric.
In gauge theory on a principal bundle

 
  with a structure group 
 
 
 
 , spontaneous symmetry breaking is characterized as a  reduction of 
 
 
 
  to some closed subgroup 
 
 
 
 . By the well-known theorem, such a reduction takes place if and only if there exists a global section 
 
 
 
  of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
 . This section is treated as a classical Higgs field.
In particular, this is the case of gauge gravitation theory where 
 
 
 
  is a principal frame bundle of linear frames in the tangent bundle

 
  of a world manifold

 
 . In accordance with the  geometric equivalence principle, its structure group 
 
 
 
  is reduced to the Lorentz group

 
 , and the associated global section of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
  is a pseudo-Riemannian metric on 
 
 
 
 , i.e., a gravitational field in General Relativity.
Similarly, a supermetric can be defined as a global section of a certain quotient superbundle.
It should be emphasized that there are different notions of a supermanifold.  Lie supergroups and principal superbundles are considered in the category of 
 
 
 
 -supermanifolds. Let 
 
 
 
  be a principal superbundle with a structure Lie supergroup 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be a closed Lie supersubgroup of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a principal superbundle. There is one-to-one correspondence between the principal supersubbundles of 
 
 
 
  with the structure Lie supergroup 
 
 
 
  and the global sections of the quotient superbundle 
 
 
 
  with a typical fiber 
 
 
 
 .
A key point is that underlying spaces of 
 
 
 
 -supermanifolds are smooth real manifolds, but possessing very particular transition functions. Therefore, the condition of local triviality of the quotient 
 
 
 
  is rather restrictive. It is satisfied in the most interesting case for applications when 
 
 
 
  is a supermatrix group and 
 
 
 
  is its Cartan supersubgroup. For instance, let 
 
 
 
  be a principal superbundle of graded frames in the tangent superspaces over a supermanifold 
 
 
 
  of even-odd dimensione 
 
 
 
 . If its structure general linear supergroup 
 
 
 
  is reduced to the orthogonal-symplectic supersubgroup 
 
 
 
 , one can think of the corresponding global section of the quotient superbundle 
 
 
 
  as being a supermetric on a supermanifold 
 
 
 
 .
In particular, this is the case of a super-Euclidean metric on a superspace

 
 .
References

Deligne, P. and Morgan, J. (1999) Notes on supersymmetry (following Joseph Bernstein). In: Quantum Field Theory and Strings: A Course for Mathematicians, Vol. 1 (Providence, RI: Amer. Math. Soc.) pp. 41-97 ISBN 978-0-8218-1198-6.
Sardanashvily, G. (2008) Supermetrics on supermanifolds, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys. 5, 271.

External links

G. Sardanashvily, Lectures on supergeometry, arXiv: 0910.0092.

See also

Supergeometry
Supergravity
Super Minkowski space
Gauge gravitation theory

"
Category:Supersymmetry


