


Relativistic system (mathematics)




Relativistic system (mathematics)

In mathematics, a  non-autonomous system of ordinary differential equations is defined to be a dynamic equation on a smooth fiber bundle

 
  over 
 
 
 
 . For instance, this is the case of non-relativistic non-autonomous mechanics, but not relativistic mechanics. To describe relativistic mechanics, one should consider a system of ordinary differential equations on a smooth manifold

 
  whose fibration over 
 
 
 
 
  is not fixed. Such a system admits transformations of a coordinate 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  depending on other coordinates on 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, it is called the relativistic system. In particular, Special Relativity on the Minkowski space

 
  is of this type.
Since a configuration space 
 
 
 
 
  of a relativistic system has no preferable fibration over 
 
 
 
 , a velocity space of relativistic system is a first order jet manifold 
 
 
 
  of one-dimensional submanifolds of 
 
 
 
 . The notion of jets of submanifolds generalizes that of jets of sections of fiber bundles which are utilized in covariant classical field theory and non-autonomous mechanics. A first order jet bundle 
 
 
 
  is projective and, following the terminology of Special Relativity, one can think of its fibers as being spaces of the absolute velocities of a relativistic system. Given coordinates 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , a first order jet manifold 
 
 
 
  is provided with the adapted coordinates 
 
 
 
  possessing transition functions



The relativistic velocities of a relativistic system are represented by elements of a fibre bundle 
 
 
 
 , coordinated by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the tangent bundle of 
 
 
 
 . Then a generic equation of motion of a relativistic system in terms of relativistic velocities reads






For instance, if 
 
 
 
  is the Minkowski space with a Minkowski metric 
 
 
 
 , this is an equation of a relativistic charge in the presence of an electromagnetic field.
References

Krasil'shchik, I. S., Vinogradov, A. M., [et al.], "Symmetries and conservation laws for differential equations of mathematical physics", Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1999, ISBN 0-8218-0958-X.
Giachetta, G., Mangiarotti, L., Sardanashvily, G., Geometric Formulation of Classical and Quantum Mechanics (World Scientific, 2010) ISBN 981-4313-72-6 (arXiv: 1005.1212).

See also

Non-autonomous system (mathematics)
Non-autonomous mechanics
Relativistic mechanics
Special relativity

"
Category:Differential equations Category:Classical mechanics Category:Theory of relativity


