


Variable elimination




Variable elimination

Variable elimination (VE) is a simple and general exact inference algorithm in probabilistic graphical models, such as Bayesian networks and Markov random fields.12 It can be used for inference of maximum a posteriori (MAP) state or estimation of marginal distribution over a subset of variables. The algorithm has exponential time complexity, but could be efficient in practice for the low-treewidth graphs, if the proper elimination order is used.
Inference
The most common query type is in the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are disjoint subsets of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is observed taking value 
 
 
 
 . A basic algorithm to computing p(X|E = e) is called variable elimination (VE), first put forth in.3
 Algorithm 1, called sum-out (SO), eliminates a single variable 
 
 
 
  from a set 
 
 
 
  of potentials,4 and returns the resulting set of potentials. The algorithm collect-relevant simply returns those potentials in 
 
 
 
  involving variable 
 
 
 
 .
Algorithm 1 sum-out(
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
 )


 
  = collect-relevant(
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
 )


 
  = the product of all potentials in 
 
 




return


Algorithm 2, taken from,5 computes 
 
 
 
  from a discrete Bayesian network B. VE calls SO to eliminate variables one by one. More specifically, in Algorithm 2, 
 
 
 
  is the set C of CPTs for B, 
 
 
 
  is a list of query variables, 
 
 
 
 is a list of observed variables, 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding list of observed values, and 
 
 
 
  is an elimination ordering for variables 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes 
 
 
 
 .
Algorithm 2 VE(
 
 
 
 )

Multiply evidence potentials with appropriate CPTs While σ is not empty
 
Remove the first variable 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 



 
  = sum-out
 
 



 
  = the product of all potentials 
 
 


return


References
"
Category:Graphical models



Zhang, N.L., Poole, D.: A Simple Approach to Bayesian Network Computations. In:7th Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 171–178. Springer, New York(1994)
Zhang, N.L., Poole, D.:A Simple Approach to Bayesian Network Computations.In: 7th Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence,pp. 171--178. Springer, New York (1994)

Koller, D., Friedman, N.: Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (2009)





