


Conformastatic spacetimes




Conformastatic spacetimes

Conformastatic spacetimes refer to a special class of static solutions to Einstein's equation in general relativity.
Introduction
The line element for the conformastatic class of solutions in Weyl's canonical coordinates reads123456


 as a solution to the field equation


 Eq(1) has only one metric function 
 
 
 
  to be identified, and for each concrete 
 
 
 
 , Eq(1) would yields a specific conformastatic spacetime.
Reduced electrovac field equations
In consistency with the conformastatic geometry Eq(1), the electrostatic field would arise from an electrostatic potential 
 
 
 
  without spatial symmetry:789


 which would yield the electromagnetic field tensor 
 
 
 
  by


 as well as the corresponding stress–energy tensor by


Plug Eq(1) and Eqs(3)(4)(5) into "trace-free" (R=0) Einstein's field equation, and one could obtain the reduced field equations for the metric function 
 
 
 
 :1011




where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are respectively the generic Laplace and gradient operators. in Eq(7), 
 
 
 
  run freely over the coordinates 
 
 
 
 .
Linearization of electrovac field equations
Examples
Extremal Reissner–Nordström spacetime
The extremal Reissner–Nordström spacetime is a typical conformastatic solution. In this case, the metric function is identified as1213


which put Eq(1) into the concrete form



Applying the transformations



one obtains the usual form of the line element of extremal Reissner–Nordström solution,



Charged dust disks
Some conformastatic solutions have been adopted to describe charged dust disks.14
Comparison with Weyl spacetimes
Many solutions, such as the extremal Reissner–Nordström solution discussed above, can be treated as either a conformastatic metric or Weyl metric, so it would be helpful to make a comparison between them. The Weyl spacetimes refer to the static, axisymmetric class of solutions to Einstein's equation, whose line element takes the following form (still in Weyl's canonical coordinates):


 Hence, a Weyl solution become conformastatic if the metric function 
 
 
 
  vanishes, and the other metric function 
 
 
 
  drops the axial symmetry:


 The Weyl electrovac field equations would reduce to the following ones with 
 
 
 
 :











where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are respectively the reduced cylindrically symmetric Laplace and gradient operators.
It is also noticeable that, Eqs(14) for Weyl are consistent but not identical with the conformastatic Eqs(6)(7) above.
References
See also

Weyl metrics
Reissner–Nordström metric

"
Category:General relativity



John Lighton Synge. Relativity: The General Theory, Chapter VIII. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company (Interscience), 1960.↩
Hans Stephani, Dietrich Kramer, Malcolm MacCallum, Cornelius Hoenselaers, Eduard Herlt . Exact Solutions of Einstein's Field Equations (2nd Edition), Chapter 18. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.↩
Guillermo A Gonzalez, Antonio C Gutierrez-Pineres, Paolo A Ospina. Finite axisymmetric charged dust disks in conformastatic spacetimes. Physical Review D 78 (2008): 064058. arXiv:0806.4285[gr-qc]↩
F D Lora-Clavijo, P A Ospina-Henao, J F Pedraza. Charged annular disks and Reissner–Nordström type black holes from extremal dust. Physical Review D 82 (2010): 084005. arXiv:1009.1005[gr-qc]↩
Ivan Booth, David Wenjie Tian. Some spacetimes containing non-rotating extremal isolated horizons. Accepted by Classical and Quantum Gravity. arXiv:1210.6889[gr-qc]↩
Antonio C Gutierrez-Pineres, Guillermo A Gonzalez, Hernando Quevedo. Conformastatic disk-haloes in Einstein-Maxwell gravity. Physical Review D 87 (2013): 044010. arXiv:1211.4941[gr-qc]↩












