


General covariant transformations




General covariant transformations

In physics, general covariant transformations are symmetries of  gravitation theory on a world manifold

 
 . They are gauge transformations whose parameter functions are vector fields on 
 
 
 
 . From the physical viewpoint, general covariant transformations are treated as particular (holonomic) reference frame transformations in general relativity. In mathematics, general covariant transformations are defined as particular automorphisms of so-called natural fiber bundles.
Mathematical definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a fibered manifold with local fibered coordinates 
 
 
 
 . Every automorphism of 
 
 
 
  is projected onto a diffeomorphism of its base 
 
 
 
 . However, the converse is not true. A diffeomorphism of 
 
 
 
  need not give rise to an automorphism of 
 
 
 
 .
In particular, an infinitesimal generator of a one-parameter Lie group of automorphisms of 
 
 
 
  is a projectable vector field



on 
 
 
 
 . This vector field is projected onto a vector field 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , whose flow is a one-parameter group of diffeomorphisms of 
 
 
 
 . Conversely, let 
 
 
 
  be a vector field on 
 
 
 
 . There is a problem of constructing its lift to a projectable vector field on 
 
 
 
  projected onto 
 
 
 
 . Such a lift always exists, but it need not be canonical. Given a connection

 
  on 
 
 
 
 , every vector field 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  gives rise to the horizontal vector field



on 
 
 
 
 . This horizontal lift 
 
 
 
  yields a monomorphism of the 
 
 
 
 -module of vector fields on 
 
 
 
  to the 
 
 
 
 -module of vector fields on 
 
 
 
 , but this monomorphisms is not a Lie algebra morphism, unless 
 
 
 
  is flat.
However, there is a category of above mentioned natural bundles 
 
 
 
  which admit the functorial lift 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
  of any vector field 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra monomorphism



This functorial lift 
 
 
 
  is an infinitesimal general covariant transformation of 
 
 
 
 .
In a general setting, one considers a monomorphism 
 
 
 
  of a group of diffeomorphisms of 
 
 
 
  to a group of bundle automorphisms of a natural bundle 
 
 
 
 . Automorphisms 
 
 
 
  are called the general covariant transformations of 
 
 
 
 . For instance, no vertical automorphism of 
 
 
 
  is a general covariant transformation.
Natural bundles are exemplified by tensor bundles. For instance, the tangent bundle

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is a natural bundle. Every diffeomorphism 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  gives rise to the tangent automorphism 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  which is a general covariant transformation of 
 
 
 
 . With respect to the holonomic coordinates 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , this transformation reads



A frame bundle

 
  of linear tangent frames in 
 
 
 
  also is a natural bundle. General covariant transformations constitute a subgroup of holonomic automorphisms of 
 
 
 
 . All bundles associated with a frame bundle are natural. However, there are natural bundles which are not associated with 
 
 
 
 .
See also

General covariance
Gauge gravitation theory
Fibered manifold

References

Kolář, I., Michor, P., Slovák, J., Natural operations in differential geometry. Springer-Verlag: Berlin Heidelberg, 1993. ISBN 3-540-56235-4, ISBN 0-387-56235-4.
Sardanashvily, G., Advanced Differential Geometry for Theoreticians. Fiber bundles, jet manifolds and Lagrangian theory, Lambert Academic Publishing: Saarbrücken, 2013. ISBN 978-3-659-37815-7; arXiv: 0908.1886


"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Manifolds Category:Fiber bundles Category:Gravitation Category:Gauge theories


