


Tetradic Palatini action




Tetradic Palatini action

The Einstein–Hilbert action for general relativity was first formulated purely in terms of the space-time metric. To take the metric and affine connection as independent variables in the action principle was first considered by Palatini.1 It is called a first order formulation as the variables to vary over involve only up to first derivatives in the action and so doesn't over complicate the Euler–Lagrange equations with terms coming from higher derivative terms. The tetradic Palatini action is another first-order formulation of the Einstein–Hilbert action in terms of a different pair of independent variables, known as frame fields and the spin connection. The use of frame fields and spin connections are essential in the formulation of a generally covariant fermionic action (see the article spin connection for more discussion of this) which couples fermions to gravity when added to the tetradic Palatini action.
Not only is this needed to couple fermions to gravity and makes the tetradic action somehow more fundamental to the metric version, the Palatini action is also a stepping stone to more interesting actions like the self-dual Palatini action which can be seen as the Lagrangian basis for Ashtekar's formulation of canonical gravity (see Ashtekar's variables) or the Holst action which is the basis of the real variables version of Ashtekar's theory. Another important action is the Plebanski action (see the entry on the Barrett–Crane model), and proving that it gives general relativity under certain conditions involves showing it reduces to the Palatini action under these conditions.
Here we present definitions and calculate Einstein's equations from the Palatini action in detail. These calculations can be easily modified for the self-dual Palatini action and the Holst action.
Some definitions
We first need to introduce the notion of tetrads. A tetrad is an orthonormal vector basis in terms of which the space-time metric looks locally flat,



where 
 
 
 
  is the Minkowski metric. The tetrads encode the information about the space-time metric and will be taken as one of the independent variables in the action principle.
Now if one is going to operate on objects that have internal indices one needs to introduce an appropriate derivative (covariant derivative). We introduce an arbitrary covariant derivative via



Where 
 
 
 
  is a Lorentz connection (the derivative annihilates the Minkowski metric 
 
 
 
 ). We define a curvature via



We obtain


 
 .
We introduce the covariant derivative which annihilates the tetrad,


 
 
 .
The connection is completely determined by the tetrad. The action of this on the generalized tensor 
 
 
 
  is given by



We define a curvature 
 
 
 
  by


 
 .
This is easily related to the usual curvature defined by



via substituting 
 
 
 
  into this expression (see below for details). One obtains,



for the Riemann tensor, Ricci tensor and Ricci scalar respectively.
The tetradic Palatini action
The Ricci scalar of this curvature can be expressed as 
 
 
 
 . The action can be written



where 
 
 
 
 
  but now 
 
 
 
  is a function of the frame field.
We will derive the Einstein equations by varying this action with respect to the tetrad and spin connection as independent quantities.
As a shortcut to performing the calculation we introduce a connection compatible with the tetrad, 
 
 
2 The connection associated with this covariant derivative is completely determined by the tetrad. The difference between the two connections we have introduced is a field 
 
 
 
  defined by



We can compute the difference between the curvatures of these two covariant derivatives (see below for details),



The reason for this intermediate calculation is that it is easier to compute the variation by reexpressing the action in terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and noting that the variation with respect to 
 
 
 
  is the same as the variation with respect to 
 
 
 
  (when keeping the tetrad fixed). The action becomes



We first vary with respect to 
 
 
 
 . The first term does not depend on 
 
 
 
  so it does not contribute. The second term is a total derivative. The last term yields 
 
 
 
 . We show below that this implies that 
 
 
 
  as the prefactor 
 
 
 
 
  is non-degenerate. This tells us that 
 
 
 
  coincides with 
 
 
 
  when acting on objects with only internal indices. Thus the connection 
 
 
 
  is completely determined by the tetrad and 
 
 
 
  coincides with 
 
 
 
 
 . To compute the variation with respect to the tetrad we need the variation of 
 
 
 
 . From the standard formula



we have 
 
 
 
 . Or upon using 
 
 
 
 , this becomes 
 
 
 
 
 . We compute the second equation by varying with respect to the tetrad,




One gets, after substituting 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  as given by the previous equation of motion,



which, after multiplication by 
 
 
 
  just tells us that the Einstein tensor

 
  of the metric defined by the tetrads vanishes. We have therefore proved that the Palatini variation of the action in tetradic form yields the usual Einstein equations.
Generalizations of the Palatini action
We change the action by adding a term



This modifies the Palatini action to



where



This action given above is the Holst action, introduced by Holst3 and 
 
 
 
  is the Barbero-Immirzi parameter whose role was recognized by Barbero4 and Immirizi.5 The self dual formulation corresponds to the choice 
 
 
 
 .
It is easy to show these actions give the same equations. However, the case corresponding to 
 
 
 
  must be done separately (see article self-dual Palatini action). Assume 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 
  has an inverse given by



(note this diverges for 
 
 
 
 ). As this inverse exists the generalization of the prefactor 
 
 
 
  will also be non-degenerate and as such equivalent conditions are obtained from variation with respect to the connection. We again obtain 
 
 
 
 . While variation with respect to the tetrad yields Einstein's equation plus an additional term. However, this extra term vanishes by symmetries of the Riemann tensor.
Details of calculation
Relating usual curvature to the mixed index curvature
The usual Riemann curvature tensor 
 
 
 
 
  is defined by



To find the relation to the mixed index curvature tensor let us substitute 
 
 





where we have used 
 
 
 
 . Since this is true for all 
 
 
 
  we obtain


 
 .
Using this expression we find



Contracting over 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  allows us write the Ricci scalar



Difference between curvatures
The derivative defined by 
 
 
 
  only knows how to act on internal indices. However, we find it convenient to consider a torsion-free extension to spacetime indices. All calculations will be independent of this choice of extension. Applying 
 
 
 
 
  twice on 
 
 
 
 ,




where 
 
 
 
  is unimportant, we need only note that it is symmetric in 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as it is torsion-free. Then






Hence



Varying the action with respect to the field 
 
 

We would expect 
 
 
 
  to also annihilate the Minkowski metric 
 
 
 
 . If we also assume that the covariant derivative 
 
 
 
 
  annihilates the Minkowski metric (then said to be torsion-free) we have,





Implying 
 
 
 
 .
From the last term of the action we have from varying with respect to 
 
 
 
 
 ,







or



or



where we have used 
 
 
 
 . This can be written more compactly as



Vanishing of 
 
 

We will show following the reference "Geometrodynamics vs. Connection Dynamics"6 that



implies 
 
 
 
 . First we define the spacetime tensor field by



Then the condition 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 
 . Contracting Eq. 1 with 
 
 
 
  one calculates that



As 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
 . We write it as



and as 
 
 
 
  are invertible this implies



Thus the terms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of Eq. 1 both vanish and Eq. 1 reduces to



If we now contract this with 
 
 
 
 , we get





or



Since we have 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we can successively interchange the first two and then last two indices with appropriate sign change each time to obtain,



Implying 
 
 
 
 , or



and since the 
 
 
 
  are invertible, we get 
 
 
 
 . This is the desired result.
References
"
Category:General relativity



A. Palatini (1919) Deduzione invariantiva delle equazioni gravitazionali dal principio di Hamilton, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 43, 203-212 [English translation by R.Hojman and C. Mukku in P.G. Bergmann and V. De Sabbata (eds.) Cosmology and Gravitation, Plenum Press, New York (1980)]↩
A. Ashtekar "Lectures on non-perturbative canonical gravity" (with invited contributions), Bibliopolis, Naples 19988.↩
Holst, S. (1996). Barbero's Hamilitonian derived from a generalized Hilbert-Palatini action. Phys. Rev. D, 53, 5966-5969.↩
Barbero G., J.F. (1995), Real Ashtekar variables for Lorentzian signature space-times. Phys. Rev. D, 51(10), 5507-5510.↩
Immirizi, G. (1997). Real and complex connections for canonical gravity. Class. Quantum Grav., 14, L177-L181.↩
Geometrodynamics vs. Connection Dynamics, Joseph D. Romano, Gen.Rel.Grav. 25 (1993) 759-854↩




