


Onsager–Machlup function




Onsager–Machlup function

The Onsager–Machlup function is a function that summarizes the dynamics of a continuous stochastic process. It is used to define a probability density for a stochastic process, and it is similar to the Lagrangian of a dynamical system. It is named after Lars Onsager and S. Machlup who were the first to consider such probability densities.1
The dynamics of a continuous stochastic process 
 
 
 
  from time 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  in one dimension, satisfying a stochastic differential equation



where 
 
 
 
  is a Wiener process, can in approximation be described by the probability density function of its value  at a finite number of points in time :



where



and  ti+1 − ti > 0}},  0}} and  T}}. A similar approximation is possible for processes in higher dimensions. The approximation is more accurate for smaller time step sizes , but in the limit  the probability density function becomes ill defined, one reason being that the product of terms



diverges to infinity. In order to nevertheless define a density for the continuous stochastic process 
 
 
 
 
 , ratios of probabilities of 
 
 
 
  lying within a small distance 
 
 
 
  from smooth curves  and  are considered:2



as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is the Onsager–Machlup function.
Definition
Consider a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Riemannian manifold

 
  and a diffusion process  on 
 
 
 
  with infinitesimal generator , where  is the Laplace–Beltrami operator and 
 
 
 
  is a vector field. For any two smooth curves ,



where 
 
 
 
  is the Riemannian distance, 
 
 
 
  denote the first derivatives of , and 
 
 
 
  is called the Onsager–Machlup function.
The Onsager–Machlup function is given by345



where  ⋅ {{!!}}x}} is the Riemannian norm in the tangent space  at 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the divergence of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the scalar curvature at 
 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
The following examples give explicit expressions for the Onsager–Machlup function of a continuous stochastic processes.
Wiener process on the real line
The Onsager–Machlup function of a Wiener process on the real line

 
  is given by6





[Proof]


Let  be a Wiener process on 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be a twice differentiable curve such that  X0}}. Define another process  by  Xt − φ(t)}} and a measure  by



For every 
 
 
 
 , the probability that Xt − φ(t){{!}} ≤ ε}} for every 
 
 
 
  satisfies



By Girsanov's theorem, the distribution of  under  equals the distribution of 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 , hence the latter can be substituted by the former:



By Itō's lemma it holds that



where 
 
 
 
  is the second derivative of 
 
 
 
 , and so this term is of order 
 
 
 
  on the event where Xt{{!}} ≤ ε}} for every 
 
 
 
  and will disappear in the limit 
 
 
 
 , hence





Diffusion processes with constant diffusion coefficient on Euclidean space
The Onsager–Machlup function in the one-dimensional case with constant diffusion coefficient

 
  is given by7



In the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional case, with 
 
 
 
  equal to the unit matrix, it is given by8



where 
 
 
 
  is the Euclidean norm and



Generalizations
Generalizations have been obtained by weakening the differentiability condition on the curve 
 
 
 
 .9 Rather than taking the maximum distance between the stochastic process and the curve over a time interval, other conditions have been considered such as distances based on completely convex norms10 and Hölder, Besov and Sobolev type norms.11
Applications
The Onsager–Machlup function can be used for purposes of reweighting and sampling trajectories,12 as well as for determining the most probable trajectory of a diffusion process.1314
See also

Lagrangian
Functional integration

References
Bibliography



















External links

Onsager–Machlup function. Encyclopedia of Mathematics. URL: http://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php?title=Onsager-Machlup_function&oldid;;=22857

"
Category:Functional analysis Category:Functions and mappings Category:Stochastic processes



Onsager, L. and Machlup, S. (1953)↩
Stratonovich, R. (1971)↩
Takahashi, Y. and Watanabe, S. (1980)↩
Fujita, T. and Kotani, S. (1982)↩
Wittich, Olaf↩
Ikeda, N. and Watanabe, S. (1980), Chapter VI, Section 9↩
Dürr, D. and Bach, A. (1978)↩
Ikeda, N. and Watanabe, S. (1980), Chapter VI, Section 9↩
Zeitouni, O. (1989)↩
Shepp, L. and Zeitouni, O. (1993)↩
Capitaine, M. (1995)↩
Adib, A.B. (2008).↩
Adib, A.B. (2008).↩
Dürr, D. and Bach, A. (1978).↩




