


Draft:Tau (proposed mathematical constant)




Draft:Tau (proposed mathematical constant)

Tau (proposed alternative notation for 2
 
 
 
 )
 
(Figure)
An arc of a circle with the same length as the radius of that circle corresponds to an angle of 1 radian. A full circle corresponds to a full turn, or approximately 6.28 radians, which are expressed here using the Greek letter tau (τ).

The number 

 (tau) is a mathematical constant equal to the ratio of a circle's circumference C, to its radius r. Tau equals exactly twice the mathematical constant pi, conventionally written 2
 
 
 
 . It use rather than that of 
 
 
 
 
  in conventional mathematical expressions and formulas has been proposed but has not been accepted by any significant portion of the mathematical community. And with few mathematicians aware of its existence and with most typically calling tau a fringe science subject, these mathematicians generally see the change as irrelevant or harmful due to the presence of 
 
 
 
  as an established notation. 1 Using 
 
 
 
  instead of 
 
 
 
  would be a very slight change in mathematics notation by effectively encapsulating a factor of 2. Adopting tau would be a major change in the habits of most scientists and engineers, who habitually use pi. Tau is approximated in decimal form as 6.28318530717958647692528676.... Proponents of tau, such as Bob Palais2 , Salman Khan3 , Michael Hartl4 and Vi Hart5 believe that tau is a more natural circle constant than pi, with Hartl calling pi a "confusing and unnatural choice."6 Others claim that the pedagogical benifits of tau are substantial, and outweigh the inconvenience of changing notation. 7
Notation
The modern conception of 
 
 
 
  as 2
 
 
 
 
  began with the article 

 
  is wrong! by Robert Palais. Palais initially used a three-legged pi symbol, 
 
 
 
 , in place of 2
 
 
 
 , and used the term "turns". Usage of 
 
 
 
  was introduced independently by Michael Hartl, Peter Harremoës, and Joseph Lindenberg.89 The choice for 
 
 
 
 
  was made for a number of reasons, including the fact that tau was an established glyph, the visual similarity to 
 
 
 
 , the tie-in with Palais' "turn", and the pun-potential of tau.10 Other symbols, including Θ (capital theta) 11, the registered copyright symbol ® 12, sampi (ϡ) and varpi (ϖ) have been suggested, but tau remains the dominant notation.
The argument for tau
  Proponents of tau claim that because the circle is defined as the locus of all points a fixed distance (the radius) from another point (the center) This implies that 
 
 
 
  = C/r might be a more natural constant than 
 
 
 
  = C/d, where d is the diameter.
The use of radians would also be simplified by the use of tau. An angle of 1/N of a circle would be expressed as 2
 
 
 
 /N radians or as 
 
 
 
 
 /N radians. For example, a quarter circle is 
 
 
 
 /2 radians or 
 
 
 
 /4 radians.
The table shows the conversion of some common angles.




Units

Values





Turns  







Radians in terms of 
 
 
  







Radians in terms of 
 
 
  







Degrees  

0°



Common trigonometric functions, such as sine and cosine have a period of 
 
 
 
 .
The difference of a pair of unequal coterminal angles is integer multiple of 
 
 
 
 .
Euler's identity, e

 
 
  + 1 = 0, appears at first to be a clear argument in favor of 
 
 
 
 . However, proponents of 
 
 
 
  note that this comes from Euler's formula, e

 
  = cos x + i sin x, with 
 
 
 
  substituted for x. Substituting 
 
 
 
 
  into the formula instead, the formula e

 
  = 1 is obtained.
Proponents of tau also note a number of important formulae in which the number 2
 
 
 
  appears. Selected examples given by Hartl in The Tau Manifesto and/or Palais in Pi is Wrong! include:




Name

Formula with 
 
 


Formula with 
 
 






Normal distribution











Fourier transform











nth roots of unity











Cauchy's integral formula











Angular frequency











Wavenumber











Hartl claims that these examples are not cherry-picked.13 Proponents of pi dispute this.14
The argument for 
 
 

 Proponents of 
 
 
 
  argue that 
 
 
 
  is already very well-established, and that there is no mathematical reason to make a switch. While the use of 
 
 
 
 
  may make certain formulae simpler, the formulae can always be correctly expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
  by simply substituting 
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
 /2. Proponents of 
 
 
 
  also often dislike the choice of 
 
 
 
 
  as a symbol, citing other common usages, such as shear stress, torque, and proper time.
Proponents of 
 
 
 
  also claim that 
 
 
 
  is a more convenient constant in certain applications. For example, they claim that the area of a unit circle is more conveniently expressed using pi. In addition, the diameter of a circle is generally much easier to physically measure than the radius, making the ratio 
 
 
 
  = C/d a more convenient constant than 
 
 
 
  = C/r in many contexts. Proponents of pi also state that cases can be made for alternate circle constants, including 
 
 
 
 
 /2, 
 
 
 
 /4, and 2
 
 
 
 i. They believe that this means that the choice is somewhat arbitrary, and therefore 
 
 
 
 , the established constant, should be used.
(Figure)
The common trigonometric function tangent has a period of 
 
 
 
 .

The period of the tangent function is also equal to pi.
Proponents of pi also point to several common formulae more naturally expressed with pi. Selected examples are shown below.




Name

Formula with 
 
 


Formula with 
 
 






Error function











Sum of interior angles of an n-gon











Area of an ellipse











Gaussian integral











Area of a circle











Basel problem











Response
Many mathematicians consider the difference between tau and pi to be irrelevant.15 Because the constant for a circle has been historically named pi, and the choice whether to use one or the other ratio (related by a factor of two) as the preferred named constant is arbitrary, causing no substantive change to mathematics, there has been relatively little impact in the mathematical community due to tau. Tau has gained a small but significant amount of attention in the mainstream media, with articles by The Sunday Times 16 , Fox News 17 , and TheStar.com18 among others, and has been used in at least one serious paper not on the subject of tau.19
In popular culture
Tauists have declared June 28 (6.28) to be "tau day". This is in direct response to Pi Day, a popular celebration of pi on March 14 (3.14). A number of news outlets reported on "Tau Day", a holiday proposed in The Tau Manifesto' for June 28 to honor the number 2
 
 
 
 .20 21 22 The Royal Institution of Australia's Tau Day celebration in 2011 featured the performance of a musical work based on tau.23
According to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Dean of Admissions Stuart Schmill, "over [the] past year or so, there has been a bit of a debate in the math universe over which is a better number to use, whether it is Pi or Tau". The school chose to inform 2012 applicants whether or not they were accepted on Pi Day at what MIT called Tau Time, 6:28 pm.24
References
See also

Pi
Turn (geometry)"
 
































