


Self-dual Palatini action




Self-dual Palatini action

Ashtekar variables, which were a new canonical formalism of general relativity, raised new hopes for the canonical quantization of general relativity and eventually led to loop quantum gravity. Smolin and others independently discovered that there exists in fact a Lagrangian formulation of the theory by considering the self-dual formulation of the Tetradic Palatini action principle of general relativity.123 These proofs were given in terms of spinors. A purely tensorial proof of the new variables in terms of triads was given by Goldberg4 and in terms of tetrads by Henneaux et al.5 Here we in particular fill in details of the proof of results for self-dual variables not given in text books.
The Palatini action
The Palatini action for general relativity has as its independent variables the tetrad 
 
 
 
  and a spin connection

 
 . Much more details and derivations can be found in the article tetradic Palatini action. The spin connection defines a covariant derivative

 
 . The space-time metric is recovered from the tetrad by the formula 
 
 
 
  We define the `curvature' by



The Ricci scalar of this curvature is given by 
 
 
 
 . The Palatini action for general relativity reads



where 
 
 
 
 . Variation with respect to the spin connection 
 
 
 
  implies that the spin connection is determined by the compatibility condition 
 
 
 
  and hence becomes the usual covariant derivative 
 
 
 
 . Hence the connection becomes a function of the tetrads and the curvature 
 
 
 
  is replaced by the curvature 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is the actual Ricci scalar 
 
 
 
 . Variation with respect to the tetrad gives Einsteins equation 
 
 
 
 .
Self-dual variables
(Anti-)self-dual parts of a tensor
We will need what is called the totally antisymmetry tensor or Levi-Civita symbol, 
 
 
 
 . This is equal to either +1 or -1 depending on whether 
 
 
 
  is either an even or odd permutation of 
 
 
 
 , respectively, and zero if any two indices take the same value. The internal indices of 
 
 
 
  are raised with the Minkowski metric 
 
 
 
 .
Now, given any anti-symmetric tensor 
 
 
 
 , we define its dual as



The self-dual part of any tensor 
 
 
 
  is defined as



with the anti-self-dual part defined as



(the appearance of the imaginary unit 
 
 
 
  is related to the Minkowski signature as we will see below).
Tensor decomposition
Now given any anti-symmetric tensor 
 
 
 
 , we can decompose it as



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the self-dual and anti-self-dual parts of 
 
 
 
  respectively. Define the projector onto (anti-)self-dual part of any tensor as



The meaning of these projectors can be made explicit. Let us concentrate of 
 
 
 
 ,



Then



The Lie bracket
An important object is the Lie bracket defined by



it appears in the curvature tensor (see the last two terms of 
 
 
 
 ), it also defines the algebraic structure. We have the results (proved below):



and



That is the Lie bracket, which defines an algebra, decomposes into two separate independent parts. We write



where 
 
 
 
  contains only the self-dual (anti-self-dual) elements of 
 
 
 
 .
The Self-dual Palatini action
We define the self-dual part, 
 
 
 
 , of the connection 
 
 
 
  as



which can be more compactly written



Define 
 
 
 
  as the curvature of the self-dual connection



Using 
 
 
 
  it is easy to see that the curvature of the self-dual connection is the self-dual part of the curvature of the connection,





The self-dual action is



As the connection is complex we are dealing with complex general relativity and appropriate conditions must be specified to recover the real theory. One can repeat the same calculations done for the Palatini action but now with respect to the self-dual connection 
 
 
 
 . Varying the tetrad field, one obtains a self-dual analog of Einstein's equation:



That the curvature of the self-dual connection is the self-dual part of the curvature of the connection helps to simplify the 3+1 formalism (details of the decomposition into the 3+1 formalism are to be given below). The resulting Hamiltonian formalism resembles that of a Yang-Mills gauge theory (this does not happen with the 3+1 Palatini formalism which basically collapses down to the usual ADM formalism).
Derivation of main results for self-dual variables
The results of calculations done here can be found in chapter 3 of notes Ashtekar Variables in Classical Relativity.6 The method of proof follows that given in section II of The Ashtekar Hamiltonian for General Relativity.7 We need to establish some results for (anti-)self-dual Lorentzian tensors.
Identities for the totally anti-symmetric tensor
Since 
 
 
 
  has signature 
 
 
 
 , it follows that



to see this consider,




With this definition one can obtain the following identities,




(the square brackets denote anti-symmetrizing over the indices).
Definition of self-dual tensor
It follows from 
 
 
 
  that the square of the duality operator is minus the identity,



The minus sign here is due to the minus sign in 
 
 
 
 , which is in turn due to the Minkowski signature. Had we used Euclidean signature, i.e. 
 
 
 
 , instead there would have been a positive sign. We define 
 
 
 
  to be self-dual if and only if



(with Euclidean signature the self-duality condition would have been 
 
 
 
 ). Say 
 
 
 
  is self-dual, write it as a real and imaginary part,



Write the self-dual condition in terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,



Equating real parts we read off



and so



where 
 
 
 
  is the real part of 
 
 
 
 .
Important lengthy calculation
The following lengthy calculation is important as all the other important formula can easily be derived from it. From the definition of the Lie bracket and with the use of 
 
 
 
  we have












That gives the formula



which is the starting point for everything else.
Derivation of important results
First consider



where in the first step we have used the anti-symmetry of the Lie bracket to swap 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , in the second step we used 
 
 
 
  and in the last step we used the anti-symmetry of the Lie bracket again. Now using this we obtain



where we used 
 
 
 
  in the third step. So we have then 
 
 
 
 
 . Similarly we have 
 
 

Now if we took 
 
 
 
  and simply replaced 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  we would get 
 
 
 
 
 . Combining 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) and 
 
 
 
  we obtain



Summarising, we have





Then





where we used 
 
 
 
  going from the first line to the second line. Similarly we have 
 
 
 
 . Now consider 
 
 
 
 ,






where we have used 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in going from the second line to the third line. Similarly



Starting with 
 
 
 
  we have



where we have used that any 
 
 
 
  can be written as a sum of its self-dual and anti-sef-dual parts, i.e. 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
 .
Summary of main results
Altogether we have,



which is our main result, already stated above as 
 
 
 
 . We also have that any bracket splits as




into a part that depends only on self-dual Lorentzian tensors and is itself the self-dual part of 
 
 
 
 
 , and a part that depends only on anti-self-dual Lorentzian tensors and is the anit-self-dual part of 
 
 
 
 .
Derivation of Ashtekar's Formalism from the Self-dual Action
The proof given here follows that given in lectures by Jorge Pullin8
The Palatini action



where the Ricci tensor, 
 
 
 
 , is thought of as constructed purely from the connection 
 
 
 
 , not using the frame field. Variation with espect to the tetrad gives Einstein's equations written in terms of the tetrads, but for a Ricci tensor constructed from the connection that has no a priori relationship with the tetrad. Variation with respect to the connection tells us the connection satisfies the usual compatibility condition



This determines the connection in terms of the teterad and we recover the usual Ricci tensor.
The self-dual action for general relativity is given above.



where 
 
 
 
  is the curvature of the 
 
 
 
 , the self-dual part of 
 
 
 
 ,



It has been shown that 
 
 
 
  is the self-dual part of 
 
 
 
 .
Define vector fields



(where 
 
 
 
  is the projector onto the three surface), which are orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 .
Writing 
 
 
 
  then we can write








where we used 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
So the action can be written



We have 
 
 
 
 . We now define



An internal tensor 
 
 
 
  is self-dual if and only if



and given the curvature 
 
 
 
  is self-dual we have



Substituting this into the action (EQ 
 
 
 
 12) we have,



where we denoted 
 
 
 
 . We pick the gauge 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (this means 
 
 
 
 ). Writing 
 
 
 
 , which in this gauge 
 
 
 
 . Therefore,




The indices 
 
 
 
  range over 
 
 
 
  and we denote them with lower case letters in a moment. By the self-duality of 
 
 
 
 ,



where we used 
 
 
 
 . This implies






We replace in the second term in the action 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . We need



and



to obtain



The action becomes




where we swapped the dummy variables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the second term of the first line. Integrating by parts on the second term,





where we have thrown away the boundary term and where we used the formula for the covariant derivative on a vector density 
 
 
 
 :



The final form of the action we require is



There is a term of the form ``
 
 
 
 '' thus the quantity 
 
 
 
  is the conjugate momentum to 
 
 
 
 . Hence, we can immediately write



Variation of action with respect to the non-dynamical quantities 
 
 
 
 , that is the time component of the four-connection, the shift fucntion 
 
 
 
 , and lapse function 
 
 
 
  give the constraints





Varying with respect to 
 
 
 
  actually gives the last constraint in Eq 
 
 
 
  divided by 
 
 
 
 , it has been rescaled to make the constraint polynomial in the fundamental variables. The connection 
 
 
 
  can be written




and




where we used 
 
 
 
 , therefore 
 
 
 
 . So the connection reads



This is the so-called chiral spin connection.
Reality conditions
Because Ashtekar's variables are complex it results in complex general relativity. To recover the real theory one has to impose what are known as the reality conditions. These require that the densitized triad be real and that the real part of the Ashtekar connection equals the compatible spin connection.
More to be said on this, later.
See also

Ashtekar variables
Einstein–Hilbert action
General relativity
Lie algebra
Loop quantum gravity
Spin connection

References
"
Category:General relativity



J. Samuel. A Lagrangian basis for Ashtekar's formulation of canonical gravity. Pramana J. Phys. 28 (1987) L429-32
T. Jacobson and L. Smolin. The left-handed spin connection as a variable for canonical gravity. Phys. Lett. B196 (1987) 39-42.
T. Jacobson and L. Smolin. Covariant action for Ashtekar's form of canonical gravity. Class. Quant. Grav. 5 (1987) 583.
Triad approach to the Hamiltonian of general relativity. Phys. Rev. D37 (1987) 2116-20.
M. Henneaux, J.E. Nelson and C. Schomblond. Derivation of Ashtekar variables from tetrad gravity. Phys. Rev. D39 (1989) 434-7.
Ashtekar Variables in Classical General Relativity, Domenico Giulini, Springer Lecture Notes in Physics 434 (1994), 81-112, arXiv:gr-qc/9312032
The Ashtekar Hamiltonian for General Relativity by Ceddric Beny
Knot theory and quantum gravity in loop space: a primer by Jorge Pullin; AIP Conf.Proc.317:141-190,1994, arXiv:hep-th/9301028




