


Nonlinear realization




Nonlinear realization

In mathematics, nonlinear realization of a Lie group

 
  possessing a Cartan subgroup

 
  is a particular induced representation of 
 
 
 
 . In fact it is a representation of a Lie algebra

 
  of 
 
 
 
  in a neighborhood of its origin.
A nonlinear realization technique is part and parcel of many field theories with spontaneous symmetry breaking, e.g., nonlinear sigma model, chiral symmetry breaking, Goldstone boson theory, classical Higgs field theory, gauge gravitation theory and supergravity.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie group and 
 
 
 
  its Cartan subgroup which admits a linear representation in a vector space 
 
 
 
 . A Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is split into the sum 
 
 
 
  of the Cartan subalgebra

 
  of 
 
 
 
  and its supplement 
 
 
 
  so that



There exists an open neighbourhood 
 
 
 
  of the unit of 
 
 
 
  such that any element 
 
 
 
  is uniquely brought into the form



Let 
 
 
 
  be an open neighborhood of the unit of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be an open neighborhood of the 
 
 
 
 -invariant center 
 
 
 
  of the quotient 
 
 
 
  which consists of elements



Then there is a local section 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . With this local section, one can define the induced representation, called the nonlinear realization, of elements 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  given by the expressions



The corresponding nonlinear realization of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  takes the following form. Let 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  be the bases for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, together with the commutation relations



Then a desired nonlinear realization of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  reads


 
 ,



up to the second order in 
 
 
 
 . In physical models, the coefficients 
 
 
 
  are treated as Goldstone fields. Similarly, nonlinear realization of Lie superalgebras is considered.
See also

Induced representation

References

Coleman S., Wess J., Zumino B., Structure of phenomenological Lagrangians, I, II, Phys. Rev. 177 (1969) 2239.
Joseph A., Solomon A., Global and infinitesimal nonlinear chiral transformations, J. Math. Phys. 11 (1970) 748.
Giachetta G., Mangiarotti L., Sardanashvily G., Advanced Classical Field Theory, World Scientific, 2009, ISBN 978-981-283-895-7.

External links

Sardanashvily G., Reduction of principal superbundles, Higgs superfields, and supermetric. Appendix: Nonlinear realization, arXiv: hep-th/0609070.

"
Category:Representation theory Category:Theoretical physics


