


Hall plane




Hall plane

In mathematics, a Hall plane is a non-Desarguesian projective plane constructed by Marshall Hall Jr. (1943).1 There are examples of order p2n for every prime p and every positive integer n provided p2n > 4.2
Algebraic construction via Hall systems
The original construction of Hall planes was based on a Hall quasifield (also called a Hall system), H of order p2n for p a prime. The construction of the plane is the standard construction based on a quasifield (see Quasifield#Projective planes for the details.).
To build a Hall quasifield, start with a Galois field, 
 
 
 
  for p a prime and a quadratic irreducible polynomial 
 
 
 
  over F. Extend H = F × F, a two-dimensional vector space over F, to a quasifield by defining a multiplication on the vectors by 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  otherwise.
Writing the elements of H in terms of a basis , that is, identifying (x,y) with x  +  λy as x and y vary over F, we can identify the elements of F as the ordered pairs (x, 0), i.e. x +  λ0. The properties of the defined multiplication which turn the right vector space H into a quasifield are:

every element α of H not in F satisfies the quadratic equation f(α) =  0;
F is in the kernel of H (meaning that (α  +  β)c  =  αc  +  βc, and (αβ)c  =  α(βc) for all α, β in H and all c in F); and
every element of F commutes (multiplicatively) with all the elements of H.3

Derivation
Another construction that produces Hall planes is obtained by applying derivation to Desarguesian planes.
A process, due to T. G. Ostrom, which replaces certain sets of lines in a projective plane by alternate sets in such a way that the new structure is still a projective plane is called derivation. We give the details of this process.4 Start with a projective plane π of order n2 and designate one line 
 
 
 
  as its line at infinity. Let A be the affine plane

 
 . A set D of n + 1 points of 
 
 
 
  is called a derivation set if for every pair of distinct points X and Y of A which determine a line meeting 
 
 
 
  in a point of D, there is a Baer subplane containing X, Y and D (we say that such Baer subplanes belong to D.) Define a new affine plane D(A) as follows: The points of D(A) are the points of A. The lines of D(A) are the lines of π which do not meet 
 
 
 
  at a point of D (restricted to A) and the Baer subplanes that belong to D (restricted to A). D(A) is an affine plane of order n2 and it, or its projective completion, is called a derived plane.5
Properties

Hall planes are translation planes.
All finite Hall planes of the same order are isomorphic.
Hall planes are not self-dual.
All finite Hall planes contain subplanes of order 2 (Fano subplanes).
All finite Hall planes contain subplanes of order different from 2.
Hall planes are André planes.

The smallest Hall plane (order 9)
The Hall plane of order 9 was actually found earlier by Veblen and Wedderburn in 1907. 6 There are four quasifields of order nine which can be used to construct the Hall plane of order nine. Three of these are Hall systems generated by the irreducible polynomials 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . 7 The first of these produces an associative quasifield,8 that is, a near-field, and it was in this context that the plane was discovered by Veblen and Wedderburn. This plane is often referred to as the nearfield plane of order nine.
Notes
References








"
Category:Projective geometry Category:Finite geometry



↩
Although the constructions will provide a projective plane of order 4, the unique such plane is Desarguesian and is generally not considered to be a Hall plane.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




