


Rayleigh–Plesset equation




Rayleigh–Plesset equation

(Figure)
The Rayleigh–Plesset equation is often applied to the study of cavitation bubbles, shown here forming behind a propeller.

In fluid mechanics, the Rayleigh–Plesset equation is an ordinary differential equation which governs the dynamics of a spherical bubble in an infinite body of liquid.1234 Its general form is usually written as



where


 
  is the pressure within the bubble, assumed to be uniform


 
  is the external pressure infinitely far from the bubble


 
  is the density of the surrounding liquid, assumed to be constant


 
  is the radius of the bubble


 
  is the kinematic viscosity of the surrounding liquid, assumed to be constant


 
  is the surface tension of the bubble
Provided that 
 
 
 
  is known and 
 
 
 
  is given, the Rayleigh–Plesset equation can be used to solve for the time-varying bubble radius 
 
 
 
 .
The Rayleigh–Plesset equation is derived from the Navier–Stokes equations under the assumption of spherical symmetry.5 Neglecting surface tension and viscosity, the equation was first derived by John Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh in 1917. The equation was first applied to traveling cavitation bubbles by Milton S. Plesset in 1949.6
Derivation
The Rayleigh–Plesset equation can be derived entirely from first principles using the bubble radius as the dynamic parameter.7 Consider a spherical bubble with time-dependent radius 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is time. Assume that the bubble contains a homogeneously distributed vapor/gas with a uniform temperate 
 
 
 
  and pressure 
 
 
 
 . Outside the bubble is an infinite domain of liquid with constant density 
 
 
 
  and dynamic viscosity

 
 . Let the temperature and pressure far from the bubble be 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The temperature 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be constant. At a radial distance 
 
 
 
  from the center of the bubble, the varying liquid properties are pressure 
 
 
 
 , temperature 
 
 
 
 , and radially outward velocity 
 
 
 
 . Note that these liquid properties are only defined outside the bubble, for 
 
 
 
 .
Mass conservation
By conservation of mass, the inverse-square law requires that the radially outward velocity 
 
 
 
  must be inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the origin (the center of the bubble).8 Therefore, letting 
 
 
 
  be some function of time,



In the case of zero mass transport across the bubble surface, the velocity at the interface must be



which gives that



In the case where mass transport occurs, the rate of mass increase inside the bubble is given by



with 
 
 
 
  being the volume of the bubble. If 
 
 
 
  is the velocity of the liquid relative to the bubble at 
 
 
 
 , then the mass entering the bubble is given by



with 
 
 
 
  being the surface area of the bubble. Now by conservation of mass 
 
 
 
 , therefore 
 
 
 
 . Hence



Therefore



In many cases, the liquid density is much greater than the vapor density, 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  can be approximated by the original zero mass transfer form 
 
 
 
 , so that9



Momentum conservation
Assuming that the liquid is a Newtonian fluid, the incompressible Navier–Stokes equation in spherical coordinates for motion in the radial direction gives



Substituting kinematic viscosity

 
  and rearranging gives



whereby substituting 
 
 
 
  from mass conservation yields



Note that the viscous terms cancel during substitution.10 Separating variables and integrating from the bubble boundary 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  gives






Boundary conditions
Let 
 
 
 
  be the normal stress in the liquid that points radially outward from the center of the bubble. In spherical coordinates, for a fluid with constant density and constant viscosity,



Therefore at some small portion of the bubble surface, the net force per unit area acting on the lamina is



where 
 
 
 
  is the surface tension.11 If there is no mass transfer across the boundary, then this force per unit area must be zero, therefore



and so the result from momentum conservation becomes



whereby rearranging and letting 
 
 
 
  gives the Rayleigh–Plesset equation12



Using dot notation to represent derivatives with respect to time, the Rayleigh–Plesset equation can be more succinctly written as








Solutions
(Figure)
Numerical integration of RP eq. including surface tension and viscosity terms. Initially at rest in atmospheric pressure with R0=50 um, the bubble subjected to oscillatory pressure at its natural frequency undergoes expansion and then collapses.

(Figure)
Numerical integration of RP eq. including surface tension and viscosity terms. Initially at rest in atmospheric pressure with R0=50 um, the bubble subjected to pressure-drop undergoes expansion and then collapses.

No analytical closed-form solution is known for the Rayleigh–Plesset equation. However, numerical solutions to any accuracy can be easily obtained. In the special case, where surface tension and viscosity are neglected, high-order analytical approximations are known.13
In the static case, the Rayleigh–Plesset equation simplifies, yielding to the Young-Laplace equation:



When only infinitesimal periodic variations in the bubble radius and pressure are considered, the RP equation also yields to the expression of the natural frequency of the bubble oscillation.
References
"
Category:Equations of fluid dynamics Category:Ordinary differential equations



Rayleigh, Lord. (1917). On the pressure developed in a liquid during the collapse of a spherical cavity. Phil. Mag., 34, 94--98.↩
Plesset, M.S. (1949). The dynamics of cavitation bubbles. ASME J. Appl. Mech., 16, 228--231.↩
↩
↩

↩






↩




