


Gauge group (mathematics)




Gauge group (mathematics)

A gauge group is a group of gauge symmetries of the Yang – Mills gauge theory of principal connections on a principal bundle. Given a principal bundle 
 
 
 
  with a structure Lie group 
 
 
 
 , a gauge group is defined to be a group of its vertical automorphisms. This group is isomorphic to the group 
 
 
 
  of global sections of the associated group bundle 
 
 
 
 
  whose typical fiber is a group 
 
 
 
  which acts on itself by the adjoint representation. The unit element of 
 
 
 
  is a constant unit-valued section 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
At the same time, gauge gravitation theory exemplifies field theory on a principal frame bundle whose gauge symmetries are general covariant transformations which are not elements of a gauge group.
It should be emphasized that, in the physical literature on gauge theory, a structure group of a principal bundle often is called the gauge group.
In quantum gauge theory, one considers a normal subgroup 
 
 
 
 
  of a gauge group 
 
 
 
  which is the stabilizer



of some point 
 
 
 
  of a group bundle 
 
 
 
 . It is called the pointed gauge group. This group acts freely on a space of principal connections. Obviously, 
 
 
 
 
 . One also introduces the effective gauge group

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the center of a gauge group 
 
 
 
 . This group 
 
 
 
  acts freely on a space of irreducible principal connections.
If a structure group 
 
 
 
 
  is a complex semisimple matrix group, the Sobolev completion

 
  of a gauge group 
 
 
 
  can be introduced. It is a Lie group. A key point is that the action of 
 
 
 
  on a Sobolev completion 
 
 
 
  of a space of principal connections is smooth, and that an orbit space 
 
 
 
 
  is a Hilbert space. It is a configuration space of quantum gauge theory.
References

Mitter, P., Viallet, C., On the bundle of connections and the gauge orbit manifold in Yang – Mills theory, Commun. Math. Phys. 79 (1981) 457.
Marathe, K., Martucci, G., The Mathematical Foundarions of Gauge Theory (North Holland, 1992) ISBN 0-444-89708-9.
Mangiarotti, L., Sardanashvily, G., Connections in Classical and Quantum Field Theory (World Scientific, 2000) ISBN 981-02-2013-8

See also

Gauge theory
Principal bundle
Gauge symmetry (mathematics)

"
Category:Gauge theories Category:Theoretical physics


