


Grain 128a




Grain 128a

The Grain 128a stream cipher was first purposed at Symmetric Key Encryption Workshop (SKEW) in 20111 as an improvement of the predecessor Grain 128, which added security enhancements and optional message authentication using the Encrypt & MAC approach. One of the important features of the Grain family is that the throughput can be increased at the expense of additional hardware. Grain 128a is designed by Martin Ågren,2 Martin Hell, Thomas Johansson and Willi Meier.
Description of the cipher
 Grain 128a consists of two large parts: Pre-output function and MAC. The pre-output function has an internal state size of 256 bits, consisting of two registers of size 128 bit: NLFSR and LFSR. The MAC supports variable tag lengths w such that 
 
 
 
  such that if 
 
 
 
  then authentication of the message is enabled, and if 
 
 
 
  authentication of the message is disabled.
Pre-output function
The pre-output function consists of two registers of size 128 bit: NLFSR (
 
 
 
 
 ) and LFSR (
 
 
 
 ) along with 2 feedback polynomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and a boolean function 
 
 
 
 .





In addition to the feedback polynomials, the update functions for the NLFSR and the LFSR are:




The pre-output stream (
 
 
 
 
 ) is defined as:



Initialisation
 Upon initialisation we define an 
 
 
 
  of 96 bit, where the 
 
 
 
  dictates the mode of operation.
The LFSR is initialised as:


 
  for 
 
 

 
  for 
 
 


The last 0 bit ensures that similar key-IV pairs do not produce shifted versions of each other.
The NLFSR is initialised by copying the entire 128 bit key (
 
 
 
 ) into the NLFSR:


 
 
  for 
 
 

Start up clocking
Before the pre-output function can begin to output its pre-output stream it has to be clocked 256 times to warm up, during this stage the pre-output stream is fed into the feedback polynomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Key stream
The key stream (
 
 
 
 ) and MAC functionality in Grain 128a both share the same pre-output stream (
 
 
 
 
 ). As authentication is optional our key stream definition depends upon the 
 
 
 
 .
When authentication is enabled, the MAC functionality uses the first 
 
 
 
  bits (where 
 
 
 
  is the tag size) after the start up clocking to initialise. The key stream is then assigned every other bit due to the shared pre-output stream.
If authentication is enabled:



If authentication is disabled:



MAC
 Grain 128a supports tags of size 
 
 
 
  up to 32 bit, to do this 2 registers of size 
 
 
 
  is used, a shift register(
 
 
 
 ) and an accumulator(
 
 
 
 ). To create a tag of a message 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the length of 
 
 
 
  as we have to set 
 
 
 
  to ensure that i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  has different tags, and also making it impossible to generate a tag that completely ignores the input from the shift register after initialisation.
For each bit 
 
 
 
  in the accumulator we at time 
 
 
 
  we denounce a bit in the accumulator as 
 
 
 
 .
Initialisation
When authentication is enabled Grain 128a uses the first 
 
 
 
  bits of the pre-output stream(
 
 
 
 
 ) to initialise the shift register and the accumulator. This is done by:
Shift register:


 
  for 
 
 

Accumulator:


 
  for 
 
 

Tag generation
Shift register:
The shift register is fed all the odd bits of the pre-output stream(
 
 
 
 
 ):



Accumulator:


 
  for 
 
 

Final tag
When the cipher has completed the L iterations the final tag(
 
 
 
 ) is the content of the accumulator:


 
 
  for $0 \leq i \leq 31$
References
External links

A New Version of Grain-128 with Authentication

"
 









