


Relaxed intersection




Relaxed intersection

The relaxed intersection of m sets corresponds to the classical intersection between sets except that it is allowed to relax few sets in order to avoid an empty intersection. This notion can be used to solve Constraints Satisfaction Problems that are inconsistent by relaxing a small number of constraints. When a bounded-error approach is considered for parameter estimation, the relaxed intersection makes it possible to be robust with respect to some outliers.
Definition
The q-relaxed intersection of the m subsets 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
  is the set of all 
 
 
 
  which belong to all 
 
 
 
  's, except 
 
 
 
  at most. This definition is illustrated by Figure 1.
(Figure)
 Figure 1. q-intersection of 6 sets for q=2 (red), q=3 (green), q= 4 (blue), q= 5 (yellow).

Define 
 
 

We have 
 
 

Characterizing the q-relaxed intersection is a thus a set inversion problem. 1
Example
Consider 8 intervals: 
 
 






We have









Relaxed intersection of intervals
The relaxed intersection of intervals is not necessary an interval. We thus take the interval hull of the result. If 
 
 
 
 's are intervals, the relaxed intersection can be computed with a complexity of m.log(m) by using the Marzullo's algorithm. It suffices to sort all lower and upper bounds of the m intervals to represent the function 
 
 
 
 . Then, we easily get the set



which corresponds to a union of intervals. We then return the smallest interval which contains this union.
Figure 2 shows the function 
 
 
 
  associated to the previous example.
(Figure)
Figure 2. Set-membership function associated to the 6 intervals.

Relaxed intersection of boxes
To compute the q-relaxed intersection of m boxes of 
 
 
 
 , we project all m boxes with respect to the n axes. For each of the n groups of m intervals, we compute the q-relaxed intersection. We return Cartesian product of the n resulting intervals. 2 Figure 3 provides an illustration of the 4-relaxed intersection of 6 boxes. Each point of the red box belongs to 4 of the 6 boxes.
(Figure)
Figure 3. The red box corresponds to the 4-relaxed intersection of the 6 boxes

Relaxed union
The q-relaxed union of 
 
 
 
  is defined by



Note that when q=0, the relaxed union/intersection corresponds to the classical union/intersection. More precisely, we have



and



De Morgan's law
If 
 
 
 
  denotes the complementary set of 
 
 
 
 , we have




As a consequence



Relaxation of contractors
Let 
 
 
 
  be m contractors for the sets 
 
 
 
 , then



is a contractor for 
 
 
 
  and



is a contractor for 
 
 
 
 , where



are contractors for



Combined with a branch-and-bound algorithm such as SIVIA (Set Inversion Via Interval Analysis), the q-relaxed intersection of m subsets of 
 
 
 
  can be computed.
Application to bounded-error estimation
The q-relaxed intersection can be used for robust localization ,3 for robust localization 4 or for tracking 5
Robust observers can also be implemented using the relaxed intersections to be robust with respect to outliers. 6
We propose here a simple example 7 to illustrate the method. Consider a model the ith model output of which is given by



where 
 
 
 
 . Assume that we have



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are given by the following list



The sets 
 
 
 
  for different 
 
 
 
  are depicted on Figure 4.
(Figure)
Figure 4. Set of all parameter vectors consistent with exactly 6-q data bars (painted red), for q=1,2,3,4,5.

References
"
Category:Satisfiability problems  



↩
↩
↩
↩
.↩
↩
↩




