


Complexification (Lie group)




Complexification (Lie group)

In mathematics, the complexification or universal complexification of a real Lie group is given by a continuous homomorphism of the group into a complex Lie group with the universal property that every continuous homomorphism of the original group into another complex Lie group extends compatibly to a complex analytic homomorphism between the complex Lie groups. The complexification, which always exists, is unique up to isomorphism. Its Lie algebra is a quotient of the complexification of the Lie algebra of the original group. They are isomorphic if the original group has a quotient by a discrete normal subgroup which is linear.
For compact Lie groups, the complexification, sometimes called the Chevalley complexification after Claude Chevalley, can be defined as the group of complex characters of the Hopf algebra of representative functions, i.e. the matrix coefficients of finite-dimensional representations of the group. In any finite-dimensional faithful unitary representation of the compact group it can be realized concretely as a closed subgroup of the complex general linear group. It consists of operators with polar decomposition

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a unitary operator in the compact group and 
 
 
 
  is a skew-adjoint operator in its Lie algebra. In this case the complexification is a complex algebraic group and its Lie algebra is the complexification of the Lie algebra of the compact Lie group.
Universal complexification
Definition
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a Lie group, a universal complexification is given by a complex Lie group  and a continuous homomorphism  with the universal property that, if 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary continuous homomorphism into a complex Lie group 
 
 
 
 , then there is a unique complex analytic homomorphism  such that 
 
 
 
 .
Uniqueness
The universal property implies that the universal complexification, if it exists, is unique up to complex analytic isomorphism.
Existence
If 
 
 
 
  is connected with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 
 , then its universal covering group

 
  is simply connected. Let  be the simply connected complex Lie group with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . Let  be the natural homomorphism and 
 
 
 
  the natural covering map. Then given a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique complex analytic homomorphism  such that 
 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the intersection of the kernels of the homomorphisms 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  varies over all possibilities. Then 
 
 
 
  is a closed normal complex Lie subgroup of  and the quotient group is a universal complexification. In particular if 
 
 
 
 
  is simply connected, its universal complexification is just .See:





For non-connected Lie groups 
 
 
 
  with identity component  and component group  G / Go}}, the extension



induces an extension



and the complex Lie group  is a complexification of 
 
 
 
 .1
Injectivity
If the original group is linear, so too is the universal complexification and the homomorphism between the two is an inclusion.2  give an example of a connected real Lie group for which the homomorphism is not injective even at the Lie algebra level: they take the product of 
 
 
 
 
  by the universal covering group of 
 
 
 
  and quotient out by the discrete cyclic subgroup generated by an irrational rotation in the first factor and a generator of the center in the second.
Chevalley complexification
Hopf algebra of matrix coefficients
If 
 
 
 
 is a compact Lie group, the *-algebra 
 
 
 
  of matrix coefficients of finite-dimensional unitary representations is a uniformly dense *-subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 , the *-algebra of complex-valued continuous functions on 
 
 
 
 
 . It is naturally a Hopf algebra with comultiplication given by



The characters of 
 
 
 
  are the *-homomorphisms of 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 . They can be identified with the point evaluations 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and the comultiplication allows the group structure on 
 
 
 
  to be recovered. The homomorphisms of 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 
  also form a group. It is a complex Lie group and can be identified with the complexification  of 
 
 
 
 . The *-algebra 
 
 
 
  is generated by the matrix coefficients of any faithful representation 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . It follows that 
 
 
 
 
  defines a faithful complex analytic representation of .See:






Invariant theory
The original approach of  to the complexification of a compact Lie group can be concisely stated within the language of classical invariant theory, described in . Let 
 
 
 
  be a closed subgroup of the unitary group

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a finite-dimensional complex inner product space. Its Lie algebra consists of all skew-adjoint operators 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  lies in 
 
 
 
  for all real 
 
 
 
 . Set 
 
 
 
  with the trivial action of 
 
 
 
  on the second summand. The group 
 
 
 
 
  acts on , with an element 
 
 
 
  acting as . The commutant (or centralizer algebra) is denoted by  EndG W⊗N}}. It is generated as a *-algebra by its unitary operators and its commutant is the *-algebra spanned by the operators . The complexification  of 
 
 
 
  consists of all operators 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that  commutes with  and 
 
 
 
 
  acts trivially on the second summand in 
 
 
 
 . By definition it is a closed subgroup of 
 
 
 
 . The defining relations (as a commutant) show that 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic subgroup. Its intersection with 
 
 
 
  coincides with 
 
 
 
 
 , since it is a priori a larger compact group for which the irreducible representations stay irreducible and inequivalent when restricted to 
 
 
 
 . Since  is generated by unitaries, an invertible operator 
 
 
 
  lies in  if the unitary operator 
 
 
 
  and positive operator 
 
 
 
  in its polar decomposition

 
 
  both lie in . Thus 
 
 
 
  lies in 
 
 
 
  and the operator 
 
 
 
  can be written uniquely as 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
  a self-adjoint operator. By the functional calculus for polynomial functions it follows that  lies in the commutant of  if 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . In particular taking 
 
 
 
  purely imaginary, 
 
 
 
 
  must have the form 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in the Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
 . Since every finite-dimensional representation of 
 
 
 
  occurs as a direct summand of , it is left invariant by  and thus every finite-dimensional representation of 
 
 
 
 
  extends uniquely to . The extension is compatible with the polar decomposition. Finally the polar decomposition implies that 
 
 
 
  is a maximal compact subgroup of , since a strictly larger compact subgroup would contain all integer powers of a positive operator 
 
 
 
 , a closed infinite discrete subgroup.See:





Decompositions in the Chevalley complexification
Cartan decomposition
The decomposition derived from the polar decomposition



where 
 
 
 
  is the Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
 
 , is called the Cartan decomposition of . The exponential factor 
 
 
 
  is invariant under conjugation by 
 
 
 
  but is not a subgroup. The complexification is invariant under taking adjoints, since 
 
 
 
  consists of unitary operators and 
 
 
 
  of positive operators.
Gauss decomposition
The Gauss decomposition is a generalization of the LU decomposition for the general linear group and a specialization of the Bruhat decomposition. For 
 
 
 
 
  it states that with respect to a given orthonormal basis  an element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  can be factorized in the form



with 
 
 
 
  lower unitriangular, 
 
 
 
 
  upper unitriangular and 
 
 
 
  diagonal if and only if all the principal minors of 
 
 
 
  are non-vanishing. In this case 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are uniquely determined.
In fact Gaussian elimination shows there is a unique 
 
 
 
 
  such that  is upper triangular.3
The upper and lower unitriangular matrices,  and , are closed unipotent subgroups of GL(V). Their Lie algebras consist of upper and lower strictly triangular matrices. The exponential mapping is a polynomial mapping from the Lie algebra to the corresponding subgroup by nilpotence. The inverse is given by the logarithm mapping which by unipotence is also a polynomial mapping. In particular there is a correspondence between closed connected subgroups of  and subalgebras of their Lie algebras. The exponential map is onto in each case, since the polynomial function  lies in a given Lie subalgebra if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  do and are sufficiently small.4
The Gauss decomposition can be extended to complexifications of other closed connected subgroups 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  by using the root decomposition to write the complexified Lie algebra asSee:








where 
 
 
 
  is the Lie algebra of a maximal torus 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and  are the direct sum of the corresponding positive and negative root spaces. In the weight space decomposition of 
 
 
 
  as eigenspaces of 
 
 
 
 
  acts as diagonally,  acts as lowering operators and  as raising operators.  are nilpotent Lie algebras acting as nilpotent operators; they are each other's adjoints on 
 
 
 
 . In particular 
 
 
 
  acts by conjugation of , so that  is a semidirect product of a nilpotent Lie algebra by an abelian Lie algebra.
By Engel's theorem, if 
 
 
 
  is a semidirect product, with 
 
 
 
  abelian and 
 
 
 
 
  nilpotent, acting on a finite-dimensional vector space 
 
 
 
  with operators in 
 
 
 
  diagonalizable and operators in 
 
 
 
  nilpotent, there is a vector 
 
 
 
  that is an eigenvector for 
 
 
 
 
  and is annihilated by 
 
 
 
 . In fact it is enough to show there is a vector annihilated by 
 
 
 
 , which follows by induction on 
 
 
 
 , since the derived algebra 
 
 
 
  annihilates a non-zero subspace of vectors on which 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  act with the same hypotheses.
Applying this argument repeatedly to  shows that there is an orthonormal basis  of 
 
 
 
  consisting of eigenvectors of  with  acting as upper triangular matrices with zeros on the diagonal.
If  and  are the complex Lie groups corresponding to  and , then the Gauss decomposition states that the subset



is a direct product and consists of the elements in  for which the principal minors are non-vanishing. It is open and dense. Moreover, if 
 
 
 
  denotes the maximal torus in 
 
 
 
 
 ,



These results are an immediate consequence of the corresponding results for 
 
 
 
 .5
Bruhat decomposition
If  NG(T) / T}} denotes the Weyl group of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denotes the Borel subgroup , the Gauss decomposition is also a consequence of the more precise Bruhat decomposition



decomposing  into a disjoint union of double cosets of 
 
 
 
 . The complex dimension of a double coset 
 
 
 
  is determined by the length of 
 
 
 
  as an element of 
 
 
 
 . The dimension is maximized at the Coxeter element and gives the unique open dense double coset. Its inverse conjugates 
 
 
 
 
  into the Borel subgroup of lower triangular matrices in 
.See:


, section 18, for 
 
 


for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 


for complexifications of simple compact Lie groups

for Harish-Chandra's method

for a treatment using algebraic groups

, Chapter 8




The Bruhat decomposition is easy to prove for 
 
 
 
 .6 Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the Borel subgroup of upper triangular matrices and  the subgroup of diagonal matrices. So  Sn}}. For 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , take 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
 
  maximizes the number of zeros appearing at the beginning of its rows. Because a multiple of one row can be added to another, each row has a different number of zeros in it. Multiplying by a matrix 
 
 
 
  in , it follows that 
 
 
 
  lies in 
 
 
 
 . For uniqueness, if  b0}}, then the entries of  vanish below the diagonal. So the product lies in , proving uniqueness.
showed that the expression of an element 
 
 
 
  as  b1σb2}} becomes unique if  is restricted to lie in the upper unitriangular subgroup  N+ ∩ σ N− σ−1}}. In fact, if  N+ ∩ σ N+ σ−1}}, this follows from the identity



The group  has a natural filtration by normal subgroups  with zeros in the first 
 
 
 
  superdiagonals and the successive quotients are Abelian. Defining  and  to be the intersections with , it follows by decreasing induction on 
 
 
 
  that  Nσ(k) ⋅ Mσ(k)}}. Indeed  and  are specified in  by the vanishing of complementary entries 
 
 
 
  on the 
 
 
 
 th superdiagonal according to whether 
 
 
 
 
  preserves the order 
 
 

The Bruhat decomposition for the other classical simple groups can be deduced from the above decomposition using the fact that they are fixed point subgroups of folding automorphisms of 
 
 
 
 .See:



 For 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the 
 
 
 
 
  matrix with 
 
 
 
 's on the antidiagonal and 
 
 
 
 's elsewhere and set




Then 
 
 
 
  is the fixed point subgroup of the involution  A (gt)−1 A−1 of SL(2n,C)}}. It leaves the subgroups  and 
 
 
 
 
  invariant. If the basis elements are indexed by 
 
 
 
 , then the Weyl group of 
 
 
 
  consists of 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 , i.e. commuting with 
 
 
 
 
 . Analogues of  and  are defined by intersection with 
 
 
 
 , i.e. as fixed points of 
 
 
 
 . The uniqueness of the decomposition 
 
 
 
  implies the Bruhat decomposition for 
 
 
 
 .
The same argument works for 
 
 
 
 
 . It can be realised as the fixed points of  B (gt)−1 B−1}} in 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .
Iwasawa decomposition
The Iwasawa decomposition



gives a decomposition for  for which, unlike the Cartan decomposition, the direct factor 
 
 
 
  is a closed subgroup, but it is no longer invariant under conjugation by 
 
 
 
 
 . It is the semidirect product of the nilpotent subgroup 
 
 
 
  by the Abelian subgroup 
 
 
 
 .
For 
 
 
 
  and its complexification 
 
 
 
 , this decomposition can be derived as a restatement of the Gram–Schmidt orthonormalization process.8
In fact let  be an orthonormal basis of 
 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be an element in 
 
 
 
 . Applying the Gram–Schmidt process to , there is a unique orthonormal basis  and positive constants  such that



Since the decomposition is direct for 
 
 
 
 , it is enough to check that  GAN}}. From the properties of the Iwasawa decomposition for 
 
 
 
 , the map 
 
 
 
 
  is a diffeomorphism onto its image in , which is closed. On the other hand the dimension of the image is the same as the dimension of , so it is also open. So  GAN}} because  is connected.9  gives a method for explicitly computing the elements in the decomposition.10 For 
 
 
 
  in  set 
 
 
 
 . This is a positive self-adjoint operator so its principal minors do not vanish. By the Gauss decomposition, it can therefore be written uniquely in the form 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in , 
 
 
 
 
  in  and 
 
 
 
  in . Since 
 
 
 
  is self-adjoint, uniqueness forces 
 
 
 
 . Since it is also positive 
 
 
 
  must lie in 
 
 
 
 
  and have the form 
 
 
 
  for some unique 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be its unique square root in 
 
 
 
 
 . Set 
 
 
 
  and  g n−1 a−1}}. Then 
 
 
 
  is unitary, so is in 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
Complex structures on homogeneous spaces
The Iwasawa decomposition can be used to describe complex structures on the 
 
 
 
 
 s in complex projective space of highest weight vectors of finite-dimensional irreducible representations of 
 
 
 
 . In particular the identification between 
 
 
 
  and  can be used to formulate the Borel–Weil theorem. It states that each irreducible representation of 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by holomorphic induction from a character of 
 
 
 
 , or equivalently that it is realized in the space of sections of a holomorphic line bundle on 
 
 
 
 
 .
The closed connected subgroups of 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
  are described by Borel–de Siebenthal theory. They are exactly the centralizers of tori 
 
 
 
 . Since every torus is generated topologically by a single element 
 
 
 
 , these are the same as centralizers  of elements 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . By a result of Hopf  is always connected: indeed any element 
 
 
 
  is along with 
 
 
 
  contained in some maximal torus, necessarily contained in .
Given an irreducible finite-dimensional representation  with highest weight vector 
 
 
 
  of weight 
 
 
 
 
 , the stabilizer of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is a closed subgroup 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvector of 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  contains 
 
 
 
 . The complexification  also acts on 
 
 
 
  and the stabilizer is a closed complex subgroup 
 
 
 
  containing . Since 
 
 
 
 
  is annihilated by every raising operator corresponding to a positive root 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  contains the Borel subgroup 
 
 
 
 . The vector 
 
 
 
  is also a highest weight vector for the copy of  corresponding to 
 
 
 
 
 , so it is annihilated by the lowering operator generating  if 
 
 
 
 . The Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is the direct sum of  and root space vectors annihilating 
 
 
 
 , so that



The Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 . By the Iwasawa decomposition  GAN}}. Since 
 
 
 
  fixes 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -orbit of 
 
 
 
  in the complex projective space of  coincides with the  orbit and



In particular



Using the identification of the Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  with its dual, 
 
 
 
 
  equals the centralizer of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , and hence is connected. The group 
 
 
 
  is also connected. In fact the space 
 
 
 
  is simply connected, since it can be written as the quotient of the (compact) universal covering group of the compact semisimple group 
 
 
 
 
  by a connected subgroup, where 
 
 
 
  is the center of 
 
 
 
 .11 If  is the identity component of 
 
 
 
 ,  has  as a covering space, so that  Po}}. The homogeneous space  has a complex structure, because 
 
 
 
  is a complex subgroup. The orbit in complex projective space is closed in the Zariski topology by Chow's theorem, so is a smooth projective variety. The Borel–Weil theorem and its generalizations are discussed in this context in , ,  and .
The parabolic subgroup 
 
 
 
  can also be written as a union of double cosets of 
 
 




where  is the stabilizer of 
 
 
 
  in the Weyl group 
 
 
 
 . It is generated by the reflections corresponding to the simple roots orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 
 .See:





Noncompact real forms
There are other closed subgroups of the complexification of a compact connected Lie group G which have the same the complexified Lie algebra. These are the other real forms of GC.12
Involutions of simply connected compact Lie groups
If G is a simply connected compact Lie group and σ is an automorphism of period 2, then the fixed point subgroup K = Gσ is automatically connected. (In fact this is true for any automorphism of G, as shown for inner automorphisms by Steinberg and in general by Borel.) See:





, Exercise 11


This can be seen most directly when the involution σ corresponds to a Hermitian symmetric space. In that case σ is inner and implemented by an element in a one-parameter subgroup exp tT contained in the center of Gσ. The innerness of σ implies that K contains a maximal torus of G, so has maximal rank. On the other hand the centralizer of the subgroup generated by the torus S of elements exp tT is connected, since if x is any element in K there is a maximal torus containing x and S, which lies in the centralizer. On the other hand it contains K since S is central in K and is contained in K since z lies in S. So K is the centralizer of S and hence connected. In particular K contains the center of G.13
For a general involution σ, the connectedness of Gσ can be seen as follows.14
The starting point is the Abelian version of the result: if T is a maximal torus of a simply connected group G and σ is an involution leaving invariant T and a choice of positive roots (or equivalently a Weyl chamber), then the fixed point subgroup Tσ is connected. In fact the kernel of the exponential map from 
 
 
 
  onto T is a lattice Λ with a Z-basis indexed by simple roots, which σ permutes. Splitting up according to orbits, T can be written as a product of terms T on which σ acts trivially or terms T2 where σ interchanges the factors. The fixed point subgroup just corresponds to taking the diagonal subgroups in the second case, so is connected.
Now let x be any element fixed by σ, let S be a maximal torus in CG(x)σ and let T be the identity component of CG(x, S). Then T is a maximal torus in G containing x and S. It is invariant under σ and the identity component of Tσ is S. In fact since x and S commute, they are contained in a maximal torus which, because it is connected, must lie in T. By construction T is invariant under σ. The identity component of Tσ contains S, lies in CG(x)σ and centralizes S, so it equals S. But S is central in T, to T must be Abelian and hence a maximal torus. For σ acts as multiplication by −1 on the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 , so it and therefore also 
 
 
 
  are Abelian.
The proof is completed by showing that σ preserves a Weyl chamber associated with T. For then Tσ is connected so must equal S. Hence x lies in S. Since x was arbitrary, Gσ must therefore be connected.
To produce a Weyl chamber invariant under σ, note that there is no root space 
 
 
 
  on which both x and S acted trivially, for this would contradict the fact that CG(x, S) has the same Lie algebra as T. Hence there must be an element s in S such that t = xs acts non-trivially on each root space. In this case t is a regular element of T—the identity component of its centralizer in G equals T. There is a unique Weyl alcove A in 
 
 
 
 
  such that t lies in exp A and 0 lies in the closure of A. Since t is fixed by σ, the alcove is left invariant by σ and hence so also is the Weyl chamber C containing it.
Conjugations on the complexification
Let G be a simply connected compact Lie group with complexification GC. The map c(g) = (g*)−1 defines an automorphism of GC as a real Lie group with G as fixed point subgroup. It is conjugate-linear on 
 
 
 
  and satisfies c2 = id. Such automorphisms of either GC or 
 
 
 
  are called conjugations. Since GC is also simply connected any conjugation c1 on 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a unique automorphism c1 of GC.
The classification of conjugations c0 reduces to that of involutions σ of G because given a c1 there is an automorphism φ of the complex group GC such that



commutes with c. The conjugation c0 then leaves G invariant and restricts to an involutive automorphism σ. By simple connectivity the same is true at the level of Lie algebras. At the Lie algebra level c0 can be recovered from σ by the formula



for X, Y in 
 
 
 
 .
To prove the existence of φ let ψ = c1c an automorphism of the complex group GC. On the Lie algebra level it defines a self-adjoint operator for the complex inner product



where B is the Killing form on 
 
 
 
 . Thus ψ2 is a positive operator and an automorphism along with all its real powers. In particular take



It satisfies



Cartan decomposition in a real form
For the complexification GC, the Cartan decomposition is described above. Derived from the polar decomposition in the complex general linear group, it gives a diffeomorphism



On GC there is a conjugation operator c corresponding to G as well as an involution σ commuting with c. Let c0 = c σ and let G0 be the fixed point subgroup of c. It is closed in the matrix group GC and therefore a Lie group. The involution σ acts on both G and G0. For the Lie algebra of G there is a decomposition



into the +1 and −1 eigenspaces of σ. The fixed point subgroup K of σ in G is connected since G is simply connected. Its Lie algebra is the +1 eigenspace 
 
 
 
 . The Lie algebra of G0 is given by



and the fixed point subgroup of σ is again K, so that G ∩ G0 = K. In G0, there is a Cartan decomposition



which is again a diffeomorphism onto the direct and corresponds to the polar decomposition of matrices. It is the restriction of the decomposition on GC. The product gives a diffeomorphism onto a closed subset of G0. To check that it is surjective, for g in G0 write g = u ⋅ p with u in G and p in P. Since c0 g = g, uniqueness implies that σu = u and σp = p−1. Hence u lies in K and p in P0.
The Cartan decomposition in G0 shows that G0 is connected, simply connected and noncompact, because of the direct factor P0. Thus G0 is a noncompact real semisimple Lie group.15
Moreover given a maximal Abelian subalgebra 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , A = exp 
 
 
 
  is a toral subgroup such that σ(a) = a−1 on A; and any two such 
 
 
 
 's are conjugate by an element of K. The properties of A can be shown directly. A is closed because the closure of A is a toral subgroup satisfying σ(a) = a−1, so its Lie algebra lies in 
 
 
 
 
  and hence equals 
 
 
 
  by maximality. A can be generated topologically by a single element exp X, so 
 
 
 
  is the centralizer of X in 
 
 
 
 . In the K-orbit of any element of 
 
 
 
  there is an element Y such that (X,Ad k Y) is minimized at k = 1. Setting k = exp tT with T in 
 
 
 
 
 , it follows that (X,[T,Y]) = 0 and hence [X,Y] = 0, so that Y must lie in 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is the union of the conjugates of 
 
 
 
 . In particular some conjugate of X lies in any other choice of 
 
 
 
 , which centralizes that conjugate; so by maximality the only possibilities are conjugates of 
 
 
 
 
 .16
A similar statements hold for the action of K on 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Morevoer, from the Cartan decomposition for G0, if A0 = exp $\mathfrak{a}_0$, then
$$\displaystyle{G_0=KA_0K.}$$
Iwasawa decomposition in a real form
See also

Real form (Lie theory)

Notes
References




























"
Category:Lie groups Category:Lie algebras Category:Algebraic groups Category:Representation theory



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
See: ↩
↩
↩




