


Degree of reaction




Degree of reaction

Degree of reaction or reaction ratio (R) is defined as the ratio of static pressure drop in the rotor to the static pressure drop in the stage or as the ratio of static enthalpy drop in the rotor to the static enthalpy drop in the stage.
Degree of reaction (R) is an important factor in designing the blades of a turbine, compressors, pumps and other turbo-machinery. It also tells about the efficiency of machine and is used proper selection of machine for the required purpose.
Various definitions exist in terms of enthalpies, pressures or flow geometry of the device. In case of turbines, both impulse and reaction machines, Degree of reaction (R) is defined as the ratio of energy transfer by the change in static head to the total energy transfer in the rotor i.e.


 
 .1 For a gas turbine or compressor it is defined as the ratio of isentropic heat drop in the moving blades (i.e. the rotor) to the sum of the isentropic heat drops in the fixed blades(i.e. the stator) and the moving blades i.e.


 
 . In pumps, degree of reaction deals in static and dynamic head. Degree of reaction is defined as the fraction of energy transfer by change in static head to the total energy transfer in the rotor i.e.


 
 .
Relation
Most turbo machines are efficient to a certain degree and can be approximated to undergo isentropic process in the stage. Hence from 
 
 
 
 ,  it is easy to see that for isentropic process ∆H ≃ ∆P. Hence it can be implied


 
  The same can be expressed mathematically as:2



Where 1 to 3ss in Figure 1 represents the isentropic process beginning from stator inlet at 1 to rotor outlet at 3. And 2 to 3ss is the isentropic process from rotor inlet at 2 to rotor outlet at 3. The velocity triangle3 (Figure 2.) for the flow process within the stage represents the change in fluid velocity as it flows first in the stator or the fixed blades and then through the rotor or the moving blades. Due to the change in velocities there is a corresponding pressure change. 
Another useful definition used commonly uses stage velocities as:4


 
  is the enthalpy drop in the rotor and5


 
  is the total enthalpy drop. The degree of reaction is then expressed as6



For axial machines

 
 , then7


 
  The degree of reaction can also be written in terms of the geometry of the turbomachine as obtained by8


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the vane angle of rotor outlet and 
 
 
 
  is the vane angle of stator outlet. In practice 
 
 
 
  is substituted as ϕ and 
 
 
9 as 
 
 
 
  giving
 
 
 
  The degree of reaction now depends only on ϕ and 
 
 
 
  which again depend on geometrical parameters β3 and β2 i.e. the vane angles of stator outlet and rotor outlet. Using the velocity triangles degree of reaction can be derived as:10


 
  This relation is again very useful when the rotor blade angle and rotor vane angle are defined for the given geometry.
Choice of reaction (R) and effect on efficiency
(Figure)
Figure 3. Influence of reaction on total-to-static efficiency with fixed value of stage loading factor

The Figure 311 alongside shows the variation of total-to-static efficiency at different blade loading coefficient with the degree of reaction. The governing equation is written as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the stage loading factor. The diagram shows the optimization of total - to - static efficiency at a given stage loading factor, by a suitable choice of reaction. It is evident from the diagram that for a fixed stage loading factor that there is a relatively small change in total-to-static efficiency for a wide range of designs.
50% reaction
The degree of reaction contributes to the stage efficiency and thus used as a design parameter. Stages having 50% degree of reaction are used where the pressure drop is equally shared by the stator and the rotor for a turbine. 
This reduces the tendency of boundary layer separation from the blade surface avoiding large stagnation pressure losses.
If R= 
 
 
 
  then from the relation of degree of reaction,|C| α2 = β3 and the velocity triangle (Figure 4.) is symmetric. The stage enthalpy gets equally distributed in the stage (Figure 5.) . In addition the whirl components at are also same at the inlet of rotor and diffuser.
(Figure)
Figure 5. Stage enthalpy diagram for degree of reaction = 1⁄2 in a turbine and pump.

(Figure)
Figure 6. Stage enthalpy for Reaction less than half

Reaction less than 50%
Stage having reaction less than half suggest that pressure drop or enthalpy drop in the rotor is less than the pressure drop in the stator for the turbine. The same follows for a pump or compressor as shown in Figure 6. Therefore the stator has a larger contribution to the total work extracted or work done. From the relation for degree of reaction, |C| α2 > β3.
(Figure)
Figure 7. Velocity triangle for reaction more than 50%.

Reaction more than 50%
Stage having reaction more than half suggest that pressure drop or enthalpy drop in the rotor is more than the pressure drop in the stator for the turbine. The same follows for a pump or compressor. Thus in this case the rotor has a larger contribution to the total work extracted or work done. From the relation for degree of reaction,|C| α2 



Peng, William W., Fundamentals of turbomachinery, John Wiley, 2008
S.M,Yahya, Turbines, Compressors and Fans, 4th ed. McGraw,2011



Dixon, S. L., Fluid Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Turbo-machinery, 5th ed. Elsevier,2011.




Shapiro, A. H., Soderberg, C. R., Stenning, A. H., Taylor, E. S. and Horlock, J. H. (1957). Notes on Turbomachinery. Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.




