


Krull–Akizuki theorem




Krull–Akizuki theorem

In algebra, the Krull–Akizuki theorem states the following: let A be a one-dimensional reduced noetherian ring,1 K its total ring of fractions. If B is a subring of a finite extension L of K containing A and is not a field, then B is a one-dimensional noetherian ring. Furthermore, for every nonzero ideal I of B, 
 
 
 
  is finite over A.2
Note that the theorem does not say that B is finite over A. The theorem does not extend to higher dimension. One important consequence of the theorem is that the integral closure of a Dedekind domain A in a finite extension of the field of fractions of A is again a Dedekind domain. This consequence does generalize to a higher dimension: the Mori–Nagata theorem states that the integral closure of a noetherian domain is a Krull domain.
Proof
Here, we give a proof when 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be minimal prime ideals of A; there are finitely many of them. Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the field of fractions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the kernel of the natural map 
 
 
 
 . Then we have:


 
 . Now, if the theorem holds when A is a domain, then this implies that B is a one-dimensional noetherian domain since each 
 
 
 
 
  is and since 
 
 
 
 . Hence, we reduced the proof to the case A is a domain. Let 
 
 
 
  be an ideal and let a be a nonzero element in the nonzero ideal 
 
 
 
 . Set 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
  is a zero-dim noetherian ring; thus, artinian, there is an l such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . We claim


 
  Since it suffices to establish the inclusion locally, we may assume A is a local ring with the maximal ideal 
 
 
 
 . Let x be a nonzero element in B. Then, since A is noetherian, there is an n such that 
 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
 . Thus,


 
  Now, assume n is a minimum integer such that 
 
 
 
  and the last inclusion holds. If 
 
 
 
 , then we easily see that 
 
 
 
 
 . But then the above inclusion holds for 
 
 
 
 , contradiction. Hence, we have 
 
 
 
  and this establishes the claim. It now follows:


 
  Hence, 
 
 
 
  has finite length as A-module. In particular, the image of I there is finitely generated and so I is finitely generated. Finally, the above shows that 
 
 
 
 
  has zero dimension and so B has dimension one. 
 
 

References

http://books.google.com/books?id=APPtnn84FMIC&lpg;;=PA83&ots;=2L9MiWbIYZ&dq;=krull%20akizuki&pg;=PA85#v=onepage&q;=krull%20akizuki&f;=false
Nicolas Bourbaki, Commutative algebra

"
Category:Theorems in algebra



In this article, a ring is commutative and has unity.↩
↩




