


Connective constant




Connective constant

In mathematics, the connective constant is a numerical quantity associated with self-avoiding walks on a lattice. It is studied in connection with the notion of universality in two-dimensional statistical physics models.1 While the connective constant depends on the choice of lattice so itself is not universal (similarly to other lattice-dependent quantities such as the critical probability threshold for percolation), it is nonetheless an important quantity that appears in conjectures for universal laws. Furthermore, the mathematical techniques used to understand the connective constant, for example in the recent rigorous proof by Duminil-Copin and Smirnov that the connective constant of the hexagonal lattice has the precise value 
 
 
 
 , may provide clues  |journal= |volume= |issue= |pages= |publisher= |url= http://arxiv.org/abs/1007.0575
}} to a possible approach for attacking other important open problems in the study of self-avoiding walks, notably the conjecture that self-avoiding walks converge in the scaling limit to the Schramm–Loewner evolution.
Definition
The connective constant is defined as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the number of n-step self-avoiding walks starting from a fixed origin point in the lattice. Since every n + m step self avoiding walk can be decomposed into an n-step self-avoiding walk and an m-step self-avoiding walk, it follows that 
 
 
 
 . Then by applying Fekete's lemma to the logarithm of the above relation, the limit 
 
 
 
  can be shown to exist. This number 
 
 
 
  is called the connective constant, and clearly depends on the particular lattice chosen for the walk since 
 
 
 
  does. The value of 
 
 
 
  is precisely known only for two lattices, see below. For other lattices, 
 
 
 
  has only been approximated numerically. It is conjectured that 
 
 
 
  as n goes to infinity, where 
 
 
 
  depends on the lattice, but the critical exponent 
 
 
 
  is universal (it depends on dimension, but not the specific lattice). In 2-dimensions it is conjectured that 
 
 
23
Known values4




Lattice

Connective constant





Hexagonal







Triangular

4.15079(4)



Square

2.63815853(15)



Kagomé

2.56062



Manhattan

1.733535(3)



L-lattice

1.5657(15)





 
  lattice

1.7110412...





 
  lattice

1.80883001(6)



These values are taken from the 1998 Jensen–Guttmann paper. The connective constant of the 
 
 
 
  lattice, since each step on the hexagonal lattice corresponds to either two or three steps in it, can be expressed exactly as a root of the polynomial



given the exact expression for the hexagonal lattice connective constant. More information about these lattices can be found in the percolation threshold article.
Duminil-Copin–Smirnov proof
In 2010, Hugo Duminil-Copin and Stanislav Smirnov published the first rigorous proof of the fact that 
 
 
 
  for the hexagonal lattice.5 This had been conjectured by Nienhuis in 1982 as part of a larger study of O(n) models using renormalization techniques.6 The rigorous proof of this fact came from a program of applying tools from complex analysis to discrete probabilistic models that has also produced impressive results about the Ising model among others.7 The argument relies on the existence of a parafermionic observable that satisfies half of the discrete Cauchy–Riemann equations for the hexagonal lattice. We modify slightly the definition of a self-avoiding walk by having it start and end on mid-edges between vertices. Let H be the set of all mid-edges of the hexagonal lattice. For a self-avoiding walk 
 
 
 
  between two mid-edges 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we define 
 
 
 
  to be the number of vertices visited and its winding 
 
 
 
  as the total rotation of the direction in radians when 
 
 
 
  is traversed from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The aim of the proof is to show that the partition function



converges for 
 
 
 
  where the critical parameter is given by 
 
 
 
 . This immediately implies that 
 
 
 
 .
Given a domain 
 
 
 
  in the hexagonal lattice, a starting mid-edge 
 
 
 
 , and two parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we define the parafermionic observable



If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then for any vertex 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , we have



where 
 
 
 
  are the mid-edges emanating from 
 
 
 
 . This lemma establishes that the parafermionic observable is divergence-free. It has not been shown to be curl-free, but this would solve several open problems (see conjectures). The proof of this lemma is a clever computation that relies heavily on the geometry of the hexagonal lattice.
Next, we focus on a finite trapezoidal domain 
 
 
 
  with 2L cells forming the left hand side, T cells across, and upper and lower sides at an angle of 
 
 
 
 . (Picture needed.) We embed the hexagonal lattice in the complex plane so that the edge lengths are 1 and the mid-edge in the center of the left hand side is positioned at −1/2. Then the vertices in 
 
 
 
  are given by



We now define partition functions for self-avoiding walks starting at 
 
 
 
  and ending on different parts of the boundary. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the left hand boundary, 
 
 
 
  the right hand boundary, 
 
 
 
  the upper boundary, and 
 
 
 
  the lower boundary. Let



By summing the identity



over all vertices in 
 
 
 
  and noting that the winding is fixed depending on which part of the boundary the path terminates at, we can arrive at the relation



after another clever computation. Letting 
 
 
 
 , we get a strip domain 
 
 
 
  and partition functions



It was later shown that 
 
 
 
 , but we do not need this for the proof.8 We are left with the relation


 
 .
From here, we can derive the inequality



And arrive by induction at a strictly positive lower bound for 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 , we have established that 
 
 
 
 .
For the reverse inequality, for an arbitrary self avoiding walk on the honeycomb lattice, we perform a canonical decomposition due to Hammersley and Welsh of the walk into bridges of widths 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Note that we can bound



which implies 
 
 
 
 . Finally, it is possible to bound the partition function by the bridge partition functions



And so, we have that 
 
 
 
  as desired.
Conjectures
Nienhuis argued in favor of Flory's prediction that the mean squared displacement of the self-avoiding random walk 
 
 
 
  satisfies the scaling relation 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 .9 The scaling exponent 
 
 
 
  and the universal constant 
 
 
 
  could be computed if the self-avoiding walk possesses a conformally invariant scaling limit, conjectured to be a Schramm–Loewner evolution with $\kappa=8/3$.10
See also

Percolation threshold

References
External links



"
Category:Discrete geometry

















