   Conformal loop ensemble      Conformal loop ensemble   (Figure)  In critical percolation on the honeycomb lattice, each hexagon face is colored red or black independently with equal probability. Every interface separating a black cluster from a red cluster is shown in green. This random collection of interfaces converges in law to CLE 6 as the lattice spacing goes to zero.   (Figure)  To define a random interface converging to SLE, we fix the colors of the hexagons along the boundary of the domain. This procedure defines a single interface separating red hexagons from black hexagons. This path converges in law to SLE 6 as the lattice spacing goes to zero.   A conformal loop ensemble (CLE κ ) is a random collection of non-crossing loops in a simply connected, open subset of the plane. These random collections of loops are indexed by a parameter κ, which may be any real number between 8/3 and 8. CLE κ is a loop version of the Schramm-Loewner evolution : SLE κ is designed to model a single discrete random interface, while CLE κ models a full collection of interfaces.  In many instances for which there is a conjectured or proved relationship between a discrete model and SLE κ , there is also a conjectured or proved relationship with CLE κ . For example:   CLE 3 is the limit of interfaces for the critical Ising model .  CLE 4 may be viewed as a set of level lines of the Gaussian free field .  CLE 16/3 is a scaling limit of cluster interfaces in critical FK percolation.  CLE 6 is a scaling limit of critical percolation on the triangular lattice.   Constructions  For 8/3 κ may be constructed using a branching variation of an SLE κ process (). When 8/3 κ may be alternatively constructed as the collection of outer boundaries of Brownian loop soup clusters ().  Properties  CLE κ is conformally invariant, which means that if    φ  :   D  →   D  ′       normal-:  φ   normal-→  D   superscript  D  normal-′      \varphi:D\to D^{\prime}   is a conformal map, then the law of a CLE in D ' is the same as the law of the image of all the CLE loops in D under the map   φ   φ   \varphi   .  Since CLE κ may be defined using an SLE κ process, CLE loops inherit many path properties from SLE. For example, each CLE κ loop is a fractal with almost-sure Hausdorff dimension 1+κ/8. Each loop is almost surely simple (no self intersections) when 8/3   