


Resolution proof compression by splitting




Resolution proof compression by splitting

In mathematical logic, proof compression by splitting is an algorithm that operates as a post-process on resolution proofs. It was proposed by Scott Cotton in his paper "Two Techniques for Minimizing Resolution Proof".1
The Splitting algorithm is based on the following observation:
Given a proof of unsatisfiability 
 
 
 
  and a variable 
 
 
 
 , it is easy to re-arrange (split) the proof in a proof of 
 
 
 
  and a proof of 
 
 
 
  and the recombination of these two proofs (by an additional resolution step) may result in a proof smaller than the original.
Note that applying Splitting in a proof 
 
 
 
  using a variable 
 
 
 
  does not invalidates a latter application of the algorithm using a differente variable 
 
 
 
 . Actually, the method proposed by Cotton2 generates a sequence of proofs 
 
 
 
 , where each proof 
 
 
 
  is the result of applying Splitting to 
 
 
 
 . During the construction of the sequence, if a proof 
 
 
 
  happens to be too large, 
 
 
 
  is setted to be the smallest proof in 
 
 
 
 .
For achieving a better compression/time ratio, a heuristic for variable selection is desirable. For this purpose, Cotton3 defines the "additivity" of a resolution step (with antecedents 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and resolvent 
 
 
 
 ):



Then, for each variable 
 
 
 
 , a score is calculated summing the additivity of all the resolution steps in 
 
 
 
  with pivot 
 
 
 
  together with the number of these resolution steps. Denoting each score calculated this way by 
 
 
 
 , each variable is selected with a probability proportional to its score:



To split a proof of unsatisfiability 
 
 
 
  in a proof 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and a proof 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , Cotton 4 proposes the following:
Let 
 
 
 
  denote a literal and 
 
 
 
  denote the resolvent of clauses 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then, define the map 
 
 
 
  on nodes in the resolution dag of 
 
 
 
 :



Also, let 
 
 
 
  be the empty clause in 
 
 
 
 . Then, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are obtained by computing 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
Notes
"
Category:Proof theory



Cotton, Scott. "Two Techniques for Minimizing Resolution Proofs". 13th International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing, 2010.↩







