


Generalized multivariate log-gamma distribution




Generalized multivariate log-gamma distribution

In probability theory and statistics, the generalized multivariate log-gamma (G-MVLG) distribution is a multivariate distribution introduced by Demirhan and Hamurkaroglu1 in 2011. The G-MVLG is a flexible distribution. Skewness and kurtosis are well controlled by the parameters of the distribution. This enables one to control dispersion of the distribution. Because of this property, the distribution is effectively used as a joint prior distribution in Bayesian analysis, especially when the likelihood is not from the location-scale family of distributions such as normal distribution.
Joint probability density function
If 
 
 
 
 , the joint probability density function (pdf) of 
 
 
 
  is given as the following:



where 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and



 
  is the correlation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote determinant and absolute value of inner expression, respectively, and 
 
 
 
  includes parameters of the distribution.
Properties
Joint moment generating function
The joint moment generating function of G-MVLG distribution is as the following:



Marginal central moments


 
  marginal central moment of 
 
 
 
  is as the following:



Marginal expected value and variance
Marginal expected value 
 
 
 
  is as the following:






where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are values of digamma and trigamma functions at 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
Related distributions
Demirhan and Hamurkaroglu establish a relation between the G-MVLG distribution and the Gumbel distribution (type I extreme value distribution) and gives a multivariate form of the Gumbel distribution, namely the generalized multivariate Gumbel (G-MVGB) distribution. The joint probability density function of 
 
 
 
  is the following:



The Gumbel distribution has a broad range of applications in the field of risk analysis. Therefore, the G-MVGB distribution should be beneficial when it is applied to these types of problems..
References
"
Category:Multivariate continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions Category:Continuous distributions



↩




