


Weyl metrics




Weyl metrics

In general relativity, the Weyl metrics (named after the German-American mathematician Hermann Weyl) refer to the class of static and axisymmetric solutions to Einstein's field equation. Three members in the renowned Kerr–Newman family solutions, namely the Schwarzschild, nonextremal Reissner–Nordström and extremal Reissner–Nordström metrics, can be identified as Weyl-type metrics.
Standard Weyl metrics
The Weyl class of solutions has the generic form12


where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two metric potentials dependent on Weyl's canonical coordinates

 
 . The coordinate system 
 
 
 
  serves best for symmetries of Weyl's spacetime (with two Killing vector fields being 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) and often acts like cylindrical coordinates,3 but is incomplete when describing a black hole as 
 
 
 
  only cover the horizon and its exteriors.
Hence, to determine a static axisymmetric solution corresponding to a specific stress–energy tensor

 
 , we just need to substitute the Weyl metric Eq(1) into Einstein's equation (with c=G=1):



and work out the two functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Reduced field equations for electrovac Weyl solutions
One of the best investigated and most useful Weyl solutions is the electrovac case, where 
 
 
 
  comes from the existence of (Weyl-type) electromagnetic field (without matter and current flows). As we know, given the electromagnetic four-potential 
 
 
 
 , the anti-symmetric electromagnetic field 
 
 
 
  and the trace-free stress–energy tensor 
 
 

 
  will be respectively determined by





which respects the source-free covariant Maxwell equations:



Eq(5.a) can be simplified to:



in the calculations as 
 
 
 
 . Also, since 
 
 
 
  for electrovacuum, Eq(2) reduces to



Now, suppose the Weyl-type axisymmetric electrostatic potential is 
 
 
 
  (the component 
 
 
 
  is actually the electromagnetic scalar potential), and together with the Weyl metric Eq(1), Eqs(3)(4)(5)(6) imply that











where 
 
 
 
  yields Eq(7.a), 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  yields Eq(7.b), 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  yields Eq(7.c), 
 
 
 
  yields Eq(7.d), and Eq(5.b) yields Eq(7.e). Here 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are respectively the Laplace and gradient operators. Moreover, if we suppose 
 
 
 
  in the sense of matter-geometry interplay and assume asymptotic flatness, we will find that Eqs(7.a-e) implies a characteristic relation that



Specifically in the simplest vacuum case with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , Eqs(7.a-7.e) reduce to4








We can firstly obtain 
 
 
 
  by solving Eq(8.b), and then integrate Eq(8.c) and Eq(8.d) for 
 
 
 
 . Practically, Eq(8.a) arising from 
 
 
 
  just works as a consistency relation or integrability condition.
Unlike the nonlinear Poisson's equation Eq(7.b), Eq(8.b) is the linear Laplace equation; that is to say, superposition of given vacuum solutions to Eq(8.b) is still a solution. This fact has a widely application, such as to analytically distort a Schwarzschild black hole.


Box A: Remarks on the electrovac field equation


We employed the axisymmetric Laplace and gradient operators to write Eqs(7.a-7.e) and Eqs(8.a-8.d) in a compact way, which is very useful in the derivation of the characteristic relation Eq(7.f). In the literature, Eqs(7.a-7.e) and Eqs(8.a-8.d) are often written in the following forms as well:











and













Box B: Derivation of the Weyl electrovac 
 
 
 
  characteristic relation


Considering the interplay between spacetime geometry and energy-matter distributions, it is natural to assume that in Eqs(7.a-7.e) the metric function 
 
 
 
  relates with the electrostatic scalar potential 
 
 
 
  via a function 
 
 
 
  (which means geometry depends on energy), and it follows that



Eq(B.1) immediately turns Eq(7.b) and Eq(7.e) respectively into





which give rise to



Now replace the variable 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , and Eq(B.4) is simplified to



Direct quadrature of Eq(B.5) yields 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  being integral constants. To resume asymptotic flatness at spatial infinity, we need 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , so there should be 
 
 
 
 . Also, rewrite the constant 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  for mathematical convenience in subsequent calculations, and one finally obtains the characteristic relation implied by Eqs(7.a-7.e) that



This relation is important in linearize the Eqs(7.a-7.f) and superpose electrovac Weyl solutions.


Newtonian analogue of metric potential Ψ(ρ,z)
In Weyl's metric Eq(1), 
 
 
 
 ; thus in the approximation for weak field limit 
 
 
 
 , one has



and therefore



This is pretty analogous to the well-known approximate metric for static and weak gravitational fields generated by low-mass celestial bodies like the Sun and Earth,5


where 
 
 
 
  is the usual Newtonian potential satisfying Poisson's equation 
 
 
 
 , just like Eq(3.a) or Eq(4.a) for the Weyl metric potential 
 
 
 
 . The similarities between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  inspire people to find out the Newtonian analogue of 
 
 
 
  when studying Weyl class of solutions; that is, to reproduce 
 
 
 
  nonrelativistically by certain type of Newtonian sources. The Newtonian analogue of 
 
 
 
  proves quite helpful in specifying particular Weyl-type solutions and extending existing Weyl-type solutions.6
Schwarzschild solution
The Weyl potentials generating Schwarzschild's metric as solutions to the vacuum equations Eq(8) are given by789


where



From the perspective of Newtonian analogue, 
 
 
 
  equals the gravitational potential produced by a rod of mass 
 
 
 
  and length 
 
 
 
  placed symmetrically on the 
 
 
 
 -axis; that is, by a line mass of uniform density 
 
 
 
  embedded the interval 
 
 
 
 . (Note: Based on this analogue, important extensions of the Schwarzschild metric have been developed, as discussed in ref.10)
Given 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , Weyl's metric Eq(\ref{Weyl metric in canonical coordinates}) becomes



and after substituting the following mutually consistent relations





one can obtain the common form of Schwarzschild metric in the usual 
 
 
 
  coordinates,



The metric Eq(14) cannot be directly transformed into Eq(16) by performing the standard cylindrical-spherical transformation 
 
 
 
 , because 
 
 
 
  is complete while 
 
 
 
  is incomplete. This is why we call 
 
 
 
  in Eq(1) as Weyl's canonical coordinates rather than cylindrical coordinates, although they have a lot in common; for example, the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  in Eq(7) is exactly the two-dimensional geometric Laplacian in cylindrical coordinates.
Nonextremal Reissner–Nordström solution
The Weyl potentials generating the nonextremal Reissner–Nordström solution (
 
 
 
 ) as solutions to Eqs(7} are given by111213


where



Thus, given 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , Weyl's metric becomes



and employing the following transformations





one can obtain the common form of non-extremal Reissner–Nordström metric in the usual 
 
 
 
  coordinates,



Extremal Reissner–Nordström solution
The potentials generating the extremal Reissner–Nordström solution (
 
 
 
 ) as solutions to Eqs(7} are given by14 (Note: We treat the extremal solution separately because it is much more than the degenerate state of the nonextremal counterpart.)



Thus, the extremal Reissner–Nordström metric reads



and by substituting



we obtain the extremal Reissner–Nordström metric in the usual 
 
 
 
  coordinates,



Mathematically, the extremal Reissner–Nordström can be obtained by taking the limit 
 
 
 
  of the corresponding nonextremal equation, and in the meantime we need to use the L'Hospital rule sometimes.
  Remarks: Weyl's metrics Eq(1) with the vanishing potential 
 
 
 
  (like the extremal Reissner–Nordström metric) constitute a special subclass which have only one metric potential 
 
 
 
  to be identified. Extending this subclass by canceling the restriction of axisymmetry, one obtains another useful class of solutions (still using Weyl's coordinates), namely the conformastatic metrics,1516


where we use 
 
 
 
  in Eq(22) as the single metric function in place of 
 
 
 
  in Eq(1) to emphasize that they are different by axial symmetry (
 
 
 
 -dependence).
Weyl vacuum solutions in spherical coordinates
Weyl's metric can also be expressed in spherical coordinates that



which equals Eq(1) via the coordinate transformation 
 
 
 
  (Note: As shown by Eqs(15)(21)(24), this transformation is not always applicable.) In the vacuum case, Eq(8.b) for 
 
 
 
  becomes



The asymptotically flat solutions to Eq(28) is17


where 
 
 
 
  represent Legendre polynomials, and 
 
 
 
  are multipole coefficients. The other metric potential 
 
 
 
 is given by18




See also

Schwarzschild metric
Reissner–Nordström metric
Distorted Schwarzschild metric

References
"
Category:Black holes Category:General relativity Category:Exact solutions in general relativity



Jeremy Bransom Griffiths, Jiri Podolsky. Exact Space-Times in Einstein's General Relativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009. Chapter 10.↩
Hans Stephani, Dietrich Kramer, Malcolm MacCallum, Cornelius Hoenselaers, Eduard Herlt. Exact Solutions of Einstein's Field Equations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. Chapter 20.↩

R Gautreau, R B Hoffman, A Armenti. Static multiparticle systems in general relativity. IL NUOVO CIMENTO B, 1972, 7(1): 71-98.↩
James B Hartle. Gravity: An Introduction To Einstein's General Relativity. San Francisco: Addison Wesley, 2003. Eq(6.20) transformed into Lorentzian cylindrical coordinates↩









Guillermo A Gonzalez, Antonio C Gutierrez-Pineres, Paolo A Ospina. Finite axisymmetric charged dust disks in conformastatic spacetimes. Physical Review D, 2008, 78(6): 064058. arXiv:0806.4285v1↩
Antonio C Gutierrez-Pineres, Guillermo A Gonzalez, Hernando Quevedo. Conformastatic disk-haloes in Einstein-Maxwell gravity. Physical Review D, 2013, 87(4): 044010. 1↩






