   Conditional dependence      Conditional dependence   In probability theory , conditional dependence is a relationship between two or more events that are dependent when a third event occurs. 1 2 For example, if A and B are two events that individually affect the happening of a third event C , and do not directly affect each other, then initially (when the event C has not occurred)      P   (  A  ∣  B  )   =  P   (  A  )   or  P   (  B  ∣  A  )   =  P   (  B  )      fragments  P   fragments  normal-(  A  normal-∣  B  normal-)    P   fragments  normal-(  A  normal-)   or  P   fragments  normal-(  B  normal-∣  A  normal-)    P   fragments  normal-(  B  normal-)     P(A\mid B)=P(A)\text{ or }P(B\mid A)=P(B)    3 4 ( A and B are independent)  Eventually the event C occurs, and now if event A occurs the probability of occurrence of the event B will decrease (similarly event B occurring first will decrease the probability of occurrence of A in future). Hence, now the two events A and B become conditionally dependent because their probability of occurrence is dependent on either event's occurrence. Intuitively we can say that since A and B both were probable causes of C , given C has occurred, occurrence of either of A or B alone could explain away the happening of C .      P   (  B  ∣  C  )   >  P   (  B  ∣  C  ,  A  )      fragments  P   fragments  normal-(  B  normal-∣  C  normal-)    P   fragments  normal-(  B  normal-∣  C  normal-,  A  normal-)     P(B\mid C)>P(B\mid C,A)    5  In essence probability comes from a person's information content about occurrence of an event. For example, let the event A be 'I have a new car'; event B be 'I have a new watch'; and event C be 'I am happy'. Let us assume that the event C has occurred – meaning 'I am happy'. Now if a third person sees my new watch, he/she will attribute this reason to my happiness. Thus in his/her view the probability of the event A ('I have a new car') to have been the cause of the event C ('I am happy') will decrease as the event C has been explained away by the event B .  Conditional dependence is different from conditional independence. In conditional independence two events which are initially dependent become independent given the occurrence of a third event. 6  See also   Conditional independence  de Finetti's theorem  Conditional expectation   References  "  Category:Articles created via the Article Wizard  Category:Probability theory  Category:Statistical dependence     Introduction to Artificial Intelligence by Sebastian Thrun and Peter Norvig, 2011 "Unit 3: Conditional Dependence" ↩  Introduction to learning Bayesian Networks from Data by Dirk Husmeier 1 "Introduction to Learning Bayesian Networks from Data -Dirk Husmeier" ↩  Conditional Independence in Statistical theory "Conditional Independence in Statistical Theory", A. P. Dawid" ↩  Probabilistic independence on Britannica "Probability->Applications of conditional probability->independence (equation 7) " ↩  Introduction to Artificial Intelligence by Sebastian Thrun and Peter Norvig, 2011 "Unit 3: Explaining Away" ↩  Conditional Independence in Statistical theory "Conditional Independence in Statistical Theory", A. P. Dawid ↩     