


Quadratically closed field




Quadratically closed field

In mathematics, a quadratically closed field is a field in which every element of the field has a square root in the field.12
Examples

The field of complex numbers is quadratically closed; more generally, any algebraically closed field is quadratically closed.
The field of real numbers is not quadratically closed as it does not contain a square root of −1.
The union of the finite fields

 
  for n ≥ 0 is quadratically closed but not algebraically closed.3
The field of constructible numbers is quadratically closed but not algebraically closed.4

Properties

A field is quadratically closed if and only if it has universal invariant equal to 1.
Every quadratically closed field is a Pythagorean field but not conversely (for example, R is Pythagorean); however, every non-formally real Pythagorean field is quadratically closed.5
A field is quadratically closed if and only if its Witt–Grothendieck ring is isomorphic to Z under the dimension mapping.6
A formally real Euclidean field E is not quadratically closed (as −1 is not a square in E) but the quadratic extension E(√−1) is quadratically closed.7
Let E/F be a finite extension where E is quadratically closed. Either −1 is a square in F and F is quadratically closed, or −1 is not a square in F and F is Euclidean. This "going-down theorem" may be deduced from the Diller–Dress theorem.8

Quadratic closure
A quadratic closure of a field F is a quadratically closed field which embeds in any other quadratically closed field containing F. A quadratic closure for any given F may be constructed as a subfield of the algebraic closure Falg of F, as the union of all quadratic extensions of F in Falg.9
Examples

The quadratic closure of R is C.10
The quadratic closure of F5 is the union of the 
 
 
 
 .11
The quadratic closure of Q is the field of constructible numbers.

References




"
Category:Field theory



Lam (2005) p. 33↩
Rajwade (1993) p. 230↩

Lam (2005) p. 220↩

Lam (2005) p. 34↩

Lam (2005) p.270↩







