


Proper base change theorem




Proper base change theorem


There is also a proper base change theorem in topology. For that, see base change map.


In algebraic geometry, there are at least two versions of proper base change theorems: one for ordinary cohomology and the other for étale cohomology.
In ordinary cohomology
The proper base change theorem states the following: let 
 
 
 
  be a proper morphism between noetherian schemes, and 
 
 
S-flat coherent sheaf on 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , then there is a finite complex 
 
 
 
  of finitely generated projective A-modules and a natural isomorphism of functors


 
  on the category of 
 
 
 
 -algebras.
There are several corollaries to the theorem, some of which are also referred to as proper base change theorems: (the higher direct image

 
  is coherent since f is proper.)
Corollary 1 (semicontinuity theorem): Let f and 
 
 
 
  as in the theorem (but S may not be affine). Then we have:

(i) For each 
 
 
 
 , the function 
 
 
 
  is upper semicontinuous.
(ii) The function 
 
 
 
  is locally constant, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Euler characteristic.

Corollary 2: Assume S is reduced and connected. Then for each 
 
 
 
  the following are equivalent

(i) 
 
 
 
  is constant.
(ii) 
 
 
 
  is locally free and the natural map








is an isomorphism for all 
 
 
 
 .
 
Furthermore, if these conditions hold, then the natural map
 
 



is an isomorphism for all 
 
 
 
 .
 

Corollary 3: Assume that for some p

 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Then the natural map







is an isomorphism for all 
 
 
 
 .
 

In étale cohomology
In nutshell, the proper base change theorem states that the higher direct image 
 
 
 
  of a torsion sheaf

 
  along a proper morphism f commutes with base change. A closely related, the finiteness theorem states that the étale cohomology groups of a constructible sheaf on a complete variety are finite. Two theorems are usually proved simultaneously.
Theorem (finiteness): Let X be a variety over a separably closed field and 
 
 
 
  a constructible sheaf on 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  are finite in each of the following cases: (i) X is complete, or (ii) 
 
 
 
  has no p-torsion, where p is the characteristic of k.
References

Brian Conrad's handout 1
Robin Hartshorne, Algebraic Geometry.
David Mumford, Abelian Varieties.
Vakil's notes
SGA 4
Milne, Étale cohomology
Gabber, "“Finiteness theorems for étale cohomology of excellent schemes"

External links

http://mathoverflow.net/questions/90260/trouble-with-semicontinuity

"
Category:Theorems in algebraic geometry


