


Theorem on formal functions




Theorem on formal functions

In algebraic geometry, the theorem on formal functions states the following:1

Let 
 
 
 
  be a proper morphism of noetherian schemes with a coherent sheaf 
 
 
 
  on X. Let 
 
 
 
  be a closed subscheme of S defined by 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
formal completions with respect to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then for each 
 
 
 
  the canonical (continuous) map:
 
 



is an isomorphism of (topological) 
 
 
 
 -modules, where
 
The left term is 
 
 
 
 .



The canonical map is one obtained by passage to limit.



The theorem is used to deduce some other important theorems: Stein factorization and a version of Zariski's main theorem that says that a proper birational morphism into a normal variety is an isomorphism. Some other corollaries (with the notations as above) are:
Corollary:2 For any 
 
 
 
 , topologically,


 
  where the completion on the left is with respect to 
 
 
 
 .
Corollary:3 Let r be such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Then



Corollay:4 For each 
 
 
 
 
 , there exists an open neighborhood U of s such that



Corollary:5 If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is connected for all 
 
 
 
 .
The theorem also leads to the Grothendieck existence theorem, which gives an equivalence between the category of coherent sheaves on a scheme and the category of coherent sheaves on its formal completion (in particular, it yields algebralizability.)
Finally, it is possible to weaken the hypothesis in the theorem; cf. Illusie. According to Illusie (pg. 204), the proof given in EGA III is due to Serre. The original proof (due to Grothendieck) was never published.
The construction of the canonical map
Let the setting be as in the lede. In the proof one uses the following alternative definition of the canonical map.
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the canonical maps. Then we have the base change map of 
 
 
 
 -modules


 
 . where 
 
 
 
  is induced by 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
  is coherent, we can identify 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is also coherent (as f is proper), doing the same identification, the above reads:


 
 . Using 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , one also obtains (after passing to limit):


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are as before. One can verify that the composition of the two maps is the same map in the lede. (cf. EGA III-1, section 4)
Notes
References

Luc Illusie, Topics in Algebraic Geometry



"
Category:Theorems in algebraic geometry



↩
↩
↩
The same argument as in the preceding corollary↩
↩




