


Sobolev spaces for planar domains




Sobolev spaces for planar domains

In mathematics, Sobolev spaces for planar domains are one of the principal techniques used in the theory of partial differential equations for solving the Dirichlet and Neumann boundary value problems for the Laplacian in a bounded domain in the plane with smooth boundary. The methods use the theory of bounded operators on Hilbert space. They can be used to deduce regularity properties of solutions and to solve the corresponding eigenvalue problems.
Sobolev spaces with boundary conditions
Let  be a bounded domain with smooth boundary. Since 
 
 
 
  is contained in a large square in , it can be regarded as a domain in  by identifying opposite sides of the square. The theory of Sobolev spaces on  can be found in , an account which is followed in several later textbooks such as  and .
For 
 
 
 
  an integer, the (restricted) Sobolev space

 
  is defined as the closure of 
 
 
 
  in the standard Sobolev space .

 L2(Ω)}}.


Vanishing properties on boundary: For 
 
 
 
  the elements of 
 
 
 
  are referred to as " functions on 
 
 
 
  which vanish with their first 
 
 
 
  derivatives on 
 
 
 
 ."1 In fact if  agrees with a function in 
 
 
 
 , then  ∂ αf }} is in . Let  be such that  in the Sobolev norm, and set  ∂ αfn }}. Thus  in 
 
 
 
 . Hence for  and  a∂x + b∂y}},










By Green's theorem this implies
 










where 
 
 
 
  the unit normal to the boundary. Since such 
 
 
 
  form a dense subspace of , it follows that 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 .
 


Support properties: Let  be the complement of 
 
 
 
  and define restricted Sobolev spaces analogously for . Both sets of spaces have a natural pairing with . The Sobolev space for 
 
 
 
  is the annihilator in the Sobolev space for  of  and that for  is the annihilator of 
 
 
 
 .2 In fact this is proved by locally applying a small translation to move the domain inside itself and then smoothing by a smooth convolution operator.


Suppose 
 
 
 
  in  annihilates . By compactness, there are finitely many opens  covering 
 
 
 
  such that the closure of  is disjoint from 
 
 
 
  and each  is an open disc about a boundary point  such that in  small translations in the direction of the normal vector  carry 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 . Add an open  with closure in  to produce a cover of  and let  be a partition of unity subordinate to this cover. If translation by 
 
 
 
  is denoted by , then
 










as 
 
 
 
  decreases to 
 
 
 
  and still lie in the annihilator, indeed they are in the annihilator for a larger domain than , the complement of which lies in 
 
 
 
 . Convolving by smooth functions of small support produces smooth approximations in the annihilator of a slightly smaller domain still with complement in 
 
 
 
 . These are necessarily smooth functions of compact support in 
 
 
 
 .
 


Further vanishing properties on the boundary: The characterization in terms of annihilators shows that  lies in 
 
 
 
  if (and only if) it and its derivatives of order less than 
 
 
 
  vanish on 
 
 
 
 .3 In fact 
 
 
 
  can be extended to  by setting it to be 
 
 
 
  on . The extension 
 
 
 
  defines as element in  using the formula










and satisfies 
 
 
 
  for g in .
 


Duality: For 
 
 
 
 , define  to be the orthogonal complement of  in . Let  be the orthogonal projection onto , so that  I − Pk}} is the orthogonal projection onto . When 
 
 
 
 , this just gives  L2(Ω)}}. If  and , then










This implies that under the pairing between  and ,  and  are each other's duals.
 


Approximation by smooth functions: The image of 
 
 
 
  is dense in  for 
 
 
 
 . This is obvious for 
 
 
 
  since the sum 
 
 
 
  +  is dense in . Density for 
 
 



Canonical isometries: The operator  gives an isometry of 
 
 
 
  into  and of 
 
 
 
  onto . In fact the first statement follows because it is true on . That  is an isometry on 
 
 
 
  follows using the density of 
 
 
 
  in : for 
 
 
 
  we have:







\left \|P_k (I+\Delta)^k f \right \|_{(-k)} &= \sup_{\|g\|_{(-k)}=1} \left|\left ((I+\Delta)^kf,g \right )_{(-k)} \right | \\ &= \sup_{\|g\|_{(-k)}=1} |(f,g)| \\ &=\|f\|_{(k)}. \end{align}

Since the adjoint map between the duals can by identified with this map, it follows that  is a unitary map.
 

Application to Dirichlet problem
Invertibility of 
 
 

The operator 
 
 
 
  defines an isomorphism between 
 
 
 
  and . In fact it is a Fredholm operator of index 
 
 
 
 . The kernel of 
 
 
 
  in  consists of constant functions and none of these except zero vanish on the boundary of 
 
 
 
 . Hence the kernel of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is invertible.
In particular the equation 
 
 
 
  has a unique solution in 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in .
Eigenvalue problem
Let 
 
 
 
  be the operator on  defined by



where  is the inclusion of  in  and  of 
 
 
 
  in , both compact operators by Rellich's theorem. The operator 
 
 
 
  is compact, self-adjoint and with 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . By the spectral theorem, there is a complete orthonormal set of eigenfunctions  in  with



Since ,  lies in 
 
 
 
 . Setting  μ−n}}, the  are eigenfunctions of the Laplacian:



Sobolev spaces without boundary condition
To determine the regularity properties of the eigenfunctions  and solutions of



enlargements of the Sobolev spaces 
 
 
 
  have to be considered. Let  be the space of smooth functions on 
 
 
 
  which with their derivatives extend continuously to 
 
 
 
 . By Borel's lemma, these are precisely the restrictions of smooth functions on . The Sobolev space  is defined to the Hilbert space completion of this space for the norm



This norm agrees with the Sobolev norm on 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  can be regarded as a closed subspace of . Unlike 
 
 
 
 ,  is not naturally a subspace of , but the map restricting smooth functions from  to 
 
 
 
  is continuous for the Sobolev norm so extends by continuity to a map .

Invariance under diffeomorphism: Any diffeomorphism between the closures of two smooth domains induces an isomorphism between the Sobolev space. This is a simple consequence of the chain rule for derivatives.
Extension theorem: The restriction of  to the orthogonal complement of its kernel defines an isomorphism onto . The extension map  is defined to be the inverse of this map: it is an isomorphism (not necessarily norm preserving) of  onto the orthogonal complement of  such that  I}}. On 
 
 
 
 , it agrees with the natural inclusion map. Bounded extension maps  of this kind from  to  were constructed first constructed by Hestenes and Lions. For smooth curves the Seeley extension theorem provides an extension which is continuous in all the Sobolev norms. A version of the extension which applies in the case where the boundary is just a Lipschitz curve was constructed by Calderón using singular integral operators and generalized by .


It is sufficient to construct an extension 
 
 
 
  for a neighbourhood of a closed annulus, since a collar around the boundary is diffeomorphic to an annulus 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  a closed interval in 
 
 
 
 . Taking a smooth bump function 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , equal to 1 near the boundary and 0 outside the collar, 
 
 
 
  will provide an extension on 
 
 
 
 . On the annulus, the problem reduces to finding an extension for  in . Using a partition of unity the task of extending reduces to a neighbourhood of the end points of 
 
 
 
 . Assuming 0 is the left end point, an extension is given locally by
 










Matching the first derivatives of order k or less at 0, gives
 










This matrix equation is solvable because the determinant is non-zero by Vandermonde's formula. It is straightforward to check that the formula for 
 
 
 
 , when appropriately modified with bump functions, leads to an extension which is continuous in the above Sobolev norm.4



Restriction theorem: The restriction map  is surjective with  H(Ωc)}}. This is an immediate consequence of the extension theorem and the support properties for Sobolev spaces with boundary condition.


Duality:  is naturally the dual of H−k0(Ω). Again this is an immediate consequence of the restriction theorem. Thus the Sobolev spaces form a chain:










The differentiation operators  carry each Sobolev space into the larger one with index 1 less.
 


Sobolev embedding theorem:  is contained in . This is an immediate consequence of the extension theorem and the Sobolev embedding theorem for .


Characterization:  consists of 
 
 
 
  in  H0(Ω)}} such that all the derivatives ∂αf lie in  for |α| ≤ k.Here the derivatives are taken within the chain of Sobolev spaces above.See:



 Since 
 
 
 
  is weakly dense in , this condition is equivalent to the existence of  functions fα such that










To prove the characterization, note that if 
 
 
 
  is in , then  lies in Hk−|α|(Ω) and hence in  L2(Ω)}}. Conversely the result is well known for the Sobolev spaces : the assumption implies that the  is in  and the corresponding condition on the Fourier coefficients of 
 
 
 
  shows that 
 
 
 
  lies in . Similarly the result an be proved directly for an annulus 
 
 
 
 . In fact by the argument on  the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to any smaller annulus [−δ',δ'] × T lies in : equivalently the restriction of the function  f (Rx, y)}} lies in  for 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand  in  as 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  must lie in . The case for a general domain 
 
 
 
  reduces to these two cases since 
 
 
 
  can be written as 
 
 
 
  with ψ a bump function supported in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is supported in a collar of the boundary.
 


Regularity theorem: If 
 
 
 
  in  has both derivatives  and  in  then 
 
 
 
  lies in . This is an immediate consequence of the characterization of  above. In fact if this is true even when satisfied at the level of distributions: if there are functions g, h in  such that (g,φ) = (f, φx) and (h,φ) = (f,φy) for φ in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is in .


Rotations on an annulus: For an annulus 
 
 
 
 , the extension map to  is by construction equivariant with respect to rotations in the second variable,










On  it is known that if 
 
 
 
  is in , then the difference quotient  h−1(Rh f − f ) → ∂y f }} in ; if the difference quotients are bounded in Hk then ∂yf lies in . Both assertions are consequences of the formula:
 










These results on  imply analogous results on the annulus using the extension.
 

Regularity for Dirichlet problem
Regularity for dual Dirichlet problem
If 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in  with 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  lies in .
Take a decomposition 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  supported in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  supported in a collar of the boundary. Standard Sobolev theory for  can be applied to 
 
 
 
 : elliptic regularity implies that it lies in  and hence . 
 
 
 
  lies in 
 
 
 
  of a collar, diffeomorphic to an annulus, so it suffices to prove the result with 
 
 
 
  a collar and 
 
 
 
 
  replaced by



The proof5 proceeds by induction on 
 
 
 
 , proving simultaneously the inequality



for some constant 
 
 
 
  depending only on 
 
 
 
 . It is straightforward to establish this inequality for 
 
 
 
 , where by density 
 
 
 
  can be taken to be smooth of compact support in 
 
 
 
 
 :



The collar is diffeomorphic to an annulus. The rotational flow  on the annulus induces a flow  on the collar with corresponding vector field  r∂x + s∂y}}. Thus 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the vector field . The radial vector field on the annulus  is a commuting vector field which on the collar gives a vector field  p∂x + q∂y}} proportional to the normal vector field. The vector fields 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  commute.
The difference quotients  can be formed for the flow . The commutators  are second order differential operators from  to . Their operators norms are uniformly bounded for 
 
 
 
  near 
 
 
 
 ; for the computation can be carried out on the annulus where the commutator just replaces the coefficients of  by their difference quotients composed with . On the other hand  δhu}} lies in 
 
 
 
 , so the inequalities for 
 
 
 
  apply equally well for 
 
 
 
 
 :



The uniform boundedness of the difference quotients  implies that 
 
 
 
  lies in  with



It follows that 
 
 
 
  lies in  where 
 
 
 
  is the vector field



Moreover 
 
 
 
  satisfies a similar inequality to 
 
 
 
 .



Let 
 
 
 
  be the orthogonal vector field



It can also be written as 
 
 
 
  for some smooth nowhere vanishing function 
 
 
 
  on a neighbourhood of the collar.
It suffices to show that 
 
 
 
  lies in . For then



so that  and  lie in  and 
 
 
 
  must lie in .
To check the result on 
 
 
 
 , it is enough to show that 
 
 
 
 
  and  lie in . Note that



are vector fields. But then



with all terms on the right hand side in . Moreover the inequalities for 
 
 
 
 
  show that



Hence



Smoothness of eigenfunctions
It follows by induction from the regularity theorem for the dual Dirichlet problem that the eigenfunctions of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  lie in . Moreover any solution of 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  must have 
 
 
 
  in . In both cases by the vanishing properties, the eigenfunctions and 
 
 
 
  vanish on the boundary of 
 
 
 
 .
Solving the Dirichlet problem
The dual Dirichlet problem can be used to solve the Dirichlet problem:



By Borel's lemma 
 
 
 
  is the restriction of a function 
 
 
 
  in . Let 
 
 
 
  be the smooth solution of 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  solves the Dirichlet problem. By the maximal principle, the solution is unique.6
Application to smooth Riemann mapping theorem
The solution to the Dirichlet problem can be used to prove a strong form of the Riemann mapping theorem for simply connected domains with smooth boundary. The method also applies to a region diffeomorphic to an annulus.7 For multiply connected regions with smooth boundary  have given a method for mapping the region onto a disc with circular holes. Their method involves solving the Dirichlet problem with a non-linear boundary condition. They construct a function 
 
 
 
  such that:



 
  is harmonic in the interior of 
 
 
 
 ;
On 
 
 
 
  we have:  κ − KeG}}, where 
 
 
 
  is the curvature of the boundary curve,  is the derivative in the direction normal to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is constant on each boundary component.

gives a proof of the Riemann mapping theorem for a simply connected domain 
 
 
 
  with smooth boundary. Translating if necessary, it can be assumed that 
 
 
 
 . The solution of the Dirichlet problem shows that there is a unique smooth function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  which is harmonic in 
 
 
 
  and equals 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . Define the Green's function by 
 
 
 
 . It vanishes on 
 
 
 
  and is harmonic on 
 
 
 
  away from 
 
 
 
 . The harmonic conjugate

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is the unique real function on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  is holomorphic. As such it must satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann equations:



The solution is given by



where the integral is taken over any path in 
 
 
 
 . It is easily verified that  and  exist and are given by the corresponding derivatives of 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is a smooth function on 
 
 
 
 , vanishing at 
 
 
 
 . By the Cauchy-Riemann 
 
 
 
  is smooth on 
 
 
 
 , holomorphic on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The function 
 
 
 
  is only defined up to multiples of 
 
 
 
 , but the function



is a holomorphic on 
 
 
 
  and smooth on 
 
 
 
 . By construction, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  has winding number

 
 , so too does 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand 
 
 
 
  only for 
 
 
 
  where there is a simple zero. So by the argument principle

 
  assumes every value in the unit disc, 
 
 
 
 , exactly once and 
 
 
 
  does not vanish inside 
 
 
 
 . To check that the derivative on the boundary curve is non-zero amounts to computing the derivative of , i.e. the derivative of 
 
 
 
  should not vanish on the boundary curve. By the Cauchy-Riemann equations these tangential derivative are up to a sign the directional derivative in the direction of the normal to the boundary. But 
 
 
 
  vanishes on the boundary and is strictly negative in 
 
 
 
  since F{{!}} {{=}} eG}}. The Hopf lemma implies that the directional derivative of 
 
 
 
  in the direction of the outward normal is strictly positive. So on the boundary curve, 
 
 
 
  has nowhere vanishing derivative. Since the boundary curve has winding number one, 
 
 
 
  defines a diffeomorphism of the boundary curve onto the unit circle. Accordingly 
 
 
 
  is a smooth diffeomorphism, which restricts to a holomorphic map 
 
 
 
  and a smooth diffeomorphism between the boundaries.
Similar arguments can be applied to prove the Riemann mapping theorem for a doubly connected domain 
 
 
 
  bounded by simple smooth curves  (the inner curve) and  (the outer curve). By translating we can assume 1 lies on the outer boundary. Let 
 
 
 
  be the smooth solution of the Dirichlet problem with 
 
 
 
  on the outer curve and 
 
 
 
  on the inner curve. By the maximum principle





on each boundary curve. The harmonic conjugate 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  can again be defined by



and is well-defined up to multiples of 
 
 
 
 . The function



is smooth on 
 
 
 
  and holomorphic in 
 
 
 
 . On the outer curve 
 
 
 
  and on the inner curve F{{!}} {{=}} e−c {{=}} r . The tangential derivatives on the outer curves are nowhere vanishing by the Cauchy-Riemann equations, since the normal derivatives are nowhere vanishing. The normalization of the integrals implies that 
 
 
 
  restricts to a diffeomorphism between the boundary curves and the two concentric circles. Since the images of outer and inner curve have winding number 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  about any point in the annulus, an application of the argument principle implies that 
 
 
 
  assumes every value within the annulus 
 
 

Trace map
The restriction map  C∞(1 × T)}} extends to a continuous map  for 
 
 
 
 
 .8 In fact



so the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality yields



where, by the integral test,



The map 
 
 
 
  is onto since a continuous extension map 
 
 
 
 
  can be constructed from  to .910 In fact set



where



Thus . If g is smooth, then by construction Eg restricts to g on 1 × T. Moreover E is a bounded linear map since



It follows that there is a trace map τ of Hk(Ω) onto Hk − ½(∂Ω). Indeed take a tubular neighbourhood of the boundary and a smooth function ψ supported in the collar and equal to 1 near the boundary. Multiplication by ψ carries functions into Hk of the collar, which can be identified with Hk of an annulus for which there is a trace map. The invariance under diffeomorphims (or coordinate change) of the half-integer Sobolev spaces on the circle follows from the fact that an equivalent norm on Hk + ½(T) is given by11



It is also a consequence of the properties of τ and E (the "trace theorem").12 In fact any diffeomorphism f of T induces a diffeomorphism F of T2 by acting only on the second factor. Invariance of Hk(T2) under the induced map F* therefore implies invariance of Hk − ½(T) under f*, since f* = τ ∘ F* ∘ E.
Further consequences of the trace theorem are the two exact sequences1314



and



where the last map takes f in H2(Ω) to f|∂Ω and ∂nf|∂Ω. There are generalizations of these sequences to Hk(Ω) involving higher powers of the normal derivative in the trace map:



The trace map to  takes f to ∂Ω}}
Abstract formulation of boundary value problems
The Sobolev space approach to the Neumann problem cannot be phrased quite as directly as that for the Dirichlet problem. The main reason is that for a function 
 
 
 
  in , the normal derivative ∂Ω}} cannot be a priori defined at the level of Sobolev spaces. Instead an alternative formulation of boundary value problems for the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  on a bounded region 
 
 
 
  in the plane is used. It employs Dirichlet forms, sesqulinear bilinear forms on , 
 
 
 
  or an intermediate closed subspace. Integration over the boundary is not involved in defining the Dirichlet form. Instead, if the Dirichlet form satisfies a certain positivity condition, termed coerciveness, solution can be shown to exist in a weak sense, so-called "weak solutions". A general regularity theorem than implies that the solutions of the boundary value problem must lie in , so that they are strong solutions and satisfy boundary conditions involving the restriction of a function and its normal derivative to the boundary. The Dirichlet problem can equally well be phrased in these terms, but because the trace map ∂Ω}} is already defined on , Dirichlet forms do not need to be mentioned explicitly and the operator formulation is more direct. A unified discussion is given in  and briefly summarised below. It is explained how the Dirichlet problem, as discussed above, fits into this framework. Then a detailed treatment of the Neumann problem from this point of view is given following .
The Hilbert space formulation of boundary value problems for the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  on a bounded region 
 
 
 
  in the plane proceeds from the following data:15

A closed subspace .
A Dirichlet form for 
 
 
 
  given by a bounded Hermitian bilinear form 
 
 
 
  defined for  such that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is coercive, i.e. there is a positive constant 
 
 
 
  and a non-negative constant 
 
 
 
  such that .

A weak solution of the boundary value problem given initial data 
 
 
 
  in  is defined by the following:



For both the Dirichlet and Neumann problem



For the Dirichlet problem 
 
 
 
 . In this case



By the trace theorem the solution satisfies Ω {{=}} 0}} in .
For the Neumann problem 
 
 
 
  is taken to be .
Application to Neumann problem
The classical Neumann problem on 
 
 
 
 
  consists in solving the boundary value problem



Green's theorem implies that for 



Thus if 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and satisfies the Neumann boundary conditions,  uy {{=}} 0}}, and so 
 
 
 
 
  is constant in 
 
 
 
 .
Hence the Neumann problem has a unique solution up to adding constants.16
Consider the Hermitian form on  defined by



Since  is in duality with 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  such that



The map 
 
 
 
  is an isometry of  onto 
 
 
 
 , so in particular 
 
 
 
  is bounded.
In fact



So



On the other hand any 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  defines a bounded conjugate-linear form on  sending 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
 . By the Riesz–Fischer theorem, there exists  such that



Hence 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
  is surjective. Define a bounded linear operator 
 
 
 
  on  by



where  is the map , a compact operator, and  is the map , its adjoint, so also compact.
The operator 
 
 
 
  has the following properties:



 
  is a contraction since it is a composition of contractions


 
  is compact, since  and  are compact by Rellich's theorem


 
  is self-adjoint, since if , they can be written 
 
 
 
 
  with  so












 
  has positive spectrum and kernel 
 
 
 
 , for










and 
 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
 .
 


There is a complete orthonormal basis  of  consisting of eigenfunctions of 
 
 
 
 . Thus










with  and  decreasing to 
 
 
 
 
 .
 


The eigenfunctions all lie in  since the image of 
 
 
 
  lies in .


The  are eigenfunctions of 
 
 
 
  with










Thus  are non-negative and increase to 
 
 
 
 .
 


The eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 
  occurs with multiplicity one and corresponds to the constant function. For if  satisfies 
 
 
 
 , then










so 
 
 
 
  is constant.
 

Regularity for Neumann problem
Weak solutions are strong solutions
The first main regularity result shows that a weak solution expressed in terms of the operator 
 
 
 
  and the Dirichlet form 
 
 
 
 
  is a strong solution in the classical sense, expressed in terms of the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  and the Neumann boundary conditions. Thus if 
 
 
 
  with , then , satisfies 
 
 
 
  and ∂Ω {{=}} 0}}. Moreover for some constant 
 
 
 
  independent of 
 
 
 
 
 ,



Note that



since



Take a decomposition 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  supported in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  supported in a collar of the boundary.
The operator 
 
 
 
  is characterized by



Then



so that



The function 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are treated separately, 
 
 
 
  being essentially subject to usual elliptic regularity considerations for interior points while 
 
 
 
  requires special treatment near the boundary using difference quotients. Once the strong properties are established in terms of 
 
 
 
  and the Neumann boundary conditions, the "bootstrap" regularity results can be proved exactly as for the Dirichlet problem.
Interior estimates
The function 
 
 
 
  lies in  where  is a region with closure in 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  and 



By continuity the same holds with 
 
 
 
  replaced by 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
 . So



Hence regarding 
 
 
 
  as an element of , . Hence . Since 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
 . Moreover



so that



Boundary estimates
The function 
 
 
 
  is supported in a collar contained in a tubular neighbourhood of the boundary. The difference quotients  can be formed for the flow  and lie in , so the first inequality is applicable:



The commutators  are uniformly bounded as operators from  to 
 
 
 
 . This is equivalent to checking the inequality



for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  smooth functions on a collar. This can be checked directly on an annulus, using invariance of Sobolev spaces under dffeomorphisms and the fact that for the annulus the commutator of  with a differential operator is obtained by applying the difference operator to the coefficients after having applied  to the function:17



Hence the difference quotients  are uniformly bounded, and therefore  with



Hence  and 
 
 
 
  satisfies a similar inequality to 
 
 
 
 
 :



Let 
 
 
 
  be the orthogonal vector field. As for the Dirichlet problem, to show that , it suffices to show that .
To check this, it is enough to show that . As before



are vector fields. On the other hand 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  define the same distribution on 
 
 
 
 . Hence



Since the terms on the right hand side are pairings with functions in , the regularity criterion shows that . Hence 
 
 
 
 
  since both terms lie in  and have the same inner products with 
 
 
 
 
 's.
Moreover the inequalities for 
 
 
 
 
  show that



Hence



It follows that  v + w ∈ H2(Ω)}}. Moreover



Neumann boundary conditions
Since , Green's theorem is applicable by continuity. Thus for ,



Hence the Neumann boundary conditions are satisfied:



where the left hand side is regarded as an element of  and hence .
Regularity of strong solutions
The main result here states that if  and ∂Ω {{=}} 0}}, then  and



for some constant independent of 
 
 
 
 .
Like the ocrresponding result for the Dirichlet problem, this is proved by induction on 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is also a weak solution of the Neumann problem so satisfies the estimate above for 
 
 
 
 . The Neumann boundary condition can be written



Since 
 
 
 
  commutes with the vector field 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the period flow , the inductive method of proof used for the Dirichlet problem works equally well in this case: for the difference quotients  preserve the boundary condition when expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
 .18
Smoothness of eigenfunctions
It follows by induction from the regularity theorem for the Neumann problem that the eigenfunctions of 
 
 
 
  in  lie in . Moreover any solution of 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in  and 
 
 
 
  in  must have 
 
 
 
  in . In both cases by the vanishing properties, the normal derivatives of the eigenfunctions and 
 
 
 
  vanish on 
 
 
 
 .
Solving the associated Neumann problem
The method above can be used to solve the associated Neumann boundary value problem:



By Borel's lemma 
 
 
 
  is the restriction of a function . Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth function such that  G}} near the boundary. Let $u$ be the solution of $∆ u = −∆ F$ with  0}}. Then $f = u + F$ solves the boundary value problem.19
Notes
References


















"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Harmonic analysis Category:Operator theory Category:Functional analysis


























