


Moving horizon estimation




Moving horizon estimation

Moving horizon estimation (MHE) is an optimization approach that uses a series of measurements observed over time, containing noise (random variations) and other inaccuracies, and produces estimates of unknown variables or parameters. Unlike deterministic approaches like the Kalman filter, MHE requires an iterative approach that relies on linear programming or nonlinear programming solvers to find a solution.1
MHE reduces to the Kalman filter under certain simplifying conditions.2 A critical evaluation of the extended Kalman filter and MHE found improved performance of MHE with the only cost of improvement being the increased computational expense.3 Because of the computational expense, MHE has generally been applied to systems where there are greater computational resources and moderate to slow system dynamics.
Overview
The application of MHE is generally to estimate measured or unmeasured states of dynamical systems. Initial conditions and parameters within a model are adjusted by MHE to align measured and predicted values. MHE is based on a finite horizon optimization of a process model and measurements. At time 
 
 
 
  the current process state is sampled and a minimizing strategy is computed (via a numerical minimization algorithm) for a relatively short time horizon in the past
 
 
 
 . Specifically, an online or on-the-fly calculation is used to explore state trajectories that find (via the solution of Euler–Lagrange equations) a objective-minimizing strategy until time 
 
 
 
 . Only the last step of the estimation strategy is used, then the process state is sampled again and the calculations are repeated starting from the time-shifted states, yielding a new state path and predicted parameters. The estimation horizon keeps being shifted forward and for this reason MHE is also called moving horizon estimation. Although this approach is not optimal, in practice it has given very good results when compared with the Kalman filter and other estimation strategies.
Principles of MHE
Moving horizon estimation (MHE) is a multivariable estimation algorithm that uses:

an internal dynamic model of the process
a history of past measurements and
an optimization cost function J over the estimation horizon,

to calculate the optimum states and parameters.
The optimization estimation function is given by:



without violating state or parameter constraints (low/high limits)
With:


 
  = i -th model predicted variable (e.g. predicted temperature)


 
  = i -th measured variable (e.g. measured temperature)


 
  = i -th estimated parameter (e.g. heat transfer coefficient)


 
  = weighting coefficient reflecting the relative importance of measured values 
 
 

 
  = weighting coefficient reflecting the relative importance of prior model predictions 
 
 

 
  = weighting coefficient penalizing relative big changes in 
 
 

Applications

MATLAB, Python, and Simulink source code for MHE4
Monitoring of industrial process fouling 5
Oil and gas industry 6
Polymer manufacture7
Unmanned aerial systems89

See also

Alpha beta filter
Data assimilation
Ensemble Kalman filter
Extended Kalman filter
Invariant extended Kalman filter
Fast Kalman filter
Filtering problem (stochastic processes)
Kernel adaptive filter
Non-linear filter
Particle filter
Predictor corrector
Recursive least squares
Schmidt–Kalman filter
Sliding mode control
Wiener filter

References
Further reading



External links

MHE Tutorial in Simulink and MATLAB
MHE lecture material
Online Course: MHE in Simulink, MATLAB and Python

"
Category:Control theory Category:Nonlinear filters Category:Linear filters Category:Signal estimation



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




