


Khinchin integral




Khinchin integral

In mathematics, the Khinchin integral (sometimes spelled Khintchine integral), also known as the Denjoy–Khinchin integral, generalized Denjoy integral or wide Denjoy integral, is one of a number of definitions of the integral of a function. It is a generalization of the Riemann and Lebesgue integrals. It is named after Aleksandr Khinchin and Arnaud Denjoy, but is not to be confused with the (narrow) Denjoy integral.
Motivation
If g : I → R is a Lebesgue-integrable function on some interval I = [a,b], and if



is its Lebesgue indefinite integral, then the following assertions are true:1

f is absolutely continuous (see below)
f is differentiable almost everywhere
Its derivative coincides almost everywhere with g(x). (In fact, all absolutely continuous functions are obtained in this manner.2)

The Lebesgue integral could be defined as follows: g is Lebesgue-integrable on I iff there exists a function f that is absolutely continuous whose derivative coincides with g almost everywhere.
However, even if f : I → R is differentiable everywhere, and g is its derivative, it does not follow that f is (up to a constant) the Lebesgue indefinite integral of g, simply because g can fail to be Lebesgue-integrable, i.e., f can fail to be absolutely continuous. An example of this is given3 by the derivative g of the (differentiable but not absolutely continuous) function f(x)=x²·sin(1/x²) (the function g is not Lebesgue-integrable around 0).
The Denjoy integral corrects this lack by ensuring that the derivative of any function f that is everywhere differentiable (or even differentiable everywhere except for at most countably many points) is integrable, and its integral reconstructs f up to a constant; the Khinchin integral is even more general in that it can integrate the approximate derivative of an approximately differentiable function (see below for definitions). To do this, one first finds a condition that is weaker than absolute continuity but is satisfied by any approximately differentiable function. This is the concept of generalized absolute continuity; generalized absolutely continuous functions will be exactly those functions which are indefinite Khinchin integrals.
Definition
Generalized absolutely continuous function
Let I = [a,b] be an interval and f : I → R be a real-valued function on I.
Recall that f is absolutely continuous on a subset E of I if and only if for every positive number ε there is a positive number δ such that whenever a finite collection [xk,yk] of pairwise disjoint subintervals of I with endpoints in E satisfies



it also satisfies



Define45 the function f to be generalized absolutely continuous on a subset E of I if the restriction of f to E is continuous (on E) and E can be written as a countable union of subsets Ei such that f is absolutely continuous on each Ei. This is equivalent6 to the statement that every nonempty perfect subset of E contains a portion7 on which f is absolutely continuous.
Approximate derivative
Let E be a Lebesgue measurable set of reals. Recall that a real number x (not necessarily in E) is said to be a point of density of E when



(where μ denotes Lebesgue measure). A Lebesgue-measurable function g : E → R is said to have approximate limit8 y at x (a point of density of E) if for every positive number ε, the point x is a point of density of 
 
 
 
 . (If furthermore g(x)  = y, we can say that g is approximately continuous at x.9) Equivalently, g has approximate limit y at x if and only if there exists a measurable subset F of E such that x is a point of density of F and the (usual) limit at x of the restriction of f to F is y. Just like the usual limit, the approximate limit is unique if it exists.
Finally, a Lebesgue-measurable function f : E → R is said to have approximate derivative y at x iff



has approximate limit y at x; this implies that f is approximately continuous at x.
A theorem
Recall that it follows from Lusin's theorem that a Lebesgue-measurable function is approximately continuous almost everywhere (and conversely).1011 The key theorem in constructing the Khinchin integral is this: a function f that is generalized absolutely continuous (or even of "generalized bounded variation", a weaker notion) has an approximate derivative almost everywhere.121314 Furthermore, if f is generalized absolutely continuous and its approximate derivative is nonnegative almost everywhere, then f is nondecreasing,15 and consequently, if this approximate derivative is zero almost everywhere, then f is constant.
The Khinchin integral
Let I = [a,b] be an interval and g : I → R be a real-valued function on I. The function g is said to be Khinchin-integrable on I iff there exists a function f that is generalized absolutely continuous whose approximate derivative coincides with g almost everywhere;16 in this case, the function f is determined by g up to a constant, and the Khinchin-integral of g from a to b is defined as f(b) − f(a).
A particular case
If f : I → R is continuous and has an approximate derivative everywhere on I except for at most countably many points, then f is, in fact, generalized absolutely continuous, so it is the (indefinite) Khinchin-integral of its approximate derivative.17
This result does not hold if the set of points where f is not assumed to have an approximate derivative is merely of Lebesgue measure zero, as the Cantor function shows.
Notes
References

Springer Encyclopedia of Mathematics: article "Denjoy integral"
Springer Encyclopedia of Mathematics: article "Approximate derivative"










"
Category:Definitions of mathematical integration









A portion of a perfect set P is a P ∩ [u, v] such that this intersection is perfect and nonempty.














