


ADF-GLS test




ADF-GLS test

In statistics and econometrics, the ADF-GLS test (or DF-GLS test) is a test for a unit root in an economic time series sample. It was developed by Elliott, Rothenberg and Stock (ERS) in 1992 as a modification of the augmented Dickey–Fuller test (ADF).1
A unit root test determines whether a time series variable is non-stationary using an autoregressive model. For series featuring deterministic components in the form of a constant or a linear trend then ERS developed an asymptotically point optimal test to detect a unit root. This testing procedure dominates other existing unit root tests in terms of power. It locally de-trends (de-means) data series to efficiently estimate the deterministic parameters of the series, and use the transformed data to perform a usual ADF unit root test. This procedure helps to remove the means and linear trends for series that are not far from the non-stationary region.2
Explanation
Consider a simple time series model 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the deterministic part and 
 
 
 
  is the stochastic part of 
 
 
 
 . When the true value of 
 
 
 
  is close to 1, estimation of the model, i.e. 
 
 
 
  will pose efficiency problems because the 
 
 
 
  will be close to nonstationary. In this setting, testing for the stationarity features of the given times series will also be subject to general statistical problems. To overcome such problems ERS suggested to locally difference the time series.
Consider the case where closeness to 1 for the autoregressive parameter is modelled as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the number of observations. Now consider filtering the series using 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  being a standard lag operator, i.e. 
 
 
 
 . Working with 
 
 
 
  would result in power gain, as ERS show, when testing the stationarity features of 
 
 
 
  using the augmented Dickey-Fuller test. This is a point optimal test for which 
 
 
 
  is set in such a way that the test would have a 50 percent power when the alternative is characterized by 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Depending on the specification of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  will take different values.
References
A Primer on Unit Root Tests, P.C.B. Phillips and Z. Xiao
"
Category:Econometrics Category:Statistical tests Category:Time series analysis



↩
Efficient Tests for an Autoregressive Unit Root, Elliott, Rothenberg and Stock, Econometrica Vol. 64, No. 4, pp. 813-836, Jul., 1996↩




