


Resolvent (Galois theory)




Resolvent (Galois theory)

In Galois theory, a discipline within the field of abstract algebra, a resolvent for a permutation group G is a polynomial whose coefficients depend polynomially on the coefficients of a given polynomial p and has, roughly speaking, a rational root if and only if the Galois group of p is included in G. More exactly, if the Galois group is included in G, then the resolvent has a rational root, and the converse is true if the rational root is a simple root. Resolvents were introduced by Joseph Louis Lagrange and systematically used by Évariste Galois. Nowadays they are still a fundamental tool to compute Galois groups. The simplest examples of resolvents are



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the discriminant, which is a resolvent for the alternating group. In the case of a cubic equation, this resolvent is sometimes called the quadratic resolvent; its roots appear explicitly in the formulas for the roots of a cubic equation.
The cubic resolvent of a quartic equation, which is a resolvent for the dihedral group of 8 elements.
The Cayley resolvent is a resolvent for the maximal resoluble Galois group in degree five. It is a polynomial of degree 6.

These three resolvents have the property of being always separable, which means that, if they have a multiple root, then the polynomial p is not irreducible. It is not known if there is an always separable resolvent for every group of permutations.
For every equation the roots may be expressed in terms of radicals and of a root of a resolvent for a resoluble group, because, the Galois group of the equation over the field generated by this root is resoluble.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a positive integer, which will be the degree of the equation that we will consider, and 
 
 
 
  an ordered list of indeterminates. This defines the generic polynomial of degree 
 
 



 
  where  is the ith elementary symmetric polynomial.
The symmetric group  acts on the  by permuting them, and this induces an action on the polynomials in the . The stabilizer of a given polynomial under this action is generally trivial, but some polynomials have a bigger stabilizer. For example, the stabilizer of an elementary symmetric polynomial is the whole group . If the stabilizer is non-trivial, the polynomial is fixed by some non-trivial subgroup 
 
 
 
 ; it is said an invariant of 
 
 
 
 . Conversely, given a subgroup 
 
 
 
  of , an invariant of 
 
 
 
  is a resolvent invariant for 
 
 
 
  if it is not an invariant of any bigger subgroup of .1
Finding invariants for a given subgroup 
 
 
 
  of  is relatively easy; one can sum the orbit of a monomial under the action of . However it may occur that the resulting polynomial is an invariant for a larger group. For example, let us consider the case of the subgroup 
 
 
 
  of  of order 4, consisting of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and the identity (for the notation, see Permutation group). The monomial 
 
 
 
  gives the invariant 
 
 
 
 . It is not a resolvent invariant for 
 
 
 
 , as being invariant by 
 
 
 
 . In fact, it is a resolvent invariant for the dihedral subgroup 
 
 
 
 , and is used to define the cubic resolvent of the quartic equation.
If 
 
 
 
  is a resolvent invariant for a group 
 
 
 
  of index

 
 , then its orbit under  has order 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the elements of this orbit. Then the polynomial


 
  is invariant under . Thus, when expanded, its coefficients are polynomials in the  that are invariant under the action of the symmetry group and thus may be expressed as polynomials in the elementary symmetric polynomials. In other words,  is an irreducible polynomial in 
 
 
 
  whose coefficients are polynomial in the coefficients of 
 
 
 
 . Having the resolvent invariant as a root, it is called a resolvent (sometimes resolvent equation).
Let us consider now an irreducible polynomial


 
  with coefficients in a given field 
 
 
 
  (typically the field of rationals) and roots  in an algebraically closed field extension. Substituting the  by the  and the coefficients of 
 
 
 
  by those of 
 
 
 
  in what precedes, we get a polynomial 
 
 
 
 , also called resolvent or specialized resolvent in case of ambiguity). If the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 , the specialization of the resolvent invariant is invariant by 
 
 
 
  and is thus a root of 
 
 
 
  that belongs to 
 
 
 
  (is rational on 
 
 
 
 ). Conversely, if 
 
 
 
  has a rational root, which is not a multiple root, the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 .
Terminology
There are some variants in the terminology.

Depending on the authors or on the context, resolvent may refer to resolvent invariant instead of to resolvent equation.
A '''Galois resolvent ''' is a resolvent such that the resolvent invariant is linear in the roots.
The  may refer to the linear polynomial








where 
 
 
 
  is a primitive nth root of unity. It is the resolvent invariant of a Galois resolvent for the identity group.
 


A relative resolvent is defined similarly as a resolvent, but considering only the action of the elements of a given subgroup 
 
 
 
  of , having the property that, if a relative resolvent for a subgroup 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  has a rational simple root and the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 , then the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 . In this context, a usual resolvent is called an absolute resolvent.

Resolvent method
The Galois group of a polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  or a proper subgroup of that. If a polynomial is irreducible, then the corresponding Galois group is a transitive subgroup.
Transitive subgroups of 
 
 
 
  form a directed graph: one group can be a subgroup of several groups. One resolvent can tell if the Galois group of a polynomial is a (not necessarily proper) subgroup of given group. The resolvent method is just a systematic way to check groups one by one until only one group is possible. This does not mean that every group must be checked: every resolvent can cancel out many possible groups. For example for degree five polynomials there is never need for a resolvent of 
 
 
 
 : resolvents for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  give desired information.
One way is to begin from maximal (transitive) subgroups until the right one is found and then continue with maximal subgroups of that.
References




ru:Резольвента алгебраического уравнения"
Category:Field theory Category:Group theory Category:Galois theory Category:Equations



http://www.alexhealy.net/papers/math250a.pdf




