


Offshore crane shock absorber




Offshore crane shock absorber

An offshore  crane shock absorber is a gas spring with hydraulic damping used to reduce dynamic loads during offshore lifting. The lifting capacity of the offshore crane can be increased significantly during lifting in high sea states if a shock absorber is fitted. 1
Crane design load
Offshore lifting capacity is governed by classification society rules. The fundamental rule is that the design load should not be exceeded. The design load is given by:



 Where:

 
  - Crane design load

 
  - Dynamic coefficient

 
  - Safe working load

 
  - Acceleration of gravity

 The classification societies require that 
 
 
 
  ≥1.3 for offshore cranes. This means that 
 
 
 
  cannot exceed 
 
 
 
  even for platform lifts. 2 3 4
Dynamic load
To calculate the dynamic load the classification societies use energy equations. The kinetic energy of the load is expressed as:



 Where:

 
  - Kinetic energy of the load

 
  - Relative velocity between crane hook and load

 Energy absorbed by the crane is given by:



 Where:

 
  - Spring energy stored in crane structure

 
  - Stiffness of offshore crane

 
  - Vertical displacement of crane hook

 The pring force is given by:



 Combining the two previous equations yields an alternative description of the energy stored in the crane structure:



 During an offshore lift the crane does not start to absorb energy from the load before the force in the crane wire exceeds the static weight of the load, which means that we can write the energy absorption of the crane as:



 Setting 
 
 
 
  equal to 
 
 
 
 : 
 
 


 And solving for 
 
 
 
 :




 The dynamic factor will always be larger than 1 because there will always be a velocity difference between the crane hook and the load during offshore lifts. The value of 
 
 
 
  determines the lifting capacity as a function of 
 
 
 
  which is dependent on the significant wave height. If the offshore crane has a shock absorber mounted it will absorb energy according to:



 Where:

 
  - Energy absorbed by shock absorber

 
  - Stroke utilization (safety factor), standard value 0.9

 
  - Efficiency of shock absorber, usually possible to get close to 0.9

 
  - Stroke length

 Adding this to the energy balance yields: 




 Again solving for ψ:




 The plot to the right shows the effect of the shock absorber stroke length.
Estimating relative velocity
The relative velocity is defined by several classification societies as:




 Where:

 
  - Maximum crane lifting velocity at this SWL

 
  - Vertical velocity of the deck which the load is placed on

 
  - Vertical velocity of the crane tip due to wave motion


 
  has to be gathered from crane user manual or be measured. The deck velocity can be estimated from Table 1.






Table 1: Deck velocity estimation

Lifting from or to







Platform or fixed structure







Supply boat or barge



 
  if 
 
 
 
  ≤3

 
  if 
 
 
 
 >3






 The crane tip velocity, 
 
 
 
 , can be estimated by Table 2.

 {| |- | Table 2: Crane tip velocity ! Lifting from or to !! 
 
 
 
  |- | Platform or fixed structure || 
 
 
 
  |- | Tension leg platform or Spar|| 
 
 
 
  |- | Semisubmersible|| 
 
 
 
  |- | FPSO or drillship|| 
 
 
 
  |- |}

 These estimations are conservative and for large ships/rigs they may deviate significantly from reality. A plot of the dynamic factor versus significant wave height for a crane mounted on a semisubmersible and lifting from supply boat is shown above to the right.
References
'
Category:Springs (mechanical) Category:Petroleum production



The Engineers Guide Safelink AS
EN13852-1:2004 Cranes - Offshore cranes - Part 1: General - purpose offshore cranes
DNV Standard For Certification No. 2.22 Lifting Appliances October 2011
API 2C 7th Ed. Specification for Offshore Pedestal-mounted Cranes




