


Recognizable set




Recognizable set

In computer science, more precisely in automata theory, a recognizable set of a monoid is a subset that can be distinguished by some morphism to a finite monoid. Recognizable sets are useful in automata theory, formal languages and algebra.
This notion is different from the notion of recognizable language. Indeed, the term "recognizable" has a different meaning in computability theory.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a monoid, a subset 
 
 
 
  is recognized by a monoid 
 
 
 
  if there exists a morphism 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , and recognizable if it is recognized by some finite monoid. This means that there exists a subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  (not necessarily a submonoid of 
 
 
 
 ) such that the image of 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
  and the image of 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  be an alphabet: the set 
 
 
 
  of words over 
 
 
 
  is a monoid, the free monoid on 
 
 
 
 . The recognizable subsets of 
 
 
 
  are precisely the regular languages. Indeed such a language is recognized by the transition monoid of any automaton that recognizes the language.
The recognizable subsets of 
 
 
 
  are the ultimately periodic sets of integers.
Properties
A subset of 
 
 
 
  is recognizable if and only if its syntactic monoid is finite.
The set 
 
 
 
  of recognizable subsets of 
 
 
 
  contains every finite subset of 
 
 
 
  and is closed under:

union
intersection
complement
right and left quotient

McKnight's theorem states that if 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated then its recognizable subsets are rational subsets. This is not true in general, i.e. 
 
 
 
  is not closed under Kleene star. Let 
 
 
 
 , the set 
 
 
 
  is finite, hence recognizable, but 
 
 
 
  is not recognizable. Indeed its syntactic monoid is infinite.
The intersection of a rational subset and of a recognizable subset is rational.
Recognizable sets are closed under inverse morphism. I.e. if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are monoids and 
 
 
 
  is a morphism then if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 .
For finite groups the following result of Anissimov and Seifert is well known: a subgroup H of a finitely generated group G is recognizable if and only if H has finite index in G. In contrast, H is rational if and only if H is finitely generated.1
See also

Rational set
Rational monoid

References


Jean-Eric Pin, Mathematical Foundations of Automata Theory, Chapter IV: Recognisable and rational sets

Further reading



"
Category:Automata theory



 preprint↩




