


Rulkov map




Rulkov map

(Figure)
Time series of Rulkov map showing three different dynamical regimes

The Rulkov map is a two-dimensional iterated map used to model a biological neuron. It was proposed by Nikolai F. Rulkov in 2001.1 The use of this map to study neural networks has computational advantages because the map is easier to iterate than a continuous dynamical system. This saves memory and simplifies the computation of large neural networks.
The model
The Rulkov map, with 
 
 
 
  as discrete time, can be represented by following dynamical equations:






where 
 
 
 
 
  represents the membrane potential of the neuron. The variable 
 
 
 
  in the model is a slow variable due to very small value of parameter 
 
 

 
 . Unlike variable 
 
 
 
 , variable 
 
 
 
 
  does not have explicit biological meaning though some analogy to gating variables can be drawn.2 The parameter 
 
 
 
  can be thought of as an external dc current given to the neuron and 
 
 
 
  is a nonlinearity parameter of the map. Different combinations of parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  give rise to different dynamical states of the neuron like resting, tonic spiking and chaotic bursts. The chaotic bursting is enabled above 
 
 

Analysis
The dynamics of the Rulkov map can be analyzed by analyzing the dynamics of its one dimensional fast submap. Since the variable 
 
 
 
  evolves very slowly, for moderate amount of time it can be treated as a paramter with constant value in the 
 
 
 
  variable's evolution equation (which we now call as one dimensional fast submap because as compared to 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a fast variable). Depending on the value of 
 
 
 
 
 , this submap can have either one or three fixed points. One of these fixed points is stable, another is unstable and third may change the stability.3 As 
 
 
 
  increases, two of these fixed points (stable one and unstable one) merge together and disappear by saddle-node bifurcation.
See also

Biological neuron model
Hodgkin–Huxley model
FitzHugh–Nagumo model

References
"
Category:Dynamical systems



"Modelling of spiking-bursting neural behavior using two dimensional map",1






