


Rational set




Rational set

In computer science, more precisely in automata theory, a rational set of a monoid is an element of the minimal class of subsets of this monoid which contains all finite subsets and is closed under union, product and Kleene star. Rational sets are useful in automata theory, formal languages and algebra.
A rational set generalizes the notion of rational (regular) language (understood as defined by regular expressions) to monoids that are not necessarily free.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a monoid. The set 
 
 
 
  of rational subsets of 
 
 
 
  is the smallest set that contains every finite set and is closed under

union: if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

product: if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

Kleene star if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

This means that any rational subset of 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by taking a finite number of finite subsets of 
 
 
 
  and applying the union, product and Kleene star operations a finite number of times.
In general a rational subset of a monoid need not form a submonoid of the monoid.
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  be an alphabet, the set 
 
 
 
  of words over 
 
 
 
  is a monoid. The rational subset of 
 
 
 
  are precisely the regular languages. Indeed this language may be defined by a finite regular expression.
The rational subsets of 
 
 
 
  are the ultimately periodic sets of integers. More generally, the rational subsets of 
 
 
 
  are the semilinear sets.1
Properties
McKnight's theorem states that if 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated then its recognizable subset are rational sets. This is not true in general, i.e. 
 
 
 
  is not closed under complement. Let 
 
 
 
 , the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are recognizable but 
 
 
 
  is not because its projection to the second element 
 
 
 
  is not rational.
The intersection of a rational subset and of a recognizable subset is rational.
Rational sets are closed under morphism: given 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  two monoids and 
 
 
 
  a morphism, if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 .
For finite groups the following result of Anissimov and Seifert is well known: a subgroup H of a finitely generated group G is recognizable if and only if H has finite index in G. In contrast, H is rational if and only if H is finitely generated.2
Rational relations and rational functions
A binary relation between monoids M and N is a rational relation if the graph of the relation, regarded as a subset of M×N is a rational set in the product monoid. A function from M to N is a rational function if the graph of the function is a rational set.3
See also

Rational series
Recognizable set
Rational monoid

References


Jean-Eric Pin, Mathematical Foundations of Automata Theory, Chapter IV: Recognisable and rational sets
Rational Sets in Commutative Monoids

Further reading



"
Category:Automata theory



Mathematical Foundations of Automata Theory↩
 preprint↩
↩




