


Zero-inflated model




Zero-inflated model

In statistics, a zero-inflated model is a statistical model based on a zero-inflated probability distribution, i.e. a distribution that allows for frequent zero-valued observations.
Zero-inflated Poisson
The first zero-inflated model is zero-inflated Poisson model. The zero-inflated Poisson model concerns a random event containing excess zero-count data in unit time.1 For example, the number of insurance claims within a population for a certain type of risk would be zero-inflated by those people who have not taken out insurance against the risk and thus are unable to claim. The zero-inflated Poisson (ZIP) model employs two components that correspond to two zero generating processes. The first process is governed by a binary distribution that generates structural zeros. The second process is governed by a Poisson distribution that generates counts, some of which may be zero. The two model components are described as follows:






where the outcome variable 
 
 
 
  has any non-negative integer value, 
 
 
 
 
  is the expected Poisson count for the 
 
 
 
 th individual; 
 
 
 
  is the probability of extra zeros.
The mean is 
 
 
 
  and the variance is 
 
 
 
 .
Estimators of ZIP
The method of moments estimators are given by




where 
 
 
 
  is the sample mean and 
 
 
 
  is the sample variance.
The maximum likelihood estimator2 can be found by solving the following equation



Where 
 
 
 
 
  is the sample mean, and 
 
 
 
  is the observed proportion of zeros.
This can be solved by iteration,3 and the maximum likelihood estimator for 
 
 
 
  is given by



Related models
1994, Greene considered the zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB) model.4 Daniel B. Hall adapted Lambert's methodology to an upper-bounded count situation, thereby obtaining a zero-inflated binomial (ZIB) model.5
Discrete pseudo compound Poisson model
If the count data with the feature that the probability of zero is larger than the probability of nonzero, namely



then the discrete data 
 
 
 
 
  obey discrete pseudo compound Poisson distribution.6
In fact, let 
 
 
 
  be the probability generating function of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . Then from Wiener–Lévy theorem,7 we show that 
 
 
 
 
  have the probability generating function of discrete pseudo compound Poisson distribution.
We say that the discrete random variable 
 
 
 
  satisfying probability generating function characterization



has a discrete pseudo compound Poisson distribution with parameters 
 
 
 
 .
When all the 
 
 
 
  are non-negative, it is the discrete compound Poisson distribution(non-Poisson case) with overdispersion property.
See also

Poisson distribution
Zero-truncated Poisson distribution
Compound Poisson distribution
Sparse approximation

References
"
Category:Regression analysis Category:Generalized linear models Category:Categorical data Category:Econometrics Category:Poisson processes



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




