


Method of fundamental solutions




Method of fundamental solutions

In scientific computation and simulation, the method of fundamental solutions (MFS) is getting a growing attention. The method is essentially based on the fundamental solution of a partial differential equation of interest as its basis function. The MFS was developed to overcome the major drawbacks in the boundary element method (BEM) which also uses the fundamental solution to satisfy the governing equation. Consequently, both the MFS and the BEM are of a boundary discretization numerical technique and reduce the computational complexity by one dimensionality and have particular edge over the domain-type numerical techniques such as the finite element and finite volume methods on the solution of infinite domain, thin-walled structures, and inverse problems.
In contrast to the BEM, the MFS avoids the numerical integration of singular fundamental solution and is an inherent meshfree method. The method, however, is compromised by requiring a controversial fictitious boundary outside the physical domain to circumvent the singularity of fundamental solution, which has seriously restricted its applicability to real-world problems. But nevertheless the MFS has been found very competitive to some application areas such as infinite domain problems.
The MFS is also known by quite a few different names in the literature. Among these are the charge simulation method, the superposition method, the desingularized method, the indirect boundary element method, and the virtual boundary element method, just to name a few.
MFS formulation
Consider a partial differential equation governing certain type of problems








 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the differential partial operator, 
 
 
 
  represents the computational domain, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote the Dirichlet and Neumann boundary, respectively, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The MFS employs the fundamental solution of the operator as its basis function to represent the approximation of unknown function u as follows



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Euclidean distance between collocation points 
 
 
 
  and source points 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the fundamental solution which satisfies



where 
 
 
 
  denotes Dirac delta function, and 
 
 
 
  are the unknown coefficients.
With the source points located outside the physical domain, the MFS avoid the fundamental solution singularity. Substituting the approximation into boundary condition yields the following matrix equation



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote the collocation points, respectively, on Dirichlet and Neumann boundaries. The unknown coefficients 
 
 
 
  can uniquely be determined by the above algebraic equation. And then we can evaluate numerical solution at any location in physical domain.
History and recent developments
The ideas behind the MFS have been around for a few decades and were developed primarily by V. D. Kupradze and M. A. Alexidze in the late 1950s and early 1960s.1 However, the method was proposed as a computational technique much later by R. Mathon and R. L. Johnston in the late 1970s,2 followed by a number of papers by Mathon, Johnston and Graeme Fairweather with applications. Slowly but surely the MFS becomes a useful tool for the solution of a large variety of physical and engineering problems.3456
A major obstacle was overcome when, in the 1990s, M. A. Golberg and C. S. Chen extended the MFS to deal with inhomogeneous equations and time-dependent problems.78 Recent developments indicate that the MFS can be used to solve partial differential equations with variable coefficients.9 The MFS has proved particularly effective for certain classes of problems such as inverse,10 unbounded domain, and free-boundary problems.11
Some new techniques have recently been developed to cure the fictitious boundary problem in the MFS, such as the boundary knot method, singular boundary method, and regularized meshless method.
See also

Radial basis function
Boundary element method
Boundary knot method
Boundary particle method
Singular boundary method

References
External links

International Center for Numerical Simulation Software in Engineering & Sciences

"
Category:Numerical analysis Category:Numerical differential equations



K. VD, A. MA, The method of functional equations for the approximate solution of certain boundary value problems, USSR Comput Math Math Phys. 4 (1964) 82–126.
R. Mathon, R.L. Johnston, The approximate solution of elliptic boundary-value problems by fundamental solutions, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis. (1977) 638–650.
Z. Fu, W. Chen, W. Yang, Winkler plate bending problems by a truly boundary-only boundary particle method, Computational Mechanics. 44 (2009) 757–763.
W. Chen, J. Lin, F. Wang, Regularized meshless method for nonhomogeneous problems, Engineering Analysis with Boundary Elements. 35 (2011) 253–257.
W. Chen, F.Z. Wang, A method of fundamental solutions without fictitious boundary, Engineering Analysis with Boundary Elements. 34 (2010) 530–532.
JIANG Xin-rong, CHEN Wen, Method of fundamental solution and boundary knot method for helmholtz equations: a comparative study, Chinese Journal of Computational Mechanics, 28:3(2011) 338–344 (in Chinese)
M.A. Golberg, C.S. Chen, The theory of radial basis functions applied to the BEM for inhomogeneous partial differential equations, Boundary Elements Communications. 5 (1994) 57–61.
M. a. Golberg, C.S. Chen, H. Bowman, H. Power, Some comments on the use of Radial Basis Functions in the Dual Reciprocity Method, Computational Mechanics. 21 (1998) 141–148.
C.M. Fan, C.S. Chen, J. Monroe, The method of fundamental solutions for solving convection-diffusion equations with variable coefficients, Advances in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics. 1 (2009) 215–230
Y.C. Hon, T. Wei, The method of fundamental solution for solving multidimensional inverse heat conduction problems, CMES Comput. Model. Eng. Sci. 7 (2005) 119–132
A.K. G. Fairweather, The method of fundamental solutions for elliptic boundary value problems, Advances in Computational Mathematics. 9 (1998) 69–95.




