


Gowers norm




Gowers norm

In mathematics, in the field of additive combinatorics, a Gowers norm or uniformity norm is a class of norm on functions on a finite group or group-like object which are used in the study of arithmetic progressions in the group. It is named after Timothy Gowers, who introduced it in his work on Szemerédi's theorem.1
Definition
Let f be a complex-valued function on a finite Abelian group G and let J denote complex conjugation. The Gowers d-norm is



Gowers norms are also defined for complex valued functions f on a segment [N]={0,1,2,...,N-1}, where N is a positive integer. In this context, the uniformity norm is given as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a large integer, 
 
 
 
  denotes the indicator function of [N], and 
 
 
 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all other 
 
 
 
 . This definition does not depend on 
 
 
 
 , as long as 
 
 
 
 .
Inverse conjectures
An inverse conjecture for these norms is a statement asserting that if a bounded function f has a large Gowers d-norm then f correlates with a polynomial phase of degree d-1 or other object with polynomial behaviour (e.g. a (d-1)-step nilsequence). The precise statement depends on the Gowers norm under consideration.
The Inverse Conjecture for vector spaces over a finite field 
 
 
 
  asserts that for any 
 
 
 
  there exists a constant 
 
 
 
  such that for any finite dimensional vector space V over 
 
 
 
  and any complex valued function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , bounded by 1, such that 
 
 
 
 , there exists a polynomial sequence 
 
 
 
  such that



where 
 
 
 
 . This conjecture was proved to be true by Bergelson, Tao, and Ziegler.234
The Inverse Conjecture for Gowers 
 
 
 
  norm asserts that for any 
 
 
 
 , a finite collection of (d-1)-step nilmanifolds

 
  and constants 
 
 
 
  can be found, so that the following is true. If 
 
 
 
  is a positive integer and 
 
 
 
  is bounded in absolute value by 1 and 
 
 
 
 , then there exists a nilmanifold 
 
 
 
  and a nilsequence 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  bounded by 1 in absolute value and with Lipschitz constant bounded by 
 
 
 
  such that:



This conjecture was proved to be true by Green, Tao, and Ziegler.56 It should be stressed that the appearance of nilsequences in the above statement is necessary. The statement is no longer true if we only consider polynomial phases.
References



"
Category:Additive combinatorics



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




