


Pólya class




Pólya class

The Pólya class is a set of entire functions satisfying the requirement that if E(z) is in the class, then:12

E(z) has no zero (root) in the upper half-plane.


 
  for x and y real and y positive.


 
  is a non-decreasing function of y for positive y.

Every entire function of Pólya class can be expressed as the limit of a series of polynomials having no zeros in the upper half-plane.3
The product of two functions of Pólya class is also of Pólya class, so the class constitutes a monoid under the operation of multiplication of functions.
The Pólya class arises from investigations by Georg Pólya in 1913.4 A de Branges space is defined on the basis of some "weight function" of Pólya class, but with the additional stipulation that the inequality be strict – that is, 
 
 
 
  for positive y.
The Pólya class is a subset of the Hermite–Biehler class, which does not include the third of the above three requirements.5
A function with no roots in the upper half plane is of Pólya class if and only if two conditions are met: that the nonzero roots zn satisfy



(with roots counted according to their multiplicity), and that the function can be expressed in the form of a Hadamard product



with c real and non-positive and Im b non-positive. (The non-negative integer m will be positive if E(0)=0. Even if the number of roots is infinite, the infinite product is well defined and converges.6)
Louis de Branges showed a connexion between functions of Pólya class and analytic functions whose imaginary part is non-negative in the upper half-plane (UHP), often called Nevanlinna functions. If a function E(z) is of Hermite-Biehler class and E(0) = 1, we can take the logarithm of E in such a way that it is analytic in the UHP and such that log(E(0)) = 0. Then E(z) is of Pólya class if and only if



(in the UHP).7
Laguerre–Pólya class
A smaller class of entire functions is the Laguerre–Pólya class, which consists of those functions which are locally the limit of a series of polynomials whose roots are all real. Any function of Laguerre–Pólya class is also of Pólya class. Some examples are 
 
 

Examples
From the Hadamard form it is easy to create examples of functions of Pólya class. Some examples are:

A non-zero constant.



Polynomials having no roots in the upper half plane, such as 
 
 



 
  if and only if Re(p) is non-negative


 
  if and only if p is a non-negative real number
any function of Laguerre-Pólya class
 
 

A product of functions of Pólya class

References
"
Category:Analytic functions



↩
"Polya class theory for Hermite-Biehler functions of finite order" by Michael Kaltenbäck and Harald Woracek, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 68.2 (2003), pp. 338–354. DOI: 10.1112/S0024610703004502.↩
↩
G. Polya: "Über Annäherung durch Polynome mit lauter reellen Wurzeln", Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 36 (1913), 279-295.↩

Section 7 of the book by de Branges.↩
Section 14 of the book by de Branges, or ↩




