


Geometric mean theorem




Geometric mean theorem

The right triangle altitude theorem or geometric mean theorem is a result in elementary geometry that describes a relation between the altitude on the hypotenuse in a right triangle and the two line segments it creates on the hypotenuse. It states that the geometric mean of the two segments equals the altitude.
Theorem and application
thumb|upright=1.5|area of grey square = area of grey rectangle


If h denotes the altitude in a right triangle and p and q the segments on the hypotenuse then the theorem can be stated as:


 
  or in term of areas:



The latter version yields a method to square a rectangle with ruler and compass, that is to construct a square of equal area to a given rectangle. For such a rectangle with sides p and q we denote its top left vertex with D. Now we extend the segment q to its left by p (using arc AE centered on D) and draw a half circle with endpoints A and B with the new segment p+q as its diameter. Then we erect a perpendicular line to the diameter in D that intersects the half circle in C. Due to Thales' theorem C and the diameter form a right triangle with the line segment DC as its altitude, hence DC is the side of a square with the area of the rectangle.
The converse statement is true as well. Any triangle, in which the altitude equals the geometric mean of the two line segments created by it, is a right triangle.
Historically the theorem is attributed to Euclid (ca. 360–280 BC), who stated it as a corollary to proposition 8 in book VI of his Elements and used it in proposition 14 of book II to square a rectangle.
Proof
Based on similarity
Proof of theorem:

The triangles 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are similar, since with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  they have two angles of equal size. The similarity yields the following equation:
 
 




Proof of converse:

For the converse we have a triangle 
 
 
 
 
  in which 
 
 
 
  holds and need to show that the angle at C is a right angle. Now because of 
 
 
 
  we also have 
 
 
 
 . Together with 
 
 
 
  the triangles 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have an angle of equal size and have corresponding pairs of legs with the same ratio. This means the triangles are similar, which yields:
 
 




Based on dissection and rearrangement
(Figure)
Geometrischer Höhensatzbeweis.svg

Dissecting the right triangle along its altitude h yields two similar triangles, which can be augmented and arranged in two alternative ways into a larger right triangle with perpendicular sides of lengths p+h and q+h. One such arrangement requires a square of area h2 to complete it, the other a rectangle of area pq. Since both arrangements yield the same triangle, the areas of the square and the rectangle must be identical.
References

Claudi Alsina, Roger B. Nelsen: Icons of Mathematics: An Exploration of Twenty Key Images. MAA 2011, ISBN 9780883853528, pp. 31–32 ()
Ilka Agricola, Thomas Friedrich: Elementary Geometry. AMS 2008, ISBN 9780821843475, p. 25 ()
Euclid: Elements, book II – prop. 14, book VI – prop. 8, (online copy)

de:Satzgruppe des Pythagoras#Höhensatz des Euklid"
Category:Area Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Euclidean plane geometry Category:History of geometry Category:Theorems in plane geometry Category:Triangles


