


Subadditive set function




Subadditive set function

In mathematics, a subadditive set function is a set function whose value, informally, has the property that the value of function on the union of two sets is at most the sum of values of the function on each of the sets. This is thematically related to the subadditivity property of real-valued functions.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a set and 
 
 
 
  be a set function, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the power set of 
 
 
 
 . The function f is subadditive if for each subset 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
 .12
Examples of subadditive functions
Every non-negative submodular set function is subadditive (the family of submodular functions is strictly contained in the family of subadditive functions).
The function that counts the number of sets required to cover a given set is subadditive. Let 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
  as the minimum number of subsets required to cover a given set. Formally, 
 
 
 
  is the minimum number 
 
 
 
  such that there are sets 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is subadditive.
The maximum of additive set functions is subadditive (dually, the minimum of additive functions is superadditive). Formally, for each 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be additive set functions. Then 
 
 
 
  is a subadditive set function.
Fractionally subadditive set functions are a generalization of submodular functions and a special case of subadditive functions. A subadditive function 
 
 
 
  is furthermore fractionally subadditive if it satisfies the following definition.3 For every 
 
 
 
 , every 
 
 
 
 , and every 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . The set of fractionally subadditive functions equals the set of functions that can be expressed as the maximum of additive functions, as in the example in the previous paragraph.4
Properties
If f is a submodular set function and T is a subset of Ω in which each element of Ω is included in T with probability p, then the expected value of f(T) is at least pf(Ω).
See also

Submodular set function
Utility functions on indivisible goods

Citations
   
"
Category:Combinatorial optimization











