


Associated graded ring




Associated graded ring

In mathematics, the associated graded ring of a ring R with respect to a proper ideal I is the graded ring:


 
 . Similarly, if M is a left R-module, then the associated graded module is the graded module over 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .
Basic definitions and properties
For a ring R and ideal I, multiplication in 
 
 
 
  is defined as follows: First, consider homogeneous elements

 
  and 
 
 
 
  and suppose 
 
 
 
  is a representative of a and 
 
 
 
  is a representative of b. Then define 
 
 
 
  to be the equivalence class of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Note that this is well-defined modulo 
 
 
 
 . Multiplication of inhomogeneous elements is defined by using the distributive property.
A ring or module may be related to its associated graded through the initial form map. Let M be an R-module and I an ideal of R. Given 
 
 
 
 , the initial form of f in 
 
 
 
 , written 
 
 
 
 , is the equivalence class of f in 
 
 
 
  where m is the maximum integer such that 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  for every m, then set 
 
 
 
 . The initial form map is only a map of sets and generally not a homomorphism. For a submodule

 
 , 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the submodule of 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
 . This may not be the same as the submodule of 
 
 
 
  generated by the only initial forms of the generators of N.
A ring inherits some "good" properties from its associated graded ring. For example, if R is a noetherian local ring, and 
 
 
 
  is an integral domain, then R is itself an integral domain.1
Examples
Let U be the enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  over a field k; it is filtered by degree. The Poincaré–Birkhoff–Witt theorem implies that 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial ring; in fact, it is the coordinate ring

 
 .
The associated graded algebra of a Clifford algebra is an exterior algebra; i.e., a Clifford algebra degenerates to an exterior algebra.
Generalization to multiplicative filtrations
The associated graded can also be defined more generally for multiplicative descending filtrations of R, Let F be a descending chain of ideals of the form


 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . The graded ring associated with this filtration is 
 
 
 
 . Multiplication and the initial form map are defined as above.
See also

Graded (mathematics)
Rees algebra

References




"
Category:Ring theory



↩




