


Strain rate tensor




Strain rate tensor

(Figure)
A two-dimensional flow that, at the highlighted point, has only a strain rate component, with no mean velocity or rotational component.

In continuum mechanics, the strain rate tensor is a physical quantity that describes the rate of change of the deformation of a material in the neighborhood of a certain point, at a certain moment of time. It can be defined as the derivative of the strain tensor with respect to time, or as the symmetric component of the gradient (derivative with respect to position) of the flow velocity.
The strain rate tensor is a purely kinematic concept that describes the macroscopic motion of the material. Therefore, it does not depend on the nature of the material, or on the forces and stresses that may be acting on it; and it applies to any continuous medium, whether solid, liquid or gas.
On the other hand, for any fluid except superfluids, any gradual change in its deformation (i.e. a non-zero strain rate tensor) gives rise to viscous forces in its interior, due to friction between adjacent fluid elements, that tend to oppose that change. At any point in the fluid, these stresses can be described by a viscous stress tensor that is, almost always, completely determined by the strain rate tensor and by certain intrinsic properties of the fluid at that point. Viscous stress also occur in solids, in addition to the elastic stress observed in static deformation; when it is too large to be ignored, the material is said to be viscoelastic.
Definition
Consider a material body, solid or fluid, that is flowing and/or moving in space. Let 
 
 
 
  be the velocity field within the body; that is, a smooth function from 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is the macroscopic velocity of the material that is passing through the point 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
 .
The velocity 
 
 
 
  at a point displaced from 
 
 
 
  by a small vector 
 
 
 
  can be written as a Taylor series:



where 
 
 
 
  the gradient of the velocity field, understood as a linear map that takes a displacement vector 
 
 
 
  to the corresponding change in the velocity. 
In an arbitrary reference frame, 
 
 
 
  is the Jacobian matrix of the field, namely the 3×3 matrix


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the component of 
 
 
 
  parallel to axis

 
  and 
 
 
 
  denotes the partial derivative of a function 
 
 
 
  with respect to the space coordinate 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  is a function of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In this coordinate system, the Taylor approximation for the velocity near 
 
 
 
  is


 
  or simply 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are viewed as 3×1 matrices.
Symmetric and antisymmetric parts
Any matrix can be decomposed into the sum of a symmetric matrix and an antisymmetric matrix. Applying this to the Jacobian matrix 
 
 
 
  with symmetric and antisymmetric components 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively:


 
  That is,


 
  This decomposition is independent of coordinate system, and so has physical significance. Then the velocity field may be approximated as


 
  that is,



The antisymmetric term 
 
 
 
  represents a rigid-like rotation of the fluid about the point 
 
 
 
 . Its angular velocity 
 
 
 
  is


 
  The product 
 
 
 
  is called the rotational curl of the vector field. A rigid rotation does not change the relative positions of the fluid elements, so the antisymmetric term 
 
 
 
  of the velocity gradient does not contribute to the rate of change of the deformation. The actual strain rate is therefore described by the symmetric 
 
 
 
  term, which is the strain rate tensor.
Shear rate and compression rate
The symmetric term 
 
 
 
  of velocity gradient (the rate-of-strain tensor) can be broken down further as the sum of a scalar times the unit tensor, that represents a gradual isotropic expansion or contraction; and a traceless symmetric tensor which represents a gradual shearing deformation, with no change in volume:1


 
  That is,


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  is the unit tensor, such that 
 
 
 
  is 1 if 
 
 
 
  and 0 if 
 
 
 
 . This decomposition is independent of the choice of coordinate system, and is therefore physically significant.
The expansion rate tensor is 1/3 of the divergence of the velocity field:


 
  which is the rate at which the volume of a fixed amount of fluid increases at that point.
The shear rate tensor is represented by a symmetric 3×3 matrix, and describes a flow that combines compression and expansion flows along three orthogonal axes, such that there is no change in volume. This type of flow occurs, for example, when a rubber strip is stretched by pulling at the ends, or when honey falls from a spoon as a smooth unbroken stream.
For a two-dimensional flow, the divergence of 
 
 
 
  has only two terms and quantifies the change in area rather than volume. The factor 1/3 in the expansion rate term should be replaced by 1/2 in that case.
See also

Stress tensor (disambiguation)

References
"
Category:Continuum mechanics



↩




