   Quality control and genetic algorithms      Quality control and genetic algorithms   The combination of quality control and genetic algorithms led to novel solutions of complex quality control design and optimization problems. Quality control is a process by which entities review the quality of all factors involved in production. Quality is the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfils a need or expectation that is stated, general implied or obligatory. 1  Genetic algorithms are search algorithms, based on the mechanics of natural selection and natural genetics. 2  Quality control  Alternative quality control 3 (QC) procedures can be applied on a process to test statistically the null hypothesis , that the process conforms to the quality requirements, therefore that the process is in control, against the alternative, that the process is out of control. When a true null hypothesis is rejected, a statistical type I error is committed. We have then a false rejection of a run of the process. The probability of a type I error is called probability of false rejection. When a false null hypothesis is accepted, a statistical type II error is committed. We fail then to detect a significant change in the process. The probability of rejection of a false null hypothesis equals the probability of detection of the nonconformity of the process to the quality requirements.  The QC procedure to be designed or optimized can be formulated as:  Q 1 ( n 1 , X 1 )# Q 2 ( n 2 , X 2 ) #...# Q q ( n q , X q ) (1)  where Q i ( n i , X i ) denotes a statistical decision rule, n i denotes the size of the sample S i , that is the number of the samples the rule is applied upon, and X i denotes the vector of the rule specific parameters, including the decision limits. Each symbol # denotes either the Boolean operator AND or the operator OR. Obviously, for # denoting AND, and for n 1 2 <...> q , that is for S 1    ⊂     \subset    S 2    ⊂     \subset   ....   ⊂     \subset    S q , the (1) denotes a q -sampling QC procedure. ...  Each statistical decision rule is evaluated by calculating the respective statistic of a monitored variable of samples taken from the process. Then, if the statistic is out of the interval between the decision limits, the decision rule is considered to be true. Many statistics can be used, including the following: a single value of the variable of a sample, the range , the mean , and the standard deviation of the values of the variable of the samples, the cumulative sum, the smoothed mean, and the smoothed standard deviation. Finally, the QC procedure is evaluated as a Boolean proposition. If it is true, then the null hypothesis is considered to be false, the process is considered to be out of control, and the run is rejected.  A quality control procedure is considered to be optimum when it minimizes (or maximizes) a context specific objective function. The objective function depends on the probabilities of detection of the nonconformity of the process and of false rejection. These probabilities depend on the parameters of the quality control procedure (1) and on the probability density functions (see probability density function ) of the monitored variables of the process.  Genetic algorithms  Genetic algorithms 4 5 6 are robust search algorithms , that do not require knowledge of the objective function to be optimized and search through large spaces quickly. Genetic algorithms have been derived from the processes of the molecular biology of the gene and the evolution of life. Their operators, cross-over, mutation , and reproduction , are isomorphic with the synonymous biological processes. Genetic algorithms have been used to solve a variety of complex optimization problems. Additionally the classifier systems and the genetic programming  paradigm have shown us that genetic algorithms can be used for tasks as complex as the program induction.  Quality control and genetic algorithms  In general, we can not use algebraic methods to optimize the quality control procedures. Usage of enumerative methods would be very tedious, especially with multi-rule procedures, as the number of the points of the parameter space to be searched grows exponentially with the number of the parameters to be optimized. Optimization methods based on the genetic algorithms offer an appealing alternative.  Furthermore, the complexity of the design process of novel quality control procedures is obviously greater than the complexity of the optimization of predefined ones.  In fact, since 1993, genetic algorithms have been used successfully to optimize and to design novel quality control procedures. 7 8 9  See also   Quality control  Genetic algorithm  Optimization (mathematics)   References  External links   American Society for Quality (ASQ)  Illinois Genetic Algorithms Laboratory (IlliGAL)  Hellenic Complex Systems Laboratory (HCSL)   "  Category:Quality control  Category:Genetic algorithms     Hoyle D. ISO 9000 quality systems handbook. Butterworth-Heineman 2001;p.654 ↩  Goldberg DE. Genetic algorithms in search, optimization and machine learning. Addison-Wesley 1989; p.1. ↩  Duncan AJ. Quality control and industrial statistics. Irwin 1986;pp.1-1123. ↩  Holland, JH. Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. The University of Michigan Press 1975;pp.1-228. ↩  Goldberg DE. Genetic algorithms in search, optimization and machine learning. Addison-Wesley 1989; pp.1-412. ↩  Mitchell M. An Introduction to genetic algorithms. The MIT Press 1998;pp.1-221. ↩  Hatjimihail AT. Genetic algorithms based design and optimization of statistical quality control procedures. Clin Chem 1993;39:1972-8. 1 ↩  Hatjimihail AT, Hatjimihail TT. Design of statistical quality control procedures using genetic algorithms. In LJ Eshelman (ed): Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Genetic Algorithms. San Francisco : Morgan Kauffman 1995;551-7. ↩  He D, Grigoryan A. Joint statistical design of double sampling x and s charts. European Journal of Operational Research 2006;168:122-142. ↩     