


Generic matrix ring




Generic matrix ring

In algebra, a generic matrix ring of size n with variables 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is a sort of a universal matrix ring. It is universal in the sense that, given a commutative ring R and n-by-n matrices 
 
 
 
  over R, any mapping 
 
 
 
  extends to the ring homomorphism (called evaluation) 
 
 
 
 .
Explicitly, given a field k, it is the subalgebra 
 
 
 
  of the matrix ring 
 
 
 
  generated by n-by-n matrices 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are matrix entries and commute by definition. For example, if m = 1, then 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial ring in one variable.
For example, a central polynomial is an element of the ring 
 
 
 
  that will map to a central element under an evaluation. (In fact, it is in the invariant ring

 
  since it is central and invariant.1)
By definition, 
 
 
 
  is a quotient of the free ring 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  by the ideal consisting of all p that vanish identically on any n-by-n matrices over k. The universal property means that any ring homomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to a matrix ring factors through 
 
 
 
 . This has a following geometric meaning. In algebraic geometry, the polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  is the coordinate ring of the affine space 
 
 
 
  and to give a point of 
 
 
 
  is to give a ring homomorphism (evaluation) 
 
 
 
  (either by the Hilbert nullstellensatz or by the scheme theory). The free ring 
 
 
 
  plays the role of the coordinate ring of the affine space in the noncommutative algebraic geometry (i.e., we don't demand free variables to commute) and thus a generic matrix ring of size n is the coordinate ring of a noncommutative affine variety whose points are the Spec's of matrix rings of size n (see below for a more concrete discussion.)
The maximum spectrum of a generic matrix ring
For simplicity, assume k is algebraically closed. Let A be an algebra over k and let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of all maximal ideals 
 
 
 
  in A such that 
 
 
 
 . If A is commutative, then 
 
 
 
  is the maximum spectrum of A and 
 
 
 
  is empty for any 
 
 
 
 .
References




"
Category:Algebraic structures








