


Draft:Divisor (algebraic geometry)




Draft:Divisor (algebraic geometry)

Cartier divisor
A Cartier divisor in an algebraic variety X (see the paragraph below for the scheme case) can be represented by an open cover by affine subsets 
 
 
 
  of X, and a collection of rational functions

 
  defined on 
 
 
 
 . The functions must be compatible in this sense: on the intersection of two sets in the cover, the quotient of the corresponding rational functions should be regular and invertible. A Cartier divisor is said to be effective if these 
 
 
 
  can be chosen to be regular functions, and in this case the Cartier divisor defines an associated subvariety of codimension 1 by forming the ideal sheaf generated locally by the 
 
 
 
 .
The notion of transition map associates naturally to every Cartier divisor D a line bundle (strictly, invertible sheaf) commonly denoted by 
 
 
 
  or sometimes also 
 
 
 
 .
More conceptually, the notion of Cartier divisors can be described with the abstract function field: in this setup X can be any scheme (in fact any ringed space). For each affine open subset U, define M′(U) to be the total quotient ring of OX(U). Because the affine open subsets form a basis for the topology on X, this defines a presheaf on X. (This is not the same as taking the total quotient ring of OX(U) for arbitrary U, since that does not define a presheaf.1) The sheaf MX of rational functions on X is the sheaf associated to the presheaf M′, and the quotient sheaf  is the sheaf of local Cartier divisors.
A Cartier divisor is a global section of the quotient sheaf MX*/OX*. Taking the global sections of 
 
 
 
  gives the exact sequence of abelian groups:


 
  We let 
 
 
 
  be the group of Cartier divisors. Note that, for any open subset U of X, 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., 
 
 
 
  is the sheaf 
 
 
 
 .
A Cartier divisor is said to be "principal" if it is in the image of the canonical homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , which, as in the Weil-divisor case, is denoted by 
 
 
2 Note also that the divisor class group


 
  naturally injects into the Picard group

 
  through the connecting homomorphism δ in the exact sequence. In fact, up to the identification of Pic and H1(-, O*), this δ is the same as the map induced by 
 
 
 
  that was defined earlier.
The mapping 
 
 
 
  is a group homomorphism: the sum of divisors corresponds to the tensor product of line bundles, and isomorphism of bundles corresponds precisely to linear equivalence of Cartier divisors. The group of divisors classes modulo linear equivalence therefore injects into the Picard group. The mapping is not surjective for all compact complex manifolds, but surjectivity does hold for all smooth projective varieties. The latter is true because, by the Kodaira embedding theorem, the tensor product of any line bundle with a sufficiently high power of any positive line bundle becomes ample; thus, on any such manifold, any line bundle is the formal difference between two ample line bundles, and any ample line bundle may be viewed as an effective divisor.
By convention, one writes the group law on Cartier divisors additively; thus, for example, the fact that above canonical map is a homomorphism means:


 
  Also, by definition, (f) = 0 if and only if f is a global section of OX*.
A Cartier divisor D is said to be "effective" (see below for the relative case) if it is a global section of 
 
 
 
 .3 Note: (f) ≥ 0 if and only if f is a global section of OX*; i.e., a regular function when X is a variety. One writes D ≥ D' if D - D' is effective.
Remark: Although the notion of Cartier divisors exists in any sheaf (any ringed space), if the sheaf is not rigid enough, the notion tends to lose some of its interest. For example in a fine sheaf (e.g. the sheaf of real-valued continuous, or smooth, functions on an open subset of a euclidean space, or locally homeomorphic, or diffeomorphic, to such a set, such as a topological manifold), any local section is a divisor of 0, so that the total quotient sheaves are zero, so that the sheaf contains no non-trivial Cartier divisor.
From Cartier divisors to Weil divisor
There is a natural homomorphism from the group of Cartier divisors to that of Weil divisors, which is an isomorphism for integral separated Noetherian schemes provided that all local rings are unique factorization domains.
Global sections of line bundles and linear systems
Recall that the local equations of a Cartier divisor 
 
 
 
  in a variety 
 
 
 
  give rise to transition maps for a line bundle 
 
 
 
 , and linear equivalences induce isomorphism of line bundles.
Loosely speaking, a Cartier divisor D is said to be effective if it is the zero locus of a global section of its associated line bundle 
 
 
 
 . In terms of the definition above, this means that its local equations coincide with the equations of the vanishing locus of a global section.
From the divisor linear equivalence/line bundle isomorphism principle, a Cartier divisor is linearly equivalent to an effective divisor if, and only if, its associated line bundle 
 
 
 
  has non-zero global sections. Two collinear non-zero global sections have the same vanishing locus, and hence the projective space 
 
 
 
  over k identifies with the set of effective divisors linearly equivalent to 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a projective (or proper) variety over a field 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a finite-dimensional 
 
 
 
 -vector space, and the associated projective space over 
 
 
 
  is called the complete linear system of 
 
 
 
 . Its linear subspaces are called linear systems of divisors. The Riemann-Roch theorem for algebraic curves is a fundamental identity involving the dimension of complete linear systems in the setup of projective curves.


 
 -divisors
Let X be a normal variety. A (Weil) 
 
 
 
 -divisor is a finite formal linear combination of irreducible subvarieties of codimension one of X with rational coefficients. (An 
 
 
 
 -divisor is defined similarly.) A 
 
 
 
 -divisor is called effective if the coefficients are nonnegative. A 
 
 
 
 -divisor is called 
 
 
 
 -Cartier if some integral multiple of it is a Cartier divisor. If X is smooth, then any 
 
 
 
 -divisor is 
 
 
 
 -Cartier.
If 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -divisor, then its integer part is the divisor


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are integer parts of 
 
 
 
 .
See also: multiplier ideal.
Relative Cartier divisors
An effective Cartier divisor in a scheme X over a ring R is a closed subscheme D of X that (1) is flat over R and (2) the ideal sheaf 
 
 
 
  of D is locally free of rank one (i.e., invertible sheaf). Equivalently, a closed subscheme D of X is an effective Cartier divisor if there is an open affine cover 
 
 
 
  of X and nonzerodivisors 
 
 
 
  such that the intersection 
 
 
 
  is given by the equation 
 
 
 
  (called local equations) and its ideal sheaf 
 
 
 
  is flat over R and such that they are compatible.

If D and ''D' '' are effective Cartier divisors, then the sum 
 
 
 
  is the effective Cartier divisor defined locally as 
 
 
 
  if f, g give local equations for D and ''D' ''.
If D is an effective Cartier divisor and 
 
 
 
  is a ring homomorphism, then 
 
 
 
  is an effective Cartier divisor in 
 
 
 
 .
If D is an effective Cartier divisor and 
 
 
 
  a flat morphism over R, then 
 
 
 
  is an effective Cartier divisor in ''X' '' with the ideal sheaf 
 
 
 
 .

Taking 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  gives the exact sequence


 
 . This allows one to see global sections of 
 
 
 
  as global sections of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the constant 1 on X can be thought of as a section of 
 
 
 
  and D is then the zero locus of this section. Conversely, if 
 
 
 
  is a line bundle on X and s a global section of it that is a nonzerodivisor on 
 
 
 
  and if 
 
 
 
  is flat over R, then 
 
 
 
  defines an effective Cartier divisor whose ideal sheaf is isomorphic to the inverse of L.
From now on suppose X is a smooth curve (still over R). Let D be an effective Cartier divisor in X and assume it is proper over R (which is immediate if X is proper.) Then 
 
 
 
  is a locally free R-module of finite rank. This rank is called the degree of D and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . It is a locally constant function on 
 
 
 
 . If D and ''D' '' are proper effective Cartier divisors, then 
 
 
 
  is proper over R and 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite flat morphism. Then 
 
 
 
 .4 On the other hand, a base change does not change degree
 
 
 
 .5
A closed subscheme D of X is finite, flat and of finite presentation if and only if it is an effective Cartier divisor that is proper over R.6
The Cartier divisor of a coherent sheaf
Let X be a Noetherian scheme and F a coherent sheaf. We assume F has finite cohomological dimension; that means for each point x in X there is a neighborhood U of x and a resolution:


 
  by free sheaves Ei's on U. Outside the support of F we have the exact sequence


 
  and taking det of it gives:
See also

ample divisor
Arakelov divisor
nef divisor
Theta-divisor
Multiplier ideal (algebraic geometry)

Notes


References


Section 21 of 
Section II.6 of 
Ch. 5, § 3 of 



"
Category:Geometry of divisors



Kleiman, p. 203↩
Editorial note: This is how Hartshorne writes; EGA, on the other hand, write "div" for the map.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




