


Draft:Component size distribution (network science)




Draft:Component size distribution (network science)

1
Component size distribution (network science)
Component size distribution is the basic property of undirected graph. The property focuses on the sizes of connected components of vertices in the graph in the regime without a giant component.2 Distribution of component size shows the number of smaller components expected for a given number of edges, 
 
 
 
 , and their expected sizes.
In a random network
Derivation
For a random network the probability that a randomly chosen node belongs to a component of size 
 
 
 
  is

 
 .3
Replace 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 ,4

  then use the Stirling-formula 
 
 
 
  for large 
 
 
 
 .5

  The obtained result is 
 
 
 
 .6


Contribution
Therefore, the component size distribution has two contributions:
  1. A slowly decreasing power law term 
 
 
 
 , and
  2. A rapidly decreasing exponential term 
 
 
 
 .

  Given that exponential term dominates for large 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  predicts that large components are prohibited. The crucial assumption for calculations is that analyzed graph does not have significant clustering. The only exception is at the critical point, where 
 
 
 
 .7 In this case all terms in the exponential cancel, thus, 
 
 
 
  follows the power law 
 
 
 
 .89 Because of relatively slow decrease of power law, it is expected to observe clusters of widely different sizes at the critical point.

In a peer to peer network
Percolation threshold
The stability of networks are primarily measured in terms of certain fraction of nodes 
 
 
 
  called percolation threshold. Its removal disintegrates the network into large number of small, disconnected components.10 Above that threshold, there exists a connected component which goes through the entire network. This connected component is also termed as the giant component. The value of percolation threshold 
 
 
 
  theoretically signifies the stability of the network, higher value indicates greater stability against churn and attack.11
  It is possible to develop the metric to measure the percolation threshold.12 To do this, a fraction of nodes 
 
 
 
  should be removed from the network. Then, after each step 
 
 
 
  one should check whether the percolation network is reached. The achieved status of the network should be in terms of component size distribution 
 
 
13, where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively are the size of the component formed and the number of components of size 
 
 
 
 .
Fig.2. The below plots represent the change in the component size distribution during percolation process and indicate the percolation point
Example.jpg|(a) Initial component size distribution (only single giant component of size 500) Example.jpg|(b) Intermediate component size distribution. Example.jpg|(c) Component size distribution at percolation point.
Fig. 2(a) shows that at the begining the component size distribution exhibits unimodal characteristics confirming a single connected component. In Fig. 2(b) is seen that at the first stages there is bimodal characteristics confirming a large component together with a set of small components. In turn, the last figure represents that at a particular step 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  becomes monotonically decreasing function indicating 
 
 
 
  as percolation point. Therefore 
 
 
 
  is considered as the time step where percolation occurs and the total fraction of nodes at that step 
 
 
 
  specifies the percolation threshold.14
See also

Network science
Graph theory
Random graph
Peer-to-peer
Percolation threshold
Stirling's approximation

References
"




M. E. J. Newman, Random Graphs as Models of Networks, Santa Fe Institute
Albert-László Barabási, Network Science, Chapter 3
Albert-László Barabási, Network Science, Chapter 3
Albert-László Barabási, Network Science, Chapter 3
Albert-László Barabási, Network Science, Chapter 3
M. E. J. Newman, Random Graphs as Models of Networks, Santa Fe Institute
Albert-László Barabási, Network Science, Chapter 3
M. E. J. Newman, Random Graphs as Models of Networks, Santa Fe Institute
Srinivas Aluru, Manish Parashar, Ramamurthy Badrinath, Viktor K.Prasanna (Eds.), High Performance Computing – HiPC 2007, 14th International Conference
Bivas Mitra, Sujoy Ghose, Niloy Ganguly, Effect of Dynamicity on Peer to Peer Networks, Indian Institute of Technology
Bivas Mitra, Sujoy Ghose, Niloy Ganguly, Effect of Dynamicity on Peer to Peer Networks, Indian Institute of Technology
Bivas Mitra, Sujoy Ghose, Niloy Ganguly, Effect of Dynamicity on Peer to Peer Networks, Indian Institute of Technology
Bivas Mitra, Sujoy Ghose, Niloy Ganguly, Effect of Dynamicity on Peer to Peer Networks, Indian Institute of Technology




