


Draft:Darrell Kingee Brown




Draft:Darrell Kingee Brown

Darrell Kingee Brown also known as Asmar, is an American public figure, musician, academic, and educator born on August 16, 1973 in Newark, New Jersey, U.S. He is best known for his highly criticized rap album for unscrupulously joking about the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center, which made him a hated pariah; and for his dramatic and oftentimes hilarious debates and romantic quips with celebrities and politicians on social media websites.
History
Darrell was raised by his mother, Beverly Brown, a single parent, and his grandmother, Pauline Paige Brown, of Virginia. He and his older sister Tasha Brown Kamaka, started life from humble beginnings. Though his mothers' father, the late Thomas Brown, (1921?-2000) of Atlanta, Georgia, a shrewd investor who invested in bonds and real estate, was financially well off, she chose to raise him and his sister without his assistance; for reasons unknown to Darrell even after he'd reached adulthood. Thomas and Pauline had been separated before he was born.
Early Life
He grew up in the urban south side area of Newark, where he attended elementary and high school; but a large portion of his time was spent in Harlem, New York with his favorite uncle Sammy and great-grandmother Elizabeth Paige; in the suburbs of Cranford, New Jersey, with his sisters' fathers' family; and in Westfield, New Jersey, located approximately one mile from there.
As a kid he was highly intelligent and adventurous. And at the age of five, he hung out with kids mostly older than he was.
Though he had never gone to a juvenile detention center as a child, it was at this age that he'd absorbed criminal mischievous ways; for example, stealing; which would eventually place him under incarceration at the age of 23 for car theft and eluding the police.
When he was 14 years old he endeavored to become a boxer, but felt that he was too skinny to land an effective punch, so he abandoned the idea. Then he set his sights on becoming a psychologist when he was 16, but dropped out of high school during his senior year and it too was pushed aside.
At 19 years old, and with a baby on the way, he'd decided he wanted to be a rapper. Not long after making the decision, he began to spend most of his time writing raps, which he shopped around and was eventually offered a contract from an indie record label called Seay Barber records-after impressing them with a live audition. But after being swindled by a lawyer that he'd retained to review his contract, and being given doubtful advice about the contract from someone he trusted, he decided to launch his own record label.
He had a daughter born to him around the same time that he was getting his company in order, but which was put off-because he had an emergency situation happen in his family, and after adopting the Jehovah's Witness way of life.
Struggling to do Gods' will, and forsake his own, proved to be a major conflict in his life. So much in fact that he found himself going back and forth to jail repeatedly from 1997-2004.
Education
After deciding that he'd had enough of incarceration during his last stint, because each prison he was being sent to got worst, he felt that it was time for him to get his life together. So after receiving his GED from the correctional facility that he was in, in 2000, he enrolled in Union County College to major in business and public administration upon his release in 2002.
It was during his first semester that he learned the hard way that he was an autodidact, because he didn't do so well; he lacked study skills and found it difficult to learn while being lectured to. Consequently, he left college and went back to the street life, and eventually ended up back in prison a few months later.
Incarceration
While in jail this time, he learned much about himself, and also how to study properly. He dedicated himself to learning.The catalyst that propelled his desire to suddenly seek knowledge, was after he stood trial for two charges in a high profile criminal court case and won the major offense, but lost the minor offense that didn't give much time, the judge unfairly sentenced him to 10 years anyway.
Prior to going to trial, he'd happened upon a book about the law that he'd found in the jails' law library-that sparked in him an interest in knowledge; law, in particular. In the heading of the book were the words, "Knowledge is power; but even a little knowledge can be beneficial." It was a book that taught the basics of law and the rules of the court. Those words proved to be true, because he knew nothing about law previously, but the book helped him enormously in winning his trial.
Armed with new skills and new outlook on life, he was released from prison and prepared to challenge college life once again. And to his credit he excelled in every subject, and made Dean's List. He also delved back into rap at this time and started another record label dubbed Bogart Entertainment.
Blackballed/Public Enemy #1
He produced a number of controversial raps on his 2004 mix-tape CD, after his release from prison. One song in particular, entitled 'New York, New York' (I Wanna Be A Part Of It) made him hated by much of America, because of his mocking of the destruction of the World Trade Center attack on 9/11, of which he said, "The Twin Towers fu##ed up my shine/ they had to come down/ so I/huffed and puffed/ leveled shit to the ground."
On October 2002, he had been pulled over while in a stolen car, in Westfield, N.J. He was taken to jail and was offered plea bargains that he'd refused. So the case was referred for a trial. Brown admitted to the charges he was guilty of while he was at trial; the jury found him not guilty of the 'burglary' charge, but returned a guilty verdict for the 'receiving stolen property' charge. After the trial was over, he was given a date to return for sentencing. On the day of sentencing, while he stood before the court, the trial judge had given him two five year sentences to be served consecutively (The other five years to be served immediately after completing the first five) when the charge that he lost at trial only called for a five flat sentence, with a grant of parole after serving 18 months. After he was sentenced, he immediately yelled out that he wanted to appeal it. He made certain to say it loud enough for those present, and the stenographer to hear him.
He was eventually transferred from the county jail to prison a few weeks later; but at the central reception facility where prisoners are quarantined a few days before being taken to prison, he was notified that he would be serving only a five year sentence of which he would be eligible for parole after serving 18 months; and his time served in the county would count toward it. Therefore, he only had six months to serve in prison, because he had spent a year in the county jail.
He received major negative feedback from his first CD Hotshot 'KILLUMINATI'; so much in fact that he didn't release another CD until two years later, in 2006, which he didn't give a title to. His 2006 unnamed CD would be his last, because he knew that he would never get a record deal because of being blacklisted and blackballed due to his 2004 CD.
Not knowing exactly what he wanted to do after giving up rap, in the meantime, he turned his attention to educating himself. He dedicated most of his free time to reading and studying, everything from World History to Calculus to Philosophy. He developed a burning desire to know; and also to understand. He trained his attention span and his memory. Law, math, $\sum_{n=0}^\infty\frac{x^n}{n!}$ and psychology proved to be his favorite subjects and he began to notice that he utilized them a lot in his daily life. His academic stance gained him the attention of many government officials, including a number of U.S. presidents, as well as leaders and rulers of many other nations; and also a host of celebrities who admired his logic, entertaining pugnacity, and educational topics that he expressed in his hybrid social media blogs on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.
Immensely talented, showbiz wise and academically, he shunned the mainstream entertainment industry due to his trust issues. Although awashed in an enormous amount of fame, mainly from his dramatic social media bouts with politicians and artists in the entertainment industry, he doesn't acknowledge it, for the purpose of wanting to maintain his freedom and privacy.
Often criticized by his celebrity peers because of his slowness in achieving wealth; his time incarcerated and his education taught him patience. He quoted, "I would rather be hated for who I am, than loved for who I am not."-Kurt Cobain. He believes that strength comes from knowing who we are mentally, and exercising physically; and we mustn't allow anyone to make us be, who they want us to be, socially, when we're not prepared for it; because peer pressure destroys those who're unaware.
Today (2015)
Darrell currently resides in Miami, Florida and recently graduated from D.A. Dorsey Technical College for building construction-to add further knowledge to his profession of real estate investing.
His sister and her husband, are employed at the U.S. Navy. They currently own homes in Maryland and Hawaii.
References
1. ^ref. Bureau of Vital Statistics, Darrell Brown, Newark, N.J.
2. ^ref. City Hall records (archives) Westfield, NJ>Thomas J. Brown (1921?-2000 A.D.)>estate,
3. ^ref. Americorp (2014) Communities In Schools of Miami
4. ^ref. Union County College, Cranford, N.J.
5. ^ref. Union County Correctional Facility, Elizabeth, N.J. (October 2003) State vs. Brown, trial; Honorable Judge Triarsi presiding.
6. ^ref. Southern State Correctional Facility, Delmar, NJ
7. ^ref. The Star Ledger, newspaper, archives, article of Darrell Brown, suspect; of Cranford, N.J. October (2002) Union County, New Jersey."


