


Multiscale turbulence




Multiscale turbulence

Multiscale turbulence is a class of turbulent flows in which the chaotic motion of the fluid is forced at different length and/or time scales.12 This is usually achieved by immersing in a moving fluid a body with a multiscale, often fractal-like, arrangement of length scales. This arrangement of scales can be either passive34 or active5
(Figure)
Three examples of multiscale turbulence generators. From left to right, a fractal cross grid, a fractal square grid and a fractal I grid.  the manufacturing of a fractal grid.

As turbulent flows contain eddies with a wide range of scales, exciting the turbulence at particular scales (or range of scales) allows one to fine-tune the properties of that flow. Multiscale turbulent flows have been successfully applied in different fields.,6 such as:

Reducing acoustic noise from wings by modifying the geometry of spoilers;7
Enhancing heat transfer from impinging jets passing through grids;8
Reducing the vortex shedding intensity of flows past normal plates without changing the shedding frequency;9
Enhancing mixing by energy-efficient stirring;1011
Improving flow metering and flow conditioning in pipes;12
Improving combustion.1314

In 2013 the EU awarded a Marie Curie grant of 3.8M Euros for research and training of 13 young scientists and engineers in multiscale turbulence in order to further explore and apply the properties of these flows1516
Multiscale turbulence has also played an important role into probing the internal structure of turbulence.17 This sort of turbulence allowed researchers to unveil a novel dissipation law in which the parameter 
 
 
 
  in



is not constant, as required by the Richardson-Kolmogorov energy cascade. This new law.18 can be expressed as 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are Reynolds numbers based, respectively, on initial/global conditions (such as free-stream velocity and the object's length scale) and local conditions (such as the rms velocity and integral length scale). This new dissipation law characterises non-equilibrium turbulence apparently universally in various flows (not just multiscale turbulence) and results from non-equilibrium unsteady energy cascade. This imbalance implies that new mean flow scalings exist for free shear turbulent flows, as already observed in axisymmetric wakes19
References
"
Category:Chaos theory Category:Turbulence Category:Fluid dynamics









Nedić, J., B. Ganapathisubramani, J. C. Vassilicos, J. Boree, L. E. Brizzi, A. Spohn. "Aeroacoustic performance of fractal spoilers". AIAA journal 2012.
















