


Draft:Mutual energy theorem




Draft:Mutual energy theorem


Mutual Energy Theorem
The concept of mutual energy is defined as the difference between the total energy and self energy. In electromagnetic field the total energy and the self energy satisfies the Poynting energy theorem, that means the total energy and self energy are conservative.
According the definition of the mutual energy, it is clear the mutual energy should be also conservative, hence there is
This is referred as mutual energy theorem. where ∇•S is the divergence of the Poynting vector (energy flow) and J•E is the rate at which the fields do work on a charged object (J is the free current density corresponding to the motion of charge, E is the electric field, and • is the dot product). The energy density u is given by:












in which D is the electric displacement field, B is the magnetic flux density and H the magnetic field strength, ε0 is the electric constant and μ0 is the magnetic constant. Since the charges are free to move, and the D and H fields bypass any bound charges and currents in the charge distribution (by their definition), J is the current density.
Using the divergence theorem, the mutual energy theorem can be rewritten in integral form:
where 
 
 
 
  is the boundary of a volume V. The shape of the volume is arbitrary but fixed for the calculation.
It is looks this theorem is trivial, however it can be the basis of a group of mutual energy theorems and reciprocity theorems. It is a bridge between Poynting energy theorem and reciprocity theorems. See following or the reference.,1
History about Poynting energy theorem, reciprocity theorems
In electromagnetic field theory, the Poynting theorem J. H. Poynting (1884). \char`\"{}On the Transfer of Energy in the Electromagnetic Field\char`\"{}. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 175: 343\textendash 361. doi:10.1098/rstl.1884.0016
 is energy conservation theorem.



The Lorentz reciprocity theoremH. A. Lorentz, \char`\"{}Het theorema van Poynting over de energie in het electromagnetisch veld en een paar algemeene stellingen over de voortplanting van licht,\char`\"{} Verhandelingen en bijdragen uitgegeven door de Afdeeling Natuurkunde, Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, vol. 4, pp. 176-187, 1895-1896.
J.R. Carson. Reciprocal theorems in Radio communication. Proc. IRE 17. 952(1929)
J.R. Carson. The Reciprocal energy theorem. Bell Syst. Tech. Jour., 9 525, (1930)
 STUART-BALLANTINE, RECIPROCITY IN ELECTROMAGNETIC, MECHANICAL, ACOUSTICAL, AND INTERCONNECTED SYSTEMS, roceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers Volume 17, Number 6 June, 1929







which is close related to Poynting theorem. The two theorems look similar, J.R. Carson has called the reciprocity theorem as ``Reciprocal energy theorem'' in the reference2. But until now the two theorems are two different theorems derived from Maxwell equations respectively.
Many efforts try to reveal the relationship between the reciprocity theorem and Poynting theorem have been done. V. H. Rumsey proposed the concept of the reactionRumsey, V. H., Reaction concept in electromagnetic theory, Phys. Rev., vol 94 Jun 1954, pp 1483-1491.
 in 1954 which is related to Lorentz reciprocity theorem. But what is the concept of the ``reaction'' behind scene? He did not tell us more deeply.
W.J. Welch has derived a reciprocity theoremWelch, W. J., Reciprocity theorems for electromagnetic fields whose time dependence is arbitrary, IRE trans. On Antennas and Propagation, vol AP-8, Jan 1960, PP68-73.
 in 1960, which is in the following






In the formula, Welch thought that all variables with subscript ``1'' is belong to retarded potential and all variables with subscript ``2'' belong to advanced potential and the surface integral vanished in a infinite sphere. Welch did not mention what will be if the two fields are same, for example, both are retarded potential.
Welch has derived another reciprocity theorem in 1961,






Rumsey has derived a another reciprocity theorem in 1963Rumsey, V. H. A Short Way of Solving Advanced Problems in electromagnetic Fields and Other Linear Systems, IEEE Transactions on antennas and Propagation, Jan 1963, pp 73-86.
 from his reaction concept, which is the following,



S. N. Samaddar suggest a reciprocity theorem and applied it to solve wave expansion problems in 1964S. N. Samaddar, Orthogonality properties of modes in a compressible partially ionized plasma, Applied Scientific Research, Section B February 1964, Volume 11, Issue 1-2, pp 84-102.
 in plasma media,



The corresponding time-domain theory of the reciprocity theorem34567 is the time-convolution reciprocity theoremGoubau, G., A reciprocity theorem for non-periodic fields, IRE Trans. on Antennas and Propagation, vol AP-8, May 1960, pp 339-342
B. Ru-shao, Cheo, A Reciprocity Theorem for electromagnetic fields with general time dependence. Antennas and Propagation,1965 IEE Volume:13 Issue:2
 derived by G. Goubau in 1960 and B. Ru-shao Cheo in 1965 which is



The further development of the time-convolution reciprocity theorem can be foundAdrianus T. de Hoop, Reciprocity, Causality, and Huygens\textquoteright{} principle in electromagnetic wave theory. Huygens\textquoteright{} Principle, 1690-1990: Theory and Applications, H. Blok, H.A. Ferwerda, H.K. Kuiken (editors). © 1992 Elsevier Science Publishers B. V. All rights reserved.
Anders Karlsson, Constitutive relations, dissipation and Gerhard Kristensson, reciprocity for the Maxwell equations in the time domain, Editor: Gerhard Kristensson © Anders Karlsson and Gerhard Kristensson, Lund, August 4, 1999.
. J. A. Kong offers the details of conjugate transform and the concept of the modified reciprocity theoremJin Au Kong, Theorems of Bianisotropic Media, Theorems of Bianisotropic Media, Proceeding of IEEE, vol, 60, No. 9, September 1972.
J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory, EMW Publishing, 1016 pg, 2008 (Previous editions by Wiley-Interscience: 1975, 1986 and 1990 and EMW Publishing: 1998, 2000 and 2005)
 in 1972. In the modified reciprocity theorem the 
 
 
 
  (permittivity) and 
 
 
 
  (permeability) of two electromagnetic fields appeared in the reciprocity theorem are allowed to be different. Norbert N. Bojarski has further developed the Welch's reciprocity theorem in 1983Norbert N. Bojarskbi, Generalized reaction principles and reciprocity theorems for the wave equations, and the relationship between the time-advanced and time-retarded fields, J. Acoust. Soc. Am 74(1), July 1983
. Shuang-Ren Zhao proposed the mutual energy theorem and modified mutual energy theorem in May of 1987Zhao S. R., The Application of \textquoteleft Mutual Energy Theorem\textquoteright{} in Expansion of Radiation Fields in Spherical Waves, published on ACTA Electronica Sinica, Vol. 15, No. 3 May 1987. P. R. of China, P88
, which is






The derivation of the mutual energy theorem is based on modified Lorenz reciprocity theorem 8910111213 and the conjugate transform14. The mutual energy theorem is defined in Fourier domain or complex domain and is further developed in the referenceZhao S.R., The Simplification of Formulas of Electromagnetic Fields by Using \textquoteleft Mutual Energy Formula\textquoteright{} published on Journal of Electronics, Vol. 11 and No. 1 Jan. 1989. P. R. of China, P73 Simplification
Zhao S.R., The Application of \textquoteleft Mutual Energy Formula\textquoteright{} in Expansion of Plane Waves published on Journal of Electronics, Vol. 11 and No. 2. March 1989. P. R. of China, P204 Mutual Energy Formula
. Compare to the Rumsey's formula, in the mutual energy theorem there is an item of the surface integral which dose not vanish. The surface integral has been applied to define an inner product of electromagnetic fields on the surface and hence to solve the wave expansion problems. Welch's reciprocity theorem1516 is further developed by A. T. de Hoop in December 1987 to become the so called time-correlation reciprocity theoremAdrianus T. de Hoop, Time-domain reciprocity theorems for electromagnetic fields in dispersive media Radio ScienceV, olume 22, Number 7, Pages 1! 71-1178, December 1987
 which is






de Hoop's time-correlation reciprocity theorem can be seen as the mutual energy theorem17 in time-domain instead of in the Fourier domain. Welch's reciprocity theorem is a special situation of the time-correlation reciprocity theorem where the time variable 
 
 
 
 . By the way in the theorem of de Hoop18 the surface integral appeared but has been thought that it will vanish on the infinite sphere. Baun has a bookBook of ``Electromagnetic Symmetry'' edited by Carl E. Baum, Haralambos N. Kritikos, 1995
 in 1995 which systematically introduced reciprocity theorems. The reference  D. Marcuse Coupled-mode Theory for Anisotropic optical waveguides, The Bell System technical Journal Vol. 54, No. 6 July-August 1975.
A. A. Barybin , MODAL EXPANSIONS AND ORTHOGONAL COMPLEMENTS IN THE THEORY OF COMPLEX MEDIA WAVEGUIDE EXCITATION BY EXTERNAL SOURCES FOR ISOTROPIC, ANISOTROPIC, AND BIANISOTROPIC MEDIA Progress In Electromagnetics Research, PIER 19, 241\textendash 300, 1998
 solved the wave expansion problem directly from Maxwell equation which is close related to the problem the mutual energy theorem can solve.
Later the mutual energy theorem has been rediscovered and has been referred as the second reciprocity theoremI.V. P and Yu.K. Sirenko, The Lost “ Second Lorentz Theorem\textquotedblright{} in the Phasor Domain, Telecommunications and Radio Engineering, 68(7):555-560 (2009)
 in 2009. In this second reciprocity theorem the surface integral was also thought to be vanish on the infinite big sphere.
Application of reciprocity theorem and mutual energy theorem can also be found in the examples Steven G. Johnson, Peter Bienstman, M. A. Skorobogatiy, Mihai Ibanescu, Elefterios Lidorikis, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Adiabatic theorem and continuous coupled-mode theory for efficient taper transitions in photonic crystals, PHYSICAL REVIEW E 66, 066608 (2002)
 Anatoly A. Barybin, Excitation theory for space-dispersive active media waveguides, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 32 (1999) 2014\textendash 2028. Printed in the UK
T. D. Carozzi, J. E. S. Bergman and R. L. Karlesson. Complex Poynting Theorem as a Conservation Law, 2005, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.
Jiuping Chen, Douglas W. Oldenburg,and Eldad Haber, Reciprocity in electromagnetics: Application to marine magnetometric resistivity Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors Volume 150, Issues 1\textendash 3, 16 May 2005, Pages 45\textendash 61
. There are a few reference discussed the relationship between Poynting theorem and reciprocity theoremSHUN-LIEN CHUANG, A Coupled-Mode Theory for multiwaveguide Systems Satisfying the Reciprocity Theorem and Power Conservation, JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. LT-5, NO. I , JANUARY 1987.
Burak Polat, On Poynting's Theorem and Reciprocity Relations for Discontinuous Fields, Electronics Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture Uludag University, Gorukle, Bursa, TR-1 6059 Turkey, E-mail: burakpolat@uludag.edu.tr
Wen Cho Chew, A New Look at Reciprocity and Energy Conservation Theorems in Electromagnetics, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2008.
. However they only discussed them together and did not offer the direct relationship between the two theorems. The reference 19 discussed the reciprocity theorem in bi-anisotropic media.
There is a concept ``mixed Poynting vector''Fragstein, Conrad von, The History of the Mixed Poynting Vector, Veröffentlicht in: Abhandlungen der Braunschweigischen Wissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft Band 39, 1987, S.25-29
 Angus Macleod, The Mixed Poynting Vector, http://www.svc.org/DigitalLibrary/documents/2014_Summer_AMacleod.pdf
 which is close related to the concept mutual energy and Poynting vector. Chen-To Tai has derived the complementary reciprocity theoremChen-To Tai, Life Fellow, IEEE, Complementary Reciprocity Theorems in Electromagnetic Theory, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 40, NO. 6, JUNE 1992 675

It is worth to notice that in the reference202122, the concept of ``mutual energy'' was not well defined and the related concept ``total energy'' and ``self energy'' were also not defined. The so called mutual energy theorem is only derived from the modified reciprocity theorem instead of Poynting theorem, hence such name: mutual energy theorem is still not widely acceptable.
Mutual energy theorems
The goal of the article23 is to convince the reader that the mutual energy theorem is a real energy theorem. The reciprocity theorem is special situation of the mutual energy theorem where two electromagnetic fields one is retarded potential, the other is advanced potential. To achieve this goal the mutual energy theorem have to be derived from Poynting theorem instead of from Maxwell equation directly. In this article a few new concept is defined or generalized. Among them there is ``modified, ``time-reversed transform, ``mutual energy, ``self energy, ``total energy. The concept of ``reaction is re-explained. The mutual energy theorem is re-derived from Poynting theorem. The derivation include different versions and the history is introduced. A few new theorems are obtained from the derivation, the following gives the details.
The modified Maxwell equations
The concept of ``modified'' is borrowed from the modified reciprocity theorem, where two electromagnetic fields are put in different media with different 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  and can be superimposed. We found for this situation the Maxwell equations are still established. In this kind of media, the Maxwell equations are referred as modified Maxwell equations.
The modified and generalized Poynting theorem
The Poynting theorem is extented to the modified Poynting theorem. The concept of ``modified'' is borrowed from the modified reciprocity theorem24 as the above of the modified Maxwell equations. This idea has also been used in the mutual energy theorem which is modified mutual energy252627. The Poynting theorem is further extended to generalized Poynting theorem in which transformed electromagnetic field can be superposed. The transform can be time-reversed transform, magnetic/electric mirrored transform, electric-magnetic swapping transform.
Time-reversed transform
We knew that after a magnetic mirror transform the electromagnetic field 
 
 
 
  is still electromagnetic field. A electromagnetic field after a time-reversed transform is not a electromagnetic field any more. That means after the time-reversed transform it does not satisfy the Maxwell equation. However we modified the time-reversed transform through introducing the negative media with negative 
 
 
 
  , 
 
 
 
 , this new time-reversed transform is given in the following,






A electromagnetic fields after the above updated time-reverse transform is still electromagnetic fields satisfies Maxwell equations. This time reverse transform is one of the import tool to derive the mutual energy theorem from Poynting theorem in Fourier domain.
The difference the substitution and the replace of a transform is noticed
There are many transforms: magnetic mirror transform, electric mirror transform, time-reversed transform. Time-offset transform. There are two process for the above transform, one is substitution of the transform, the other is replace of a transform. Replace and substitution are two different process, in the history many mistakes were made because the confusion of this two processes. In this article we try to clarify the difference of the replacement and substitution of a transform.
Introduced the instantaneous mutual energy theorem
In this article the concept of mutual energy is defined as the difference between the total energy and the self energy. The instantaneous mutual energy theorem is derived from Poynting theorem with the concept of mutual energy. The instantaneous mutual energy theorem is following,






Derived the time-reversed mutual energy theorem in Fourier domain
Time-reversed mutual energy theorem is introduced from Fourier domain through instantaneous mutual energy theorem, and hence from the Poynting theorem. The reversed mutual energy theorem in Fourier domain is show in the following,






The time-reversed mutual energy theorem in time domain is






Derived the mutual energy theorem in Fourier domain
The mutual energy theorem can be derived from reversed mutual energy theorem with time-reversed transform. The mutual energy theorem is shown in the following,






The corresponding in the time domain which is time-correlation mutual energy theorem or time-correlation reciprocity theorem.28






Derived the time-reversed reciprocity theorems from the mutual energy theorems in Fourier domain
The time-reversed reciprocity theorem is shown as following,






In time-domain, the corresponding theorem is time-correlation reciprocity theorem is derived which is in the following,






Re-derived the Lorenz reciprocity theorem from the mutual energy theorem
The Lorenz reciprocity theorem2930 is shown as a special situation of the mutual energy theorem. In the special situation where two electromagnetic fields are different, one is the field of retarded potential and the other is the field of advanced potential. The concept of the reaction31 is re-explained as the mutual energy (or power) of the two electromagnetic fields where one is the field of retarded potential and the other is the field of advanced potential.
Re-derived time-correlation mutual energy theorem from Poynting theorem
In the above we have derived the mutual energy theorem in Fourier domain. The derivation is that first derive the time-reversed mutual energy theorem and then through a time-reverse transform we obtained the mutual energy theorem. We did not very satisfy with this process of derivation. Since it is not a pure derivation from Poynting theorem. The time-reversed transform need the Maxwell equation to prove. Hence we actually derived the mutual energy theorem form Poynting theorem plus Maxwell equation. A purely derivation from Poynting theorem should not use the transform for example the mirrored transform or time-reversed transform. Hence we seek another way to prove the mutual energy theorem and avoid the time-reversed transform. We have proved that the time-correlation mutual energy theorem from Poynting theorem. And then considered a Fourier transform for the time-correlation mutual energy theorem, we obtained the mutual energy theorem. This way we have purely derived the mutual energy theorem form the Poynting theorem.
Introduced the mixed mutual energy theorem
We have try to derive the mutual energy theorem from complex Poynting theorem. But we failed to do so. Instead to obtained the mutual energy theorem we obtained the following mixed mutual energy theorem.









or corresponding mixed time-correlation mutual energy theorem,












The mixed mutual energy theorem is related with the concept of mixed Poynting vector 3233. We do not clear perhaps the mixed mutual energy has some usage in the future.
Introduced the inner product to the mutual energy theorem
This author has introduced the inner product in Fourier domain343536. In this article this idea is generalized to time domain. In time domain the inner product is defined as following



The author has shown that 
 
 
 
  is not a good inner product, but 
 
 
 
  is a good inner product. The inner product can be applied to the wave expansion problem. The normal function expansion methods can be applied to electromagnetic field wave expansions.
Re-explained the concept of the reaction
Many confused concept about transform is clarified. There are time-reversed transform, mirror transform, time offset transform. In the above transform there are two different process in derivation of new theory one is substitution and the other is replacement. Mistake is often caused by confusing the replacement as substitution. The concept of causal field, advanced potential, retard potential, offset field, transmitting filed, receiving field is clarified too. The concept reaction is re-explained as the mutual energy of two fields one is retarded potential and the other one is advanced potential.
Complementary theorems
Chen-To Tai has derived the complementary reciprocity theorem37. We have obtained 4 theorems, 2 mutual energy theorems and 2 reciprocity theorems. We apply the electromagnetic field swapping transform



to the 4 theorems, 4 corresponding complementary theorems are obtained. Among them one is the Chen-To tai's complementary reciprocity theorem.
References


"



Shuangren Zhao, The modified Poynting theorem and the concept of mutual energy, arxiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02006





















Shuang-ren Zhao, Kevin Yang, Kang Yang, Xingang Yang, Xintie Yang The modified Poynting theorem and the concept of mutual energy, http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02006


















