


Hénon-Heiles System




Hénon-Heiles System

(Figure)
Contour plot of the Hénon-Heiles potential

While at Princeton in 1962, Michel Hénon and Carl Heiles worked on the non-linear motion of a star around a galactic center where the motion is restricted to a plane. In 1964 they have published an article 1 titled 'The applicability of the third integral of motion: Some numerical experiments'. Their original idea was to find a third integral of motion in a galactic dynamics. For that purpose they have taken a simplified two-dimensional nonlinear axi-symmetric potential and found that the third integral exist only for a limited number of initial conditions. In the modern perspective these initial conditions which doesn't have the third integral motion are called chaotic orbits.
Introduction
The Hénon-Heiles Potential can be expressed as2


 
  The Hénon-Heiles Hamiltonian can be written as


 
  The Hénon-Heiles System (HHS) is defined by the following four equations:











 
  In the classical chaos community, the value of the parameter 
 
 
 
  is usually taken as unity. Since HHS is specified in 
 
 
 
 , we need a Hamiltonian of degrees of freedom two to model it. It can be solved for some cases using Painlevé Analysis.
Quantum Henon-Heiles Hamiltonian
In the quantum case the Henon-Heiles Hamiltonian can be written as a two-dimensional Schrödinger equation.
The corresponding two-dimensional Schrödinger equation is given by


 
 .
Wada Property of the Exit Basins
Hénon-Heiles system shows rich dynamical behavior. Usually the wada property cannot be seen in the Hamiltonian system but Hénon-Heiles exit basin shows an interesting wada property. It can be seen that when the energy is greater than the critical energy, the Hénon-Heiles system has three exit basins. In 2001 M. A. F. Sanjuán et al. 3 had shown that in the Henon-Heiles system the exit basins have the wada property.
References
External links

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Henon-HeilesEquation.html

"
Category:Stellar astronomy










