


Hierarchical closeness




Hierarchical closeness
'''Hierarchical closeness''' ('''HC''') is a structural [[Centrality|centrality me
 asure]] used in network theory or graph theory. It’s extended from closeness centrality to rank how centrally located a node is in a directed network. The original closeness considers the most important node in a directed network simply is the node where can reach to other nodes by the shortest paths whereas hierarchical closeness evaluates the most important node is the node where can reach the most of nodes by the shortest paths. The hierarchical closeness explicitly includes information about the range of other nodes that can be affected by the given node. In a directed network 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the set of nodes and 
 
 
 
  is the set of interactions, hierarchical closeness of a node 
 
 
 
 
  ∈ 
 
 
 
  called 
 
 
 
  was proposed by Tran and Kwon1 as follows:


 
  where:



 
  is the reachability of a node 
 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
  a path from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  is the normalized form of original closeness (Sabidussi, 1966).2 It can use a variant definition of closeness3 as follows
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the distance of the shortest path, if any, from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ; otherwise, 
 
 
 
  is specified as an infinite value.

In the formula, 
 
 
 
 
  represents the number of nodes in 
 
 
 
  that can be reachable from 
 
 
 
 . It can also represent the hierarchical position of a node in a directed network. It notes that if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  because 
 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . In cases where 
 
 
 
 , the reachability is a dominant factor because 
 
 
 
  but 
 
 
 
 . In other words, the first term indicates the level of the global hierarchy and the second term presents the level of the local centrality.
Application
Hierarchical closeness can be used in biological networks to rank the risk of genes to carry diseases.1
References
"
Category:Graph theory Category:Graph algorithms Category:Algebraic graph theory Category:Networks Category:Network analysis Category:Network theory



Tran, T.-D. and Kwon, Y.-K. Hierarchical closeness efficiently predicts disease genes in a directed signaling network, Computational biology and chemistry.↩
Sabidussi, G. (1966) The centrality index of a graph, Psychometrika, 31, 581-603 %G English↩
Opsahl, T., Agneessens, F. and Skvoretz, J. (2010) Node centrality in weighted networks: Generalizing degree and shortest paths, Social networks, 32, 245-251.↩




