


Chomsky–Schützenberger enumeration theorem




Chomsky–Schützenberger enumeration theorem

In formal language theory, the Chomsky–Schützenberger enumeration theorem is a theorem derived by Noam Chomsky and Marcel-Paul Schützenberger about the number of words of a given length generated by an unambiguous context-free grammar. The theorem provides an unexpected link between the theory of formal languages and abstract algebra.
Statement
In order to state the theorem, a few notions from algebra and formal language theory are needed.
A power series over 
 
 
 
  is an infinite series of the form


 
  with coefficients 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
 . The multiplication of two formal power series

 
  and 
 
 
 
  is defined in the expected way as the convolution of the sequences 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :



In particular, we write 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and so on. In analogy to algebraic numbers, a power series 
 
 
 
  is called algebraic over 
 
 
 
 , if there exists a finite set of polynomials 
 
 
 
 
  each with rational coefficients such that



A context-free grammar is said to be unambiguous if every string generated by the grammar admits a unique parse tree or, equivalently, only one leftmost derivation. Having established the necessary notions, the theorem is stated as follows.

Chomsky–Schützenberger theorem. If 
 
 
 
  is a context-free language admitting an unambiguous context-free grammar, and 
 
 
 
  is the number of words of length 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a power series over 
 
 
 
  that is algebraic over 
 
 
 
 .
 

Proofs of this theorem are given by , and by .
Usage
Asymptotic estimates
The theorem can be used in analytic combinatorics to estimate the number of words of length n generated by a given unambiguous context-free grammar, as n grows large. The following example is given by : The unambiguous context-free grammar G over the alphabet {0,1} has start symbol S and the following rules

S → M | U

M → 0M1M | ε

U → S | 0M1U.
 

To obtain an algebraic representation of the power series G(x) associated with a given context-free grammar G, one transforms the grammar into a system of equations. This is achieved by replacing each occurrence of a terminal symbol by 'x', each occurrence of 'ε' by the integer '1', each occurrence of '→' by '=', and each occurrence of '|' by '+', respectively. The operation of concatenation at the right-hand-side of each rule corresponds to the multiplication operation in the equations thus obtained. This yields the following system of equations:

S = M + U

M = M²x² + 1

U = Sx + MUx²


In this system of equations, S, M, and U are functions of x, so one could also write S(x), M(x), and U(x). The equation system can be resolved after S, resulting in a single algebraic equation:

x(2x-1)S^2 + (2x-1)S +1 = 0.
 

This quadratic equation has two solutions for S, one of which is the algebraic power series G(x). By applying methods from complex analysis to this equation, the number 
 
 
 
  of words of length n generated by G can be estimated, as n grows large. In this case, one obtains 
 
 
 
 
  but 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 . See  for a detailed exposition.
Inherent ambiguity
In classical formal language theory, the theorem can be used to prove that certain context-free languages are inherently ambiguous. For example, the Goldstine language

 
  over the alphabet 
 
 
 
  consists of the words 
 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 
 .
It is comparably easy to show that the language 
 
 
 
  is context-free . The harder part is to show that there does not exist an unambiguous grammar that generates 
 
 
 
 . This can be proved as follows: If 
 
 
 
  denotes the number of words of length 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
 , then for the associated power series holds 
 
 
 
 . Using methods from complex analysis, one can prove that this function is not algebraic over 
 
 
 
 . By the Chomsky-Schützenberger theorem, one can conclude that 
 
 
 
  does not admit an unambiguous context-free grammar. See  for detailed account.
References














"
Category:Noam Chomsky Category:Formal languages Category:Theorems in discrete mathematics


