


Trochoidal wave




Trochoidal wave

(Figure)
Surface elevation of a trochoidal wave (deep blue) propagating to the right. The trajectories of free surface particles are close circles (in cyan), and the flow velocity is shown in red, for the black particles. The wave height – difference between the crest and trough elevation – is denoted as 
 
 
 
 , the wavelength as 
 
 
 
  and the phase speed as 
 
 


In fluid dynamics, a trochoidal wave or Gerstner wave is an exact solution of the Euler equations for periodic surface gravity waves. It describes a progressive wave of permanent form on the surface of an incompressible fluid of infinite depth. The free surface of this wave solution is an inverted (upside-down) trochoid – with sharper crests and flat troughs. This wave solution was discovered by Gerstner in 1802, and rediscovered independently by Rankine in 1863.
The flow field associated with the trochoidal wave is not irrotational: it has vorticity. The vorticity is of such a specific strength and vertical distribution that the trajectories of the fluid parcels are closed circles. This is in contrast with the usual experimental observation of Stokes drift associated with the wave motion. Also the phase speed is independent of the trochoidal wave's amplitude, unlike other nonlinear wave-theories (like those of the Stokes wave and cnoidal wave) and observations. For these reasons – as well as for the fact that solutions for finite fluid depth are lacking – trochoidal waves are of limited use for engineering applications.
In computer graphics, the rendering of realistic-looking ocean waves can be done by use of so-called Gerstner waves. This is a multi-component and multi-directional extension of the traditional Gerstner wave, often using fast Fourier transforms to make (real-time) animation feasible.1
Description of classical trochoidal wave
Using a Lagrangian specification of the flow field, the motion of fluid parcels is – for a periodic wave on the surface of a fluid layer of infinite depth:2


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the positions of the fluid parcels in the 
 
 
 
  plane at time 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  the horizontal coordinate and 
 
 
 
  the vertical coordinate (positive upward, in the direction opposing gravity). The Lagrangian coordinates 
 
 
 
  label the fluid parcels, with 
 
 
 
  the centres of the circular orbits – around which the corresponding fluid parcel moves with constant speed

 
  Further 
 
 
 
  is the wavenumber (and 
 
 
 
  the wavelength), while 
 
 
 
  is the phase speed with which the wave propagates in the 
 
 
 
 -direction. The phase speed satisfies the dispersion relation:



which is independent of the wave nonlinearity (i.e. does not depend on the wave height 
 
 
 
 ), and this phase speed 
 
 
 
  the same as for Airy's linear waves in deep water.
The free surface is a line of constant pressure, and is found to correspond with a line 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a (nonpositive) constant. For 
 
 
 
  the highest waves occur, with a cusp-shaped crest. Note that the highest (irrotational) Stokes wave has a crest angle of 120°, instead of the 0° for the rotational trochoidal wave.3
The wave height of the trochoidal wave is 
 
 
 
  The wave is periodic in the 
 
 
 
 -direction, with wavelength 
 
 
 
  and also periodic in time with period


In computer graphics
(Figure)
Animation (5 MB) of swell waves using multi-directional and multi-component Gerstner waves for the simulation of the ocean surface and POV-Ray for the 3D rendering. (The animation is periodic in time; it can be set to loop after right-clicking on it while it is playing).

A multi-component and multi-directional extension of the Lagrangian description of the free-surface motion – as used in Gerstner's trochoidal wave – is used in computer graphics for the simulation of ocean waves.4 For the classical Gerstner wave the fluid motion exactly satisfies the nonlinear, incompressible and inviscid flow equations below the free surface. However, the extended Gerstner waves do in general not satisfy these flow equations exactly (although they satisfy them approximately, i.e. for the linearised Lagrangian description by potential flow). This description of the ocean can be programmed very efficiently by use of the fast Fourier transform (FFT). Moreover, the resulting ocean waves from this process look realistically, as a result of the nonlinear deformation of the free surface (due to the Lagrangian specification of the motion): sharper crests and flatter troughs.
The mathematical description of the free-surface in these Gerstner waves can be as follows:5 the horizontal coordinates are denoted as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and the vertical coordinate is 
 
 
 
 . The mean level of the free surface is at 
 
 
 
  and the positive 
 
 
 
 -direction is upward, opposing the Earth's gravity of strength 
 
 
 
  The free surface is described parametrically as a function of the parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as well as of time 
 
 
 
  The parameters are connected to the mean-surface points 
 
 
 
  around which the fluid parcels at the wavy surface orbit. The free surface is specified through 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 
 
  with:



where 
 
 
 
  is the hyperbolic tangent function, 
 
 
 
  is the number of wave components considered, 
 
 
 
  is the amplitude of component 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  its phase. Further 
 
 
 
  is its wavenumber and 
 
 
 
  its angular frequency. The latter two, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can not be chosen independently but are related through the dispersion relation:



with 
 
 
 
  the mean water depth. In deep water (
 
 
 
 ) the hyperbolic tangent goes to one
 
 
 
  The components 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the horizontal wavenumber vector

 
  determine the wave propagation direction of component 
 
 

The choice of the various parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and a certain mean depth 
 
 
 
  determines the form of the ocean surface. A clever choice is needed in order to exploit the possibility of fast computation by means of the FFT. See e.g.  for a description how to do this. Most often, the wavenumbers are chosen on a regular grid in 
 
 
 
 -space. Thereafter, the amplitudes 
 
 
 
  and phases 
 
 
 
  are chosen randomly in accord with the variance-density spectrum of a certain desired sea state. Finally, by FFT, the ocean surface can be constructed in such a way that it is periodic both in space and time, enabling tiling.
In rendering, also the normal vector

 
  to the surface is often needed. These can be computed using the cross product (
 
 
 
 ) as:



The unit normal vector then is 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  the norm of 
 
 

Notes
References


. Reprinted in: Annalen der Physik 32(8), pp. 412–445, 1809.


Originally published in 1879, the 6th extended edition appeared first in 1932.



"
Category:Water waves Category:Wave mechanics Category:Physical oceanography Category:3D computer graphics Category:Articles containing video clips



↩
↩
↩






