


Lie algebra extension




Lie algebra extension

In the theory of Lie groups, Lie algebras and their representation theory, a Lie algebra extension

 
  is an enlargement of a given Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  by another Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . Extensions arise in several ways. There is the trivial extension obtained by taking a direct sum of two Lie algebras. Other types are the split extension and the central extension. Extensions may arise naturally, for instance, when forming a Lie algebra from projective group representations. Such a Lie algebra will contain central charges.
Starting with a polynomial loop algebra over finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra and performing two extensions, a central extension and an extension by a derivation, one obtains a Lie algebra which is isomorphic with an untwisted affine Kac–Moody algebra. Using the centrally extended loop algebra algebra one may construct a current algebra in two spacetime dimensions. The Virasoro algebra is the universal central extension of the Witt algebra.1
Central extensions are needed in physics, because the symmetry group of a quantized system usually is a central extension of the classical symmetry group, and in the same way the corresponding symmetry Lie algebra of the quantum system is, in general, a central extension of the classical symmetry algebra.2 Kac–Moody algebras have been conjectured to be a symmetry groups of a unified superstring theory.3 The centrally extended Lie algebras algebras play a dominant role in quantum field theory, particularly in conformal field theory, string theory and in M-theory.45
A large portion towards the end is devoted to background material for applications of Lie algebra extensions, both in mathematics and in physics, in areas where they are actually useful. A parenthetical link, (background material), is provided where it might be beneficial.
History
Due to the Lie correspondence, the theory, and consequently the history of Lie algebra extensions, is tightly linked to the theory and history of group extensions. A systematic study of group extensions was performed by the Austrian mathematician Otto Schreier in 1923 in his PhD. thesis and later published.678 The problem posed for his thesis by Otto Hölder was "given two groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , find all groups 
 
 
 
  having a normal subgroup 
 
 
 
  isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  such that the factor group 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 ".
Lie algebra extensions are most interesting and useful for infinite-dimensional Lie algebras. In 1967, Victor Kac and Robert Moody independently generalized the notion of classical Lie algebras, resulting in a new theory of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras algebras, now called Kac–Moody algebras.910 They generalize the finite-dimensional simple Lie algebras and can often concretely be constructed as extensions.11
Notation and proofs
Notational abuse to be found below includes  for the exponential map

 
  given an argument, writing 
 
 
 
  for the element  in a direct product 
 
 
 
  ( is the identity in 
 
 
 
 ), and analogously for Lie algebra direct sums (where also 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are used interchangeably). Likewise for semidirect products and semidirect sums. Canonical injections (both for groups and Lie algebras) are used for implicit identifications. Furthermore, if 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ..., are groups, then the default names for elements of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ..., are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ..., and their Lie algebras are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ... . The default names for elements of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ..., are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ... (just like for the groups!), partly to save scarce alphabetical resources but mostly to have a uniform notation.
Lie algebras that are ingredients in an extension will, without comment, be taken to be over the same field.
The summation convention applies, including sometimes when the indices involved are both upstairs or both downstairs.
Caveat: Not all proofs and proof outlines below have universal validity. The main reason is that the Lie algebras are often infinite-dimensional, and then there may or may not be a Lie group corresponding to the Lie algebra. Moreover, even if such a group exists, it may not have the "usual" properties, e.g. the exponential map might not exist, and if it does, it might not have all the "usual" properties. In such cases, it is questionable whether the group should be endowed with the "Lie" qualifier. The literature is not uniform. For the explicit examples, the relevant structures are supposedly in place.
Definition
Lie algebra extensions are formalized in terms of short exact sequences.12 A short exact sequence is an exact sequence of length three,  such that 
 
 
 
  is a monomorphism, 
 
 
 
  is an epimorphism, and 
 
 
 
 . From these properties of exact sequences, it follows that (the image of) 
 
 
 
  is an ideal in 
 
 
 
 . Moreover,


 
  but it is not necessarily the case that 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to a subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 . This construction mirrors the analogous constructions in the closely related concept of group extensions.
If the situation in  prevails, non-trivially and for Lie algebras over the same field, then one says that 
 
 
 
  is an extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
The defining property may be reformulated. The Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is an extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  if  is exact. Here the zeros on the ends represent the zero Lie algebra (containing the null vector

 
  only) and the maps are the obvious ones; 
 
 
 
  maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  maps all elements of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . With this definition, it follows automatically that 
 
 
 
  is a monomorphism and 
 
 
 
  is an epimorphism.
An extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily unique. Let  denote two extensions and let the primes below have the obvious interpretation. Then, if there exists a Lie algebra isomorphism  such that


 
   then the extensions 
 
 
 
  and  are said to be equivalent extensions. Equivalence of extensions is an equivalence relation.
Extension types
Trivial
A Lie algebra extension


 
  is trivial if there is a subspace 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is an ideal in 
 
 
 
 .13
Split
A Lie algebra extension


 
  is split if there is a subspace 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  as a vector space and 
 
 
 
  is an subalgebra in 
 
 
 
 .
An ideal is a subalgebra, but a subalgebra is not necessarily and ideal. A trivial extension is thus a split extension.
Central
Central extensions of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  by an abelian Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  can be obtained with the help of a so-called (nontrivial) 2-cocycle (background) on 
 
 
 
 . Non-trivial 2-cocycles occur in the context of projective representations (background) of Lie groups. This is alluded to further down.
A Lie algebra extension


 
  is a central extension if 
 
 
 
  is contained in the center

 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
Properties

Since the center commutes with everything, 
 
 
 
  in this case is abelian.
Given a central extension 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , one may construct a 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
 . Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a central extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a linear map from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  with the property that  Idg}}, i.e. 
 
 
 
  is a section of 
 
 
 
 . Use this section to define 
 
 
 
  by



 
   The map 
 
 
 
  satisfies


 
  To see this, use the definition of 
 
 
 
  on the left hand side, then use the linearity of 
 
 
 
 . Use Jacobi identity on 
 
 
 
  to get rid of half of the six terms. Use the definition of 
 
 
 
  again on terms  sitting inside three Lie brackets, bilinearity of Lie brackets, and the Jacobi identity on 
 
 
 
 , and then finally use on the three remaining terms that 
 
 
 
  and that 
 
 
 
  so that  brackets to zero with everything. It then follows that  i−1 ∘ ε}} satisfies the corresponding relation, and if 
 
 
 
  in addition is one-dimensional, then 
 
 
 
  is a 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
  (via a trivial correspondence of 
 
 
 
  with the underlying field).
A central extension


 
  is universal if for every other central extension


 
  there exists homomorphisms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that the diagram  commutes, i.e.  Φ ∘ i}} and  s}}.
Construction
By direct sum
Let 
 
 
 
  be Lie algebras over the same field 
 
 
 
 . Define


 
  and define addition pointwise on 
 
 
 
 . Scalar multiplication is defined by


 
  With these definitions, 
 
 
 
  is a vector space over 
 
 
 
 . With the Lie bracket 

 
  is a Lie algebra. Define further


 
  It is clear that  holds as an exact sequence. This extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  is called a trivial extension. It is, of course, nothing else than the Lie algebra direct sum. By symmetry of definitions, 
 
 
 
  is an extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  as well, but 
 
 
 
 . It is clear from  that the subalgebra 
 
 
 
  is an ideal (Lie algebra). This property of the direct sum of Lie algebras is promoted to the definition of a trivial extension.
By semidirect sum
Inspired by the construction of a semidirect product (background) of groups using a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , one can make the corresponding construct for Lie algebras.
If 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra homomorphism, then define a Lie bracket on 
 
 
 
  by  With this Lie bracket, the Lie algebra so obtained is denoted  h ⊕S g}} and is called the semidirect sum of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
By inspection of  one sees that 
 
 
 
  is a subalgebra of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is an ideal in 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . It is clear that 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 .
As with the trivial extension, this property generalizes to the definition of a split extension.
Example
 Let 
 
 
 
  be the Lorentz group

 
  and let 
 
 
 
  denote the translation group in 4 dimensions, isomorphic to , and consider the multiplication rule of the Poincaré group




 
  (where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are identified with their images in 
 
 
 
 ). From it follows immediately that, in the Poincaré group,  (Λ a, I) ∈ T ⊂ P}}. Thus every Lorentz transformation 
 
 
 
  corresponds to an automorphism  of 
 
 
 
  with inverse  and 
 
 
 
  is clearly a homomorphism. Now define


 
  endowed with multiplication given by . Unwinding the definitions one finds that the multiplication is the same as the multiplication one started with and it follows that 
 
 
 
 . From  follows that  AdΛ}} and then from  it follows that  adλ. λ ∈ o(3, 1)}}.
By derivation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a derivation (background) of 
 
 
 
  and denote by 
 
 
 
  the one-dimensional Lie algebra spanned by 
 
 
 
 . Define the Lie bracket on 
 
 
 
  by14


 
  It is obvious from the definition of the bracket that 
 
 
 
  is and ideal in 
 
 
 
  in and that 
 
 
 
  is a subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  is complementary to 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be given by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . It is clear that 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is a split extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . Such an extension is called extension by a derivation.
By 2-cocycle
If 
 
 
 
  is a 2-cocycle (background) on a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is any one-dimensional vectors space, let 
 
 
 
  (vector space direct sum) and define a Lie bracket on 
 
 
 
  by



Here 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary but fixed element of 
 
 
 
 . Antisymmetry follows from antisymmetry of the Lie bracket on 
 
 
 
  and antisymmetry of the 2-cocycle. The Jacobi identity follows from the corresponding properties of 
 
 
 
  and of 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra. Put  0}} and it follows that 
 
 
 
 . Also, it follows with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that . Hence 
 
 
 
  is a central extension of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . It is called extension by a 2-cocycle.
Theorems
Below follows some results regarding central extensions and 2-cocycles.15
Theorem16
 Let  and  be cohomologous 2-cocycles on a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  and let  and  be respectively the central extensions constructed with these 2-cocycles. Then the central extensions  and  are equivalent extensions.
Proof
 By definition,  φ1 + δf}}. Define


 
  It follows from the definitions that 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra isomorphism and  holds.
Corollary
 A cohomology class  defines a central extension of 
 
 
 
  which is unique up to isomorphism.
The trivial 2-cocycle gives the trivial extension, and since a 2-coboundary is cohomologous with the trivial 2-cocycle, one has
Corollary
 A central extension defined by a coboundary is equivalent with a trivial central extension.
Theorem
 A finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra has only trivial central extensions.
Proof
 Since every central extension comes from a 2-cocycle 
 
 
 
 , it suffices to show that every 2-cocycle is a coboundary. Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
 . The task is to use this 2-cocycle to manufacture a 1-cochain 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
The first step is to for each  use 
 
 
 
  to define a linear map . But the linear maps are elements of . This suffices to express 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 , using the isomorphism 
 
 
 
 . Next, a linear map 
 
 
 
  is defined that turns out to be a derivation. Since all derivations are inner, one has  adGd}} for some . An expression for 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is obtained. Thus set, trusting that 
 
 
 
  is a derivation,



Let 
 
 
 
  be the 1-cochain defined by


 
  Then


 
  showing that 
 
 
 
  is a coboundary. By the previous results, any central extension is trivial.  To verify that 
 
 
 
  actually is a derivation, first note that it is linear since 
 
 
 
  is, then compute


 
 
  By appeal to the non-degeneracy of 
 
 
 
 , the left arguments of 
 
 
 
  are equal on the far left and far right.  The observation that one can define a derivation 
 
 
 
 , given a symmetric non-degenerate associative form 
 
 
 
  and a 2-cocycle 
 
 
 
 , by


 
  or using the symmetry of 
 
 
 
  and the antisymmetry of 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  leads to a corollary.
Corollary
 Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-degenerate symmetric associative bilinear form and let 
 
 
 
  be a derivation satisfying


 
  then 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
  is a 2-cocycle.
Proof The condition on 
 
 
 
  ensures the antisymmetry of 
 
 
 
 . The Jacobi identity for 2-cocycles follows starting with


 
  using symmetry of the form, the antisymmetry of the bracket, and once again the definition of 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is the Lie algebra of a Lie group 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a central extension of 
 
 
 
 , one may ask whether there is a Lie group 
 
 
 
  with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . The answer is, by Lie's third theorem affirmative. But is there a central extension

 
  of 
 
 
 
  with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 ? The answer to this question requires some machinery, and can be found in .
Applications
The "negative" result of the preceding theorem indicates that one must, at least for semisimple Lie algebras, go to infinite-dimensional Lie algebras to find useful applications of central extensions. There are indeed such. Here will be presented affine Kac–Moody algebras and Virasoro algebras. These are extensions of polynomial loop-algebras and the Witt algebra respectively.
Polynomial loop-algebra
Let 
 
 
 
  be a polynomial loop algebra (background),


 
  where  is a complex finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra. The goal is to find a central extension of this algebra. Two of the theorems apply. On the one hand, if there is a 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
 , then a central extension may be defined. On the other hand, if this 2-cocycle is acting on the  part (only), then the resulting extension is trivial. Moreover, derivations acting on  (only) cannot be used for definition of a 2-cocycle either because these derivations are all inner and the same problem results. One therefore looks for derivations on . One such set of derivations is



In order to manufacture a non-degenerate bilinear associative antisymmetric form 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , attention is focused first on restrictions on the arguments, with 
 
 
 
  fixed. It is a theorem that every form satisfying the requirements is a multiple of the Killing form 
 
 
 
  on .17 This requires


 
  Symmetry of 
 
 
 
  implies


 
  and associativity yields


 
  With 
 
 
 
  one sees that  γ0,l+m}}. This last condition implies the former. Using this fact, define  γ0,n}}. The defining equation then becomes


 
  For every 
 
 
 
  the definition


 
  does define a symmetric associative bilinear form


 
  But these forms the basis of a vector space in which every form has the right properties.
Returning to the derivations at hand and the condition


 
  one sees, using the definitions, that


 
  or, with 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  This (and the antisymmetry condition) holds if 
 
 
 
 , in particular it holds when 
 
 
 
 .
Thus chose  L0}} and  d0}}. With these choices, the premises in the corollary are satisfied. The 2-cocycle 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
  is finally employed to define a central extension of 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  with Lie bracket


 
  For basis elements, suitably normalized and with antisymmetric structure constants, one has


 
 
  This is a universal central extension of the polynomial loop algebra.18
A note on terminology In physics terminology, the algebra of above might pass for a Kac–Moody algebra, whilst it will probably not in mathematics terminology. An additional dimension, an extension by a derivation is required for this. Nonetheless, if, in a physical application, the eigenvalues of  or its representative are interpreted as (ordinary) quantum numbers, the additional superscript on the generators is referred to as the level. It is an additional quantum number. An additional operator whose eigenvalues are precisely the levels is introduced further below.
Current algebra
  As an application of a central extension of polynomial loop algebra, a current algebra of a quantum field theory is considered (background). Suppose one has a current algebra, with the interesting commutator being ^cJ_c^i(t, \mathbf x)\delta(\mathbf x - \mathbf y) + S_{ab}^{ij}\partial_j\delta(\mathbf x - \mathbf y) + ... ,|CA10}} with a Schwinger term. To construct this algebra mathematically, let 
 
 
 
  be the centrally extended polynomial loop algebra of the previous section with


 
  as one of the commutation relations, or, with a switch of notation () with a factor of 
 
 
 
  under the physics convention,19



Define using elements of 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  One notes that


 
  so that it is defined on a circle. Now compute the commutator,



For simplicity, switch coordinates so that 
 
 
 
 
  and use the commutation relations,



Now employ the Poisson summation formula,


 
  for 
 
 
 
  in the interval 
 
 
 
  and differentiate it to yield


 
  and finally


 
  or


 
  since the delta functions arguments only ensure that the arguments of the left and right arguments of the commutator are equal (formally 
 
 
 
 ).
By comparison with , this is a current algebra in two spacetime dimensions, including a Schwinger term, with the space dimension curled up into a circle. In the classical setting of quantum field theory, this is perhaps of little use, but with the advent of string theory where fields live on world sheets of strings, and spatial dimensions are curled up, there may be relevant applications.
Kac–Moody algebra
 The derivation  used in the construction of the 2-cocycle 
 
 
 
  in the previous section can be extended to a derivation 
 
 
 
  on the centrally extended polynomial loop algebra, here denoted by 
 
 
 
  in order to realize a Kac–Moody algebra2021 (background). Simply set


 
  Next, define as a vector space


 
  The Lie bracket on 
 
 
 
  is, according to the standard construction with a derivation, given on a basis by



For convenience, define


 
  In addition, assume the basis on the underlying finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra has been chosen so that the structure coefficients are antisymmetric in all indices and that the basis is appropriately normalized. Then one immediately through the definitions verifies the following commutation relations.


 
 
  These are precisely the short-hand description of an untwisted affine Kac–Moody algebra. To recapitulate, begin with a finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra. Define a space of formal Laurent polynomials with coefficients in the finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra. Withe the support of a symmetric non-degenerate alternating bilinear form and a derivation, a 2-cocycle is defined, subsequently used in the standard prescription for a central extension by a 2-cocycle. Extend the derivation to this new space, use the standard prescription for a split extension by a derivation and an untwisted affine Kac–Moody algebra obtains.
Virasoro algebra
The purpose is to construct the Virasoro algebra, due to Miguel Angel Virasoro,22 as a central extension by a 2-cocycle 
 
 
 
  of the Witt algebra 
 
 
 
  (background). The Jacobi identity for 2-cocycles yields  Letting 
 
 
 
  and using antisymmetry of 
 
 
 
  one obtains



In the extension, the commutation relations for the element  are


 
  It is desirable to get rid of the central charge on the right hand side. To do this define


 
  Then, using 
 
 
 
  as a 1-cochain,


 
  so with this 2-cocycle, equivalent to the previous one, one has23


 
  With this new 2-cocycle (skip the prime) the condition becomes


 
  and thus


 
  where the last condition is due to the antisymmetry of the Lie bracket. With this, and with 
 
 
 
  (cutting out a "plane" in ),  yields



that with 
 
 
 
  (cutting out a "line" in ) becomes


 
  This is a difference equation generally solved by


 
  The commutator in the extension on elements of 
 
 
 
  is then


 
  With 
 
 
 
  it is possible to change basis (or modify the 2-cocycle by a 2-coboundary) so that


 
  with the central charge absent altogether, and the extension is hence trivial. (This was not (generally) the case with the previous modification, where only  obtained the original relations.) With 
 
 
 
  the following change of basis,


 
  the commutation relations take the form


 
  showing that the part linear in 
 
 
 
  is trivial. It also shows that  is one-dimensional (corresponding to the choice of 
 
 
 
 ) The conventional choice is to take 
 
 
 
  and still retaining freedom by absorbing an arbitrary factor in the arbitrary object 
 
 
 
 . The Virasoro algebra

 
  is then


 
  with commutation relations



Bosonic open strings
The relativistic classical open string (background) is subject to quantization. This roughly amounts to taking the position and the momentum of the string and promoting them to operators on the space of states of open strings. Since strings are extended objects, this results in a continuum of operators depending on the parameter 
 
 
 
 . The following commutation relations are postulated in the Heisenberg picture.24


 
 
  All other commutators vanish.
Because of the continuum of operators, and because of the delta functions, it is desirable to express these relations instead in terms of the quantized versions of the Virasoro modes, the Virasoro operators. These are calculated to satisfy


 
  They are interpreted as creation and annihilation operators acting on Hilbert space, increasing or decreasing the quantum of their respective modes. If the index is negative, the operator is a creation operator, otherwise it is an annihilation operator. (If it is zero, it is proportional to the total momentum operator.) In view of the fact that the light cone plus and minus modes were expressed in terms of the transverse Virasoro modes, one must consider the commutation relations between the Virasoro operators. These were classically defined (then modes) as



Since, in the quantized theory, the alphas are operators, the ordering of the factors matter. In view of the commutation relation between the mode operators, it will only matter for the operator  (for which 
 
 
 
 ).  is chosen normal ordered,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a possible ordering constant. One obtains after a somewhat lengthy calculation25 the relations


 
  If one would allow for 
 
 
 
  above, then one has precisely the commutation relations of the Witt algebra. Instead one has


 
  upon identification of the generic central term as 
 
 
 
  times the identity operator, this is the Virasoro algebra, the universal central extension of the Witt algebra.
The operator  enters the theory as the Hamiltonian, modulo an additive constant. Moreover, the Virasoro operators enter into the definition of the Lorentz generators of the theory. It is perhaps the most important algebra in string theory.26 The consistency of the Lorentz generators, by the way, fixes the spacetime dimensionality to 26. While this theory presented here (for relative simplicity of exposition) is unphysical, or at the very least incomplete (it has, for instance, no fermions) the Virasoro algebra arises in the same way in the more viable superstring theory and M-theory.
Group extension
A projective representation 
 
 
 
  of a Lie group 
 
 
 
  (background) can be used to define a so-called group extension .
In quantum mechanics, Wigner's theorem asserts that if 
 
 
 
  is a symmetry group, then it will be represented projectively on Hilbert space by unitary or antiunitary operators. This is often dealt with by passing to the universal covering group of 
 
 
 
  and take it as the symmetry group. This works nicely for the rotation group

 
  and the Lorentz group

 
 , but it does not work when the symmetry group is the Galilean group. In this case one has to pass to its central extension, the Bargmann group,27 which is the symmetry group of the Schrödinger equation. Likewise, if  ℝ2n}}, the group of translations in position and momentum space, one has to pass to its central extension, the Heisenberg group.28
Let 
 
 
 
  be the 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
  induced by 
 
 
 
 . Define29


 
  as a set and let the multiplication be defined by


 
  Associativity holds since 
 
 
 
  is a 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
 . One has for the unit element


 
  and for the inverse



The set  is an abelian subgroup of . This means that  is not semisimple. The center of 
 
 
 
 ,  includes this subgroup. The center may be larger.
At the level of Lie algebras it can be shown that the Lie algebra  of  is given by


 
  as a vector space and endowed with the Lie bracket


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  is a 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
 . This 2-cocycle can be obtained from 
 
 
 
  albeit in a highly nontrivial way.30
Now by using the projective representation 
 
 
 
  one may define a map  by


 
  It has the properties


 
  so  is a bona fide representation of .
In the context of Wigner's theorem, the situation may be depicted as such (replace  by 
 
 
 
 ); let 
 
 
 
  denote the unit sphere in Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be its inner product. Let 
 
 
 
  denote ray space and 
 
 
 
  the ray product. Let moreover a wiggly arrow denote a group action. Then the diagram  commutes, i.e.


 
  Moreover, in the same way that 
 
 
 
  is a symmetry of 
 
 
 
  preserving 
 
 
 
 ,  is a symmetry of 
 
 
 
  preserving 
 
 
 
 . The fibers of  are all circles. These circles are left invariant under the action of 
 
 
 
 . The action of 
 
 
 
  on these fibers is transitive with no fixed point. The conclusion is that 
 
 
 
  is a principal fiber bundle over 
 
 
 
  with structure group 
 
 
 
 .31
Background material
In order to adequately discuss extensions, structure that goes beyond the defining properties of a Lie algebra is needed. Rudimentary facts about these are collected here for quick reference.
Derivations
A derivation

 
  of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is a map


 
  such that Leibnitz rule


 
  holds. The set of derivations on a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is denoted 
 
 
 
 . It is itself a Lie algebra under the Lie bracket


 
  It is the Lie algebra of the group 
 
 
 
  of automorphisms of 
 
 
 
 .32 One has to show


 
  If the rhs holds, differentiate and set 
 
 
 
  implying that the lhs holds. If the lhs holds 
 
 
 
 , write the rhs as


 
  and differentiate the rhs of this expression. It is, using 
 
 
 
 , identically zero. Hence the rhs of this expression is independent of 
 
 
 
  and equals its value for 
 
 
 
 , which is the lhs of this expression.
If 
 
 
 
 , then , acting by  [G1, G2]}}, is a derivation. The set  is the set of inner derivations on 
 
 
 
 . For finite-dimensional simple Lie algebras all derivations are inner derivations.33
Semidirect product (groups)
Consider two Lie groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the automorphism group of 
 
 
 
 . The latter is the group of isomorphisms of 
 
 
 
 . If there is a Lie group homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , then for each 
 
 
 
  there is a  with the property  ΦgΦg', g,g' ∈ G}}. Denote with 
 
 
 
  the set

 
  and define multiplication by  Then 
 
 
 
  is a group with identity  and the inverse is given by  (Φg−1(h−1), g−1)}}. Using the expression for the inverse and equation  it is seen that 
 
 
 
  is normal in 
 
 
 
 . Denote the group with this semidirect product as  H ⊗S G}}.
Conversely, if  H ⊗S G}} is a given semidirect product expression of the group 
 
 
 
 , then by definition 
 
 
 
  is normal in 
 
 
 
  and  for each 
 
 
 
  where  and the map  is a homomorphism.
Now make use of the Lie correspondence. The maps  each induce, at the level of Lie algebras, a map . This map is computed by  For instance, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both subgroups of a larger group 
 
 
 
  and  ghg−1}}, then  and one recognizes 
 
 
 
  as the adjoint action

 
  of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  restricted to 
 
 
 
 . Now 
 
 
 
  [ 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional] is a homomorphism,34 and appealing once more to the Lie correspondence, there is a unique Lie algebra homomorphism 
 
 
 
 .35 This map is (formally) given by \right|_{t=0},\quad G \in \mathfrak g|6}} for example, if 
 
 
 
 , then (formally) \right|_{t=0} = \left .\frac{d}{dt}e^{\mathrm{ad}_{tG}}\right|_{t=0} = \mathrm{ad}_G,|6'}} where a relationship between 
 
 
 
  and the adjoint action

 
  rigorously proved in here is used.
Lie algebra
 The Lie algebra is, as a vector space, 
 
 
 
 . This is clear since 
 
 
 
  generates 
 
 
 
  and  (eH, eG)}}. The Lie bracket is given by36


 
   To compute the Lie bracket, begin with a surface in 
 
 
 
  parametrized by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Elements of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  are decorated with a bar, and likewise for 
 
 
 
 .



One has


 
  and


 
  by  and thus



Now differentiate this relationship with respect to 
 
 
 
  and evaluate at 
 
 
 
 $:


 
  and


 
  by  and thus



Cohomology
For the present purposes, consideration of a limited portion of the theory Lie algebra cohomology suffices. The definitions are not the most general possible, or even the most common ones, but the objects they refer to are authentic instances of more the general definitions.
2-cocycles
 The objects of primary interest are the 2-cocycles on 
 
 
 
 , defined as bilinear alternating functions,


 
  that are alternating,


 
  and having a property resembling the Jacobi identity called the Jacobi identity for 2-cycles,



The set of all 2-cocycles on 
 
 
 
  is denoted .
2-cocycles from 1-cochains
 Some 2-cocycles can be obtained from 1-cochains. A 1-cochain on 
 
 
 
  is simply a linear map,


 
  The set of all such maps is denoted  and, of course (in at least the finite-dimensional case) . Using a 1-cochain 
 
 
 
 , a 2-cocycle 
 
 
 
  may be defined by


 
  The alternating property is immediate and the Jacobi identity for 2-cocycles is (as usual) shown by writing it out and using the definition and properties of the ingredients (here the Jacobi identity on 
 
 
 
  and the linearity of 
 
 
 
 ). The linear map  is called the coboundary operator (here restricted to ).
The second cohomology group
 Denote the image of  of 
 
 
 
  by . The quotient


 
  is called the second cohomology group of 
 
 
 
 . Elements of  are equivalence classes of 2-cocycles and two 2-cocycles  and  are called equivalent cocycles if they differ by a 2-coboundary, i.e. if  φ2 + δf}} for some . Equivalent 2-cocycles are called cohomologous. The equivalence class of  is denoted .
These notions generalize in several directions. For this, see the main articles.
Structure constants
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hamel basis for 
 
 
 
 . Then each 
 
 
 
  has a unique expression as


 
  for some indexing set 
 
 
 
  of suitable size. In this expansion, only finitely many  are nonzero. In the sequel it is (for simplicity) assumed that the basis is countable, and Latin letters are used for the indices and the indexing set can be taken to be  1, 2, ...}}. One immediately has


 
  for the basis elements, where the summation symbol has been rationalized away, the summation convention applies. The placement of the indices in the structure constants (up or down) is immaterial. The following theorem is useful:
Theorem:There is a basis such that the structure constants are antisymmetric in all indices if and only if the Lie algebra is a direct sum of simple compact Lie algebras and 
 
 
 
  Lie algebras. This is the case if and only if there is a real positive definite metric 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  satisfying the invariance condition


 
  in any basis. This last condition is necessary on physical grounds for non-Abelian gauge theories in quantum field theory. Thus one can produce an infinite list of possible gauge theories using the Cartan catalog of simple Lie algebras on their compact form (i.e., 
 
 
 
 , etc. One such gauge theory is the 
 
 
 
  gauge theory of the standard model with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 .37
Killing form
The Killing form is a symmetric bilinear form on 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
  Here  is viewed as a matrix operating on the vector space 
 
 
 
 . The key fact needed is that if 
 
 
 
  is semisimple, then, by Cartan's criterion, 
 
 
 
  is non-degenerate. In such a case 
 
 
 
  may be used to identify 
 
 
 
  and . If , then there is a  Gλ ∈ g}} such that


 
  This is resembling Riesz representation theorem and the proof is virtually the same. The Killing form has the property


 
  which is referred to as associativity. By defining  K[Gα,Gβ]}} and expanding the inner brackets in terms of structure constants, one finds that the Killing form satisfies the invariance condition of above.
Loop algebra
A loop group is taken as a group of smooth maps from the unit circle  into a Lie group 
 
 
 
  with the group structure defined by the group structure on 
 
 
 
 . The Lie algebra of a loop group is then a vector space of mappings from  into the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Any subalgebra of such a Lie algebra is referred to as a loop algebra. Attention here is focused on polynomial loop algebras of the form


 
   To see this, consider elements 
 
 
 
  near the identity in 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in the loop group, expressed in a basis  for 
 
 



 
  where the  are real and small and the implicit sum is over the dimension 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Now write


 
  to obtain


 
  Thus the functions


 
  constitute the Lie algebra. 
A little thought confirms that these are loops in 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  goes from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The operations are the ones defined pointwise by the operations in 
 
 
 
 . This algebra is isomorphic with the algebra


 
  where  is the algebra of Laurent polynomials,


 
  The Lie bracket is


 
  In this latter view the elements can be considered as polynomials with (constant!) coefficients in 
 
 
 
 . In terms of a basis and structure constants,



It is also common to have a different notation,


 
  where the omission of 
 
 
 
  should be kept in mind to avoid confusion; the elements really are functions . The Lie bracket is then


 
  which is recognizable as one of the commutation relations in an untwisted affine Kac–Moody algebra, to be introduced later, without the central term. With 
 
 
 
 , a subalgebra isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  is obtained. It generates (as seen by tracing backwards in the definitions) the set of constant maps from  into 
 
 
 
 , which is obviously isomorphic with 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  is onto (which is the case when 
 
 
 
  is compact. If 
 
 
 
  is compact, then a basis  for 
 
 
 
  may be chosen such that the  are skew-Hermitian. As a consequence,


 
  Such a representation is called unitary because the representatives


 
  are unitary. Here, the minus on the lower index of 
 
 
 
  is conventional, the summation convention applies, and the 
 
 
 
  is (by the definition) buried in the 
 
 
 
 s in the right hand side.
Current algebra (physics)
Current algebras arise in quantum field theories as a consequence of global gauge symmetry. Conserved currents occur in classical field theories whenever the Lagrangian respects a continuous symmetry. This is the content of Noether's theorem. Most (perhaps all) modern quantum field theories can be formulated in terns of classical Lagrangians (prior to quantization), so Noether's theorem applies in the quantum case as well. Upon quantization, the conserved currents are promoted to position dependent operators on Hilbert space. These operators are subject to commutation relations, generally forming an infinite-dimensional Lie algebra. A model illustrating this is presented below.
To enhance the flavor of physics, factors of 
 
 
 
  will appear here and there as opposed to in the mathematical conventions.38
Consider a column vector 
 
 
 
  of scalar fields . Let the Lagrangian density be



This Lagrangian is invariant under the transformation39



where  are generators of either 
 
 
 
  or a closed subgroup thereof, satisfying



Noether's theorem asserts the existence of 
 
 
 
  conserved currents,



where  is the momentum canonically conjugate to . The reason these currents are said to be conserved is because


 
  and consequently



the charge associated to the charge density  is constant in time.40 This (so far classical) theory is quantized promoting the fields and their conjugates to operators on Hilbert space and by postulating (bosonic quantization) the commutation relations4142


 
 
  The currents accordingly become operators43 They satisfy, using the above postulated relations, the definitions and integration over space, the commutation relations


 
 
  where the speed of light and the reduced Planck's constant have been set to unity. The last commutation relation does not follow from the postulated commutation relations (these are fixed only for , not for ), except for 
 
 
 
  For 
 
 
 
  the Lorentz transformation behavior is used to deduce the conclusion. The next commutator to consider is


 
  The presence of the delta functions and their derivatives is explained by the requirement of microcausality that implies that the commutator vanishes when 
 
 
 
 . Thus the commutator must be a distribution supported at 
 
 
 
 .44 The first term is fixed due to the requirement that the equation should, when integrated over 
 
 
 
 , reduce to the last equation before it. The following terms are the Schwinger terms. They integrate to zero, but it can be shown quite generally45 that they must be nonzero.
Consider a conserved current  with a generic Schwinger term


 
  By taking the vacuum expectation value (VEV),


 
  one finds


 
 
  where  and Heisenberg's equation of motion have been used as well as 
 
 
 
  and its conjugate.
Multiply this equation by 
 
 
 
  and integrate with respect to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  over all space, using integration by parts, and one finds


 
  Now insert a complete set of states, 
 
 



 
  Here hermiticity of 
 
 
 
  and the fact that not all matrix elements of 
 
 
 
  between the vacuum state and the states from a complete set can be zero. 
Affine Kac–Moody algebra
Let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional complex simple Lie algebra with a dedicated suitable normalized basis such that the structure constants are antisymmetric in all indices with commutation relations


 
  An untwisted affine Kac–Moody algebra

 
  is obtained by copying the basis for each 
 
 
 
  (regarding the copies as distinct), setting


 
  as a vector space and assigning the commutation relations



If 
 
 
 
 , then the subalgebra spanned by the  is obviously identical to the polynomial loop algebra of above.
Witt algebra
  The Witt algebra, named after Ernst Witt, is the complexification the of Lie algebra  of smooth vector fields on the circle . In coordinates, such vector fields may be written


 
  and the Lie bracket is the Lie bracket of vector fields, on  simply given by


 
  The algebra is denoted  VectS1 + iVectS1}}. A basis for 
 
 
 
  is given by the set


 
  This basis satisfies



This Lie algebra algebra has a useful central extension, the Virasoro algebra. It has 
 
 
 
 dimensional subalgebras isomorphic with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For each 
 
 
 
 , the set  spans a subalgebra isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 .
For  one has


 
  These are the commutation relations of 
 
 
 
  with


 
  The groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are isomorphic under the map46


 
  and the same map holds at the level of Lie algebras due to the properties of the exponential map. A basis for 
 
 
 
  is given, see classical group, by


 
  Now compute


 
 
  The map preserves brackets and there are thus Lie algebra isomorphisms between the subalgebra of 
 
 
 
  spanned by  with real coefficients, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The same holds for any subalgebra spanned by , this follows from a simple rescaling of the elements (on either side of the isomorphisms). 
Projective representation
If 
 
 
 
  is a matrix Lie group, then elements 
 
 
 
  of the Lie algebra can be given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a differentiable path in 
 
 
 
  that goes through the identity element at 
 
 
 
 . Commutators of elements of the Lie algebra can be computed using two paths,  and the group commutator,



Likewise, given a group representation 
 
 
 
 , its Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is computed by


 
 
  Then there is a Lie algebra between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  isomorphism sending bases to bases, so that 
 
 
 
 
  is a faithful representation of 
 
 
 
 .
If however 
 
 
 
  is a projective representation, i.e. a representation up to a phase factor,then the Lie algebra, as computed from the group representation, is not isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 . In a projective representation the multiplication rule reads


 
  The function 
 
 
 
 
 ,often required to be smooth, satisfies


 
 
  It is called a 2-cocycle on 
 
 
 
 .
One has


 
 
  because both 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  evaluate to the identity at 
 
 
 
 . For an explanation of the phase factors 
 
 
 
 , see Wigner's theorem. The commutation relations in 
 
 
 
  for a basis,


 
  become in 
 
 



 
  so in order for 
 
 
 
  to be closed under the bracket (and hence have a chance of actually being a Lie algebra) a central charge

 
  must be included.
Relativistic classical string theory
A classical relativistic string traces out a world sheet in spacetime, just like a point particle traces out a world line. This world sheet can locally be parametrized using two parameters 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Points  in spacetime can, in the range of the parametrization, be written  xμ(σ, τ)}}. One uses a capital 
 
 
 
  to denote points in spacetime actually being on the world sheet of the string. Thus the string parametrization is given by . The inverse of the parametrization provides a local coordinate system on the world sheet in the sense of manifolds.
The equations of motion of a classical relativistic string derived in the Lagrangian formalism from the Nambu–Goto action are47


 
  A dot over a quantity denotes differentiation with respect to 
 
 
 
  and a prime differentiation with respect to 
 
 
 
 . A dot between quantities denotes the relativistic inner product.
These rather formidable equations simplify considerably with a clever choice of parametrization called the light cone gauge. In this gauge, the equations of motion become


 
  the ordinary wave equation. The price to be paid is that the light cone gauge imposes constraints,


 
  so that one cannot simply take arbitrary solutions of the wave equation to represent the strings. The strings considered here are open strings, i.e. they don't close up on themselves. This means that the Neumann boundary conditions have to be imposed on the endpoints. With this, the general solution of the wave equation (excluding constraints) is given by


 
  where  is the slope parameter of the string (related to the string tension). The quantities  and  are string position from the initial condition and string momentum. This is rewritten, first defining


 
  and then writing



In order to satisfy the constraints, one passes to light cone coordinates. For 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the number of space dimensions, set



Not all  are independent. Some are zero (hence missing in the equations above), and the "minus coefficients" satisfy


 
  The quantitity on the left is given a name,


 
  the transverse Virasoro mode.
When the theory is quantized, the alphas, and hence the  become operators.
See also

Group cohomology
Group contraction (Inönu–Wigner contraction)
Group extension
Lie algebra cohomology

Remarks
Notes
References
Books










































Journals





(free access)




(English translation)



This can be found in [https://books.google.se/books?id=Wpk6Q-gFTmwC&printsec;;=frontcover&hl;=sv#v=onepage&q;&f;=false Kac–Moody and Virasoro algebras, A reprint Volume for Physicists]



(open access)











Web



"
Category:Lie groups Category:Quantum field theory Category:Lie algebras Category:Mathematical physics Category:Conformal field theory Category:String theory





 The Beacon of Kac–Moody Symmetry for Physics. (free access)


Otto Schreier (1901 - 1929) was a pioneer in the theory of extension of groups. Along with his rich research papers, his lecture notes were posthumously published (edited by Emanuel Sperner) under the name Einführung in die analytische Geometrie und Algebra (Vol I 1931, Vol II 1935), later in 1951 translated to English in Introduction to Modern Algebra and Matrix Theory. See  for further reference.







To show that the Jacobi identity holds, one writes everything out, uses the fact that the underlying Lie algebras have a Lie product satisfying the Jacobi identity, and that 
 
 
 
 .


 Corollary 22.2.9.
 Exercise 7.8.



Miguel Angel Virasoro, born 1940 is an Argentine physicist. The Virasoro algebra, named after him, was first published in 
The same effect can be obtained by a change of basis in 
 
 
 
 .





If the 2-cocycle takes its values in the abelian group 
 
 
 
 , i. e. it is a phase factor, which will always be the case in the contezt of Wigner's theorem, then  may be replaced with 
 
 
 
 
  in the construction.
 The reference states the fact and that it is difficult to show. No further references are given. Expressions on a slightly different form can be found tough in  and .



To see this, apply formula  to , recall that 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphism, and use  eΨg(G)}} a couple of times.
The fact that the Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , the set of all derivations of 
 
 
 
  (itself being a Lie algebra under the obvious bracket), can be found in 


Roughly, the whole Lie algebra is multiplied by 
 
 
 
 
 , there is an 
 
 
 
  occurring in the definition of the structure constants and the exponent in the exponential map (Lie theory) acquires a factor of (minus) 
 
 
 
 . the main reason for this convention is that physicists like their Lie algebra elements to be Hermitian (as opposed to skew-Hermitian) in order for them to have real eigenvalues and hence be candidates for observables.
Since  −i∑αaTa}} and  are constant, they may be pulled out of partial derivatives. The 
 
 
 
  and  then combine in  I}} by unitarity.
This follows from Gauss law is based on the assumption of a sufficiently rapid fall-off of the fields at infinity.

There are alternative routes to quantization, e.g. one postulates the existence of creation and annihilation operators for all particle types with certain exchange symmetries based on which statistics, Bose–Einstein or Fermi–Dirac, the particles obey, in which case the above are derived for scalar bosonic fields using mostly Lorentz invariance and the demand for the unitarity of the S-matrix. In fact, all operators on Hilbert space can be built out of creation and annihilation operators. See e.g. , chapters 2–5.
This step is ambiguous, since the classical fields commute whereas the operators don't. Here it is pretended that this problem doesn't exist. In reality, it is never serious as long as one is consistent.
 Section 17.5.


 Equation 6.53 (supported by 6.49, 6.50).




