   With high probability      With high probability   In mathematics , an event that occurs with high probability (often shortened to w.h.p. or WHP ) is one whose probability depends on a certain number n and goes to 1 as n goes to infinity, i.e. it can be made as close as desired to 1 by making n big enough.  Applications  The term WHP is especially used in computer science , in the analysis of probabilistic algorithms . For example, consider a certain probabilistic algorithm on a graph with n nodes. If the probability that the algorithm returns the correct answer is    1  -   1  /  n       1    1  n     1-1/n   , then when the number of nodes is very large, the algorithm is correct with a probability that is very near 1. This fact is expressed shortly by saying that the algorithm is correct WHP.  Some algorithms in which this term is used are:   Miller–Rabin primality test : a probabilistic algorithm for testing whether a given number n is prime or composite. If n is composite, the test will detect n as composite WHP. There is a small chance that we are unlucky and the test will think that n is prime. But, the probability of error can be reduced indefinitely by running the test many times with different randomizations.  Freivalds' algorithm : a randomized algorithm for verifying matrix multiplication. It runs faster than deterministic algorithms WHP.  Treap : a randomized binary search tree. Its height is logarithmic WHP. Fusion tree is a related data structure.  Online codes : randomized codes which allow the user to recover the original message WHP.  BQP : a complexity class of problems for which there are polynomial-time quantum algorithms which are correct WHP. QMA and QIP are related complexity class.  Probably approximately correct learning : A process for machine-learning in which the learned function has low generalization-error WHP.  Gossip protocols : a communication protocol used in distributed systems to reliably deliver messages to the whole cluster using a constant amount of network resources on each node and ensuring no single point of failure.   See also   randomized algorithm  almost surely   References      "  Category:Probability  Category:Randomized algorithms   