


Draft:The study of the momentum transfer due to fluid friction and heat transfer between a stream and a solid object in internal flow,




Draft:The study of the momentum transfer due to fluid friction and heat transfer between a stream and a solid object in internal flow,

-

Laminar Duct Flow
The study of the momentum transfer due to fluid friction and heat transfer between a stream and a solid object in internal flow, that is when the solid surface is the duct that guides the stream, comes under the topic of Laminar duct flow. This topic covers the powerful concept of fully developed flow which divides a duct flow into a developing length succeeded by a fully developed length, similar to the concept of boundary layer in the external flow.1
Hydrodynamic Entrance Length
In this region, the tip of each plate is surrounded by the flow stream in the same manner. Since the thickness of each layer grows in the x-direction, and since one layer can grow only to a thickness D/2 before merging with the other layer, the channel flow can be thought of as the succession of two distinct flow region. In the first region (called entrance or developing region), distinct boundary layers coexist with core fluid that has not yet felt viscously the presence of the walls. In the second region, the core has disappeared and the boundary layers are no longer distinct.
The location X where the two boundary layer merge is calculated by integral solution as



and the same can also be obtained by scaling analysis as



Fully developed Flow
The region after the developing region where no distinct boundary layer exist is called as the fully developed region. The steady-state mass and momentum conservation statements at any point inside the two-dimensional channel can be simplified greatly based on the following scaling argument. At any location x-L in the fully developed region, we have y 
 
 
 
  D and u 
 
 
 
 
  U. Therefore, the transversal velocity in the fully developed region scales as23


in fully developed flow based on the definition, velocity v=0 and du/dx=0 based on these, the y-momentum equation reduces to



which indicates that the pressure P is only a function of x. After taking into account all the conditions the x-momentum equation reduces to



solving above equation for no slip conditions u=0 at y = 
 
 
 
  D/2 results in the well known Hagen-Poiseuille solution for fully developed flow between parallel plates,




If we use the same equation in cylindrical coordinate system then the equation will become as,4


We can use this equation for calculating the solution for pipe flow,5



where, R is the radius of the pipe.
References
"



Convective Heat Transfer by Adrian Bejan
Convective Heat Transfer by Adrian Bejan
http://engineering-references.sbainvent.com/fluid-mechanics/fully-developed-flow.php#.VXsm__mqqko
http://people.rit.edu/pnveme/ExplictSolutions2/1Dim/LaminarFlowPipe/LaminarFlowPipe.html
Fundamental of Heat and Mass Transfer by Frank P. Incropera and David P. Dewitt




