


Flory-Stockmayer Theory




Flory-Stockmayer Theory

Flory-Stockmayer Theory is a theory governing the cross-linking and gelation of step-growth polymers:..1 The Flory-Stockmayer theory represents an advancement from the Carothers equation, allowing for the identification of the gel point for polymer synthesis not at stoichiometric balance.2 The theory was initially conceptualized by Paul Flory in 19413 and then was further developed by Walter Stockmayer in 1944 to include cross-linking with an arbitrary initial size distribution.4
History
Gelation occurs when a polymer forms large interconnected polymer molecules through cross-linking.5 In other words, polymer chains are cross-linked with other polymer chains to form an infinitely large molecule, interspersed with smaller complex molecules, shifting the polymer from a liquid to a network solid or gel phase. The Carothers equation is an effective method for calculating the degree of polymerization for stoichiometrically balanced reactions.6 However, the Carothers equation is limited to branched systems, describing the degree of polymerization only at the onset of cross-linking. The Flory-Stockmayer Theory allows for the prediction of when gelation occurs using percent conversion of initial monomer and is not confined to cases of stoichiometric balance. Additionally, the Flory-Stockmayer Theory can be used to predict whether gelation is possible through analyzing the limiting reagent of the step-growth polymerization.7
Flory’s Assumptions
In creating the Flory-Stockmayer Theory, Flory made three assumptions that affect the accuracy of this model.89 These assumptions were

All functional groups on a branch unit are equally reactive
All reactions occur between A and B
There are no intramolecular reactions

As a result of these assumptions, a conversion slightly higher than that predicted by the Flory-Stockmayer Theory is commonly needed to actually create a polymer gel. Since steric hindrance effects prevent each functional group from being equally reactive and intramolecular reactions do occur, the gel forms at slightly higher conversion10
General Case
The Flory-Stockmayer Theory predicts the gel point using the following definitions1112

f = number of reactive functional groups on a branch unit (i.e. the functionality of that branch unit) pA = probability that A reacts ∝ = probability that a functional group on a branch unit leads via a chain of bifunctional units to another branch unit

Using the definition of α and p,


 
  The critical value for cross-linking and gel formation is defined as the gel point and is calculated as:


 
  where the functionality of the largest branch unit is substituted for f.
thumb|center|upright=5.0|A general image of a multifunctional branch unit, Af, reacting with bifunctional monomers with A and B functional groups to form a step-growth polymer.
For the above general case:

ρ = fraction of A functional groups in molecules with f>2
 

Here.,13


 
  and


 
  Using the following definition,


 
  , such that NAo and NBo are the initial amount of A and B, respectively and


 
 , since all reactions are between A and B α becomes:


 
  Comparing this value to the critical value of cross-linking needed for gelation allows for a prediction of the conversion needed for gelation to occur. A value of α greater than αc means gelation will occur; a value of α less than αc means that gelation will not occur14
Trifunctional A Monomer with Difunctional B Monomer
thumb|center|upright=5.0|A trifunctional branch unit with A functional group reacting with a bifunctional branch unit with a B functional group, forming a continuous step-growth polymer molecule.


 
  Since all the A functional groups are from the trifunctional monomer, ρ = 1 and


 
  Therefore, gelation occurs when


 
  or when,


 
  Similarly, gelation occurs when


 
  The inequality that determines when or if gelation occurs is that which uses the limiting reagent of the reaction. If A limits the reaction, then gelation occurs when 
 
 
 
 . If B limits the reaction, then gelation occurs when 
 
 
 
 
 .1516
References
"
Category:Polymer chemistry



Flory, P.J. (1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Flory, P.J. (1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Stockmayer, Walter H.(1944). "Theory of Molecular Size Distribution and Gel Formation in Branched Polymers II. General Cross Linking". Journal of Chemical Physics. 12,4, 125
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Stauffer, Dietrich, et al.(1982) "Gelation and Critical Phenomena". Advances in Polymer Science 44, 103
Stauffer, Dietrich, et al. (1982) "Gelation and Critical Phenomena". Advances in Polymer Science 44, 103
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Stauffer, Dietrich, et al.(1982) "Gelation and Critical Phenomena". Advances in Polymer Science 44, 103
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers I. Gelation". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3083
Flory, P.J.(1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers II. Trifunctional Branching Units". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3091
Flory, P.J. (1941). "Molecular Size Distribution in Three Dimensional Polymers III. Tetrafunctional Branching Units". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 3096




