


Additive State Decomposition




Additive State Decomposition

Additive state decomposition occurs when a system is decomposed into two or more subsystems with the same dimension as that of the original system. A commonly-used decomposition in the control field is to decompose a system into two or more lower-order subsystems, called lower-order subsystem decomposition here. In contrast, additive state decomposition is to decompose a system into two or more subsystems with the same dimension as that of the original system.
Taking a system  for example, it is decomposed into two subsystems:  and , where  np}} and  ns}}, respectively. The lower-order subsystem decomposition satisfies



By contrast, the additive state decomposition satisfies





Additive state decomposition on a dynamical control system
Consider an ‘original’ system as follows:  where 
 
 
 
 .
First, a ‘primary’ system is brought in, having the same dimension as the original system:  where 
 
 

From the original system and the primary system, the following ‘secondary’ system is derived:


 
  New variables 
 
 
 
  are defined as follows:  Then the secondary system can be further written as follows:  From the definition (), it follows




The process is shown in this picture:

Examples
Example1
In fact, the idea of the additive state decomposition has been implicitly mentioned in existing literature. An existing example is the tracking controller design, which often requires a reference system to derive error dynamics. The reference system (primary system) is assumed to be given as follows:



 
  Based on the reference system, the error dynamics (secondary system) are derived as follows:




 
  where 
 
 

This is a commonly-used step to transform a tracking problem to a stabilization problem when adaptive control is used.
Example2
Consider a class of systems as follows:
Choose () as the original system and design the primary system as follows:
Then the secondary system is determined by the rule ():
By additive state decomposition



Since


 
  the tracking error  can be analyzed by  and  separately. If  and  are bounded and small, then so is . Fortunately, note that () is a linear time-invariant system and is independent of the secondary system (), for the analysis of which many tools such as the transfer function are available. By contrast, the transfer function tool cannot be directly applied to the original system () as it is time-varying.
Example 3
Consider a class of nonlinear systems as follows:
where  represent the state, output and input, respectively; the function  is nonlinear. The objective is to design  such that  as . Choose () as the original system and design the primary system as follows:
Then the secondary system is determined by the rule ():
where  up}}. Then  xp + xs}} and  yp + ys}}. Here, the task  is assigned to the linear time-invariant system () (a linear time-invariant system being simpler than a nonlinear one). On ther other hand, the task  is assigned to the nonlinear system () (a stabilizing control problem is simpler than a tracking problem). If the two tasks are accomplished, then  yp + ys → 0}}. The basic idea is to decompose an original system into two subsystems in charge of simpler subtasks. Then one designs controllers for two subtasks, and finally combines them to achieve the original control task.The process is shown in this picture:

Comparison with superposition principle
A well-known example implicitly using additive state decomposition is the Superposition Principle, widely used in physics and engineering.
superposition principle: For all linear systems, the net response at a given place and time caused by two or more stimuli is the sum of the responses which would have been caused by each stimulus individually. For a simple linear system:


 
  , 
 
 
 
  the statement of the superposition principle means  xp + xs}}, where






Obviously, this result can also be derived from the additive state decomposition. Moreover, the superposition principle and additive state decomposition have the following relationship. From Table 1, additive state decomposition can be applied not only to linear systems but also nonlinear systems.





Suitable Systems

Emphasis





Superposition Principle

Linear

Superposition



Additive State Decomposition

Linear\Nonlinear

Decomposition





Applications
Additive state decomposition is used in stabilizing control,1 and can be extended to additive output decomposition.2
References
Further reading

Quan, Quan and Kai-Yuan Cai (2009). "Additive Decomposition and Its applications to Internal-Model-Based Tracking,". Joint 48th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control and 28th Chinese Control Conference, Shanghai, China. 817-822.
Quan Quan, Hai Lin, Kai-Yuan Cai (2014). "Output Feedback Tracking Control by Additive State Decomposition for a Class of Uncertain Systems," International Journal of Systems Science 45(9): 1799–1813.
Quan Quan, Kai-Yuan Cai, Hai Lin (2015). "Additive-State-Decomposition-Based Tracking Control Framework for a Class of Nonminimum Phase Systems with Measurable Nonlinearities and Unknown Disturbances," International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control 25(2):163-178
Quan Quan, Lu Jiang, Kai-Yuan Cai. "Discrete-Time Output-Feedback Robust Repetitive Control for a Class of Nonlinear Systems by Additive State Decomposition"

"
Control theory



Quan Quan, Guangxun Du, Kai-Yuan Cai. "Additive-State-Decomposition Dynamic Inversion Stabilized Control for a Class of Uncertain MIMO Systems," http://arxiv.org/abs/1211.6821
Quan Quan, Kai-Yuan Cai. "Additive-Output-Decomposition-Based Dynamic Inversion Tracking Control for a Class of Uncertain Linear Time-Invariant Systems," The 51st IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2012, Maui, Hawaii, USA, 2866-2871.




