


Draft:Relativistic Global Non-Inertial Reference Frames




Draft:Relativistic Global Non-Inertial Reference Frames



Introduction
In all inertial reference frames both non-relativistic (NR) in Galilei space-time and special relativistic (SR) in Minkowski space-time physical laws take the same form. Instead in non-inertial reference frames fictitious inertial forces add to the normal ones present in the inertial frames.1 In general relativity (GR) global inertial frames do not exist: they are defined only locally in small regions where space-time curvature is negligible.
There is a complete description of NR and SR inertial frames centered on an inertial observer using Cartesian spatial 3-coordinates. An observer, or better a mathematical observer, is an idealization of a measuring apparatus containing an atomic clock and defining, by means of gyroscopes, a set of spatial axes at each point of its world-line (or even better an ortho-normal tetrad with a convention for its transport). However, a satisfactory identification of some class of global non-inertial frames exists only in NR physics (for instance the rotating frames) but not in SR. This is due to the fact that in the Galilei space-time of NR physics time and Euclidean 3-spaces are absolute notions. Instead in SR, due to the Lorentz signature of Minkowski space-time, time is no longer absolute and there is no notion of instantaneous 3-space: the only intrinsic structure is the conformal one, i.e. the light-cone as the locus of incoming and outgoing radiation.
The 1+3 Point of View, its Coordinate Singularities and the Need of Clock Synchronization
In SR the existing descriptions of non-inertial frames centered on accelerated observers, Fermi coordinates or Riemann-normal coordinates (see normal coordinates), hold only locally 2 345. They are based on the 1+3 point of view 6 78, in which only the world-line of a time-like observer is given. In each point of the world-line the observer 4-velocity determines an orthogonal 3-dimensional space-like tangent hyper-plane, which is identified with an instantaneous 3-space. However, these tangent planes intersect at a certain distance from the world-line (the so-called acceleration length depending upon the 4-acceleration of the observer) 9 10 where 4-coordinates of the Fermi type develop a coordinate singularity.
Another type of coordinate singularity is developed in rigidly rotating coordinate systems 1112 at a distance 
 
 
 
  from the rotation axis where 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  is the angular velocity and 
 
 
 
  the two-way velocity of light). This is the so-called horizon problem of the rotating disk (the horizon is named the light cylinder): a time-like 4-velocity becomes a null vector at 
 
 
 
 , as happens on the horizon of a black-hole.
To get a well defined global non-inertial frame centered on an either inertial or accelerated observer in SR one needs that the observer makes a choice of a convention on the synchronization of clocks to define an instantaneous 3-space to be associated to each point of his/her world-line. The Euclidean 3-spaces 
 
 
 
  of the inertial frame centered on the inertial observer A are identified with the Einstein convention for the synchronization of clocks: a) the inertial observer A sends a ray of light at 
 
 
 
  towards the (in general accelerated) observer B; b) the ray is reflected towards A at a point P of B's world-line and then reabsorbed by A at 
 
 
 
 ; c) by convention P is synchronous with the mid-point between emission and absorption on A's world-line, i.e. 
 
 
 
 . (As an aside we note that 
 
 
 
  is the 2-way (or round trip) velocity of light: in SR it is isotropic and constant and replaces the standard of length in relativistic metrology 13. On the other hand, the 1-way velocity of light from the inertial observer A to an observer B has a meaning only after a choice of a convention for synchronizing the clock in A with the one in B. Only in the inertial frames it coincides with 
 
 
 
  due to Einstein convention.) However if the observer A is accelerated, the Einstein convention can break down due to the possible appearance of coordinate singularities, as happens in the 1+3 point of view.
The 3+1 Point of View: Global Non-Inertial Frames with Radar 4-Coordinates
To be able to define global non-inertial frames centered on accelerated observers in SR one has to adopt the 3+1 point of view 14 15, in which, besides the world-line 
 
 
 
  of a time-like observer (
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary monotonically increasing function of the proper time of his/her atomic clock), one also gives a global nice foliation of the space-time with instantaneous 3-spaces 
 
 
 
 . It is the mathematical idealization of a protocol for clock synchronization. It is an idealization because the physical protocols (for example, think of GPS) can establish a clock synchronization convention only inside the future light-cone of the physical observer defining the local 3-spaces only inside it. However this idealization is needed to define the Cauchy problem for Maxwell equations so to be able to predict the future by solving them. The protocol requires that all the clocks in the points of 
 
 
 
  sign the same time 
 
 
 
  of the atomic clock of the observer and on each 3-space 
 
 
 
  one chooses curvilinear 3-coordinates 
 
 
 
  having the observer as origin. These 4-coordinates 
 
 
 
  are the Lorentz-scalar and observer-dependent radar 4-coordinates, first introduced by Bondi16 17
An important application of radar 4-coordinates are the embedding functions 
 
 
 
 . They describe the 3-spaces 
 
 
 
  as embedded 3-manifolds into Minkowski space-time. As first described in 18 one begins with the coordinate transformation 
 
 
 
  from the Cartesian 4-coordinates 
 
 
 
  of an inertial frame centered on a reference inertial observer to radar coordinates. The embeddings functions are simply the inverse 
 
 
 
 . From the embedding functions we find the induced induced 4-metric on 
 
 
 
 . It is constructed in terms of derivatives of the embedding function 
 
 
 
  as follows
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  in which 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  conventionally used in particle physics and 
 
 
 
  in general relativity.
The partial derivatives of the embedding functions have geometrical significance. The four vectors 
 
 
 
  are tangent to 
 
 
 
  so that the unit normal 
 
 
 
  is proportional to 
 
 
 
 . From these follow 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  being the lapse and shift functions respectively. The lapse function describes the proper time increment 
 
 
 
  at each point of 
 
 
 
  between it and 
 
 
 
 , while the shift functions identify which point at 
 
 
 
  has the same 3-coordinates as a point on 
 
 
 
 . A (in general non-orthonormal) tetrad at each point of Minkowski space-time is identified by the unit normal 
 
 
 
  and the space-like 4-vectors 
 
 
 
 .
The Conditions to Avoid Coordinate Singularities and Relativistic Inertial Forces
In 19 there are the following three conditions ensuring that the foliation is nice and admissible:
1) to avoid the singularity of Fermi coordinates the 3-spaces 
 
 
 
  must never intersect each other, namely the lapse function must always be positive 
 
 
 
 ;
2) to avoid the coordinate singularity of the rotating disk one must have 
 
 
 
  and the positive-definite 3-metric 
 
 
 
  must have three positive eigenvalues (these are the Møller conditions) 20
3) at spatial infinity (where the lapse function tends to one and the shift functions vanish)all the 3-spaces 
 
 
 
  must tend to the same space-like hyper-plane where asymptotic inertial observers have a set of ortho-normal tetrads 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is the unit normal to the hyper-plane and such that the spatial axes 
 
 
 
  are identified by the fixed stars of star catalogues.
By using the asymptotic tetrads 
 
 
 
  one can give the following parametrization of the embedding functions






where 
 
 
 
  is the world-line of the observer. The functions 
 
 
 
  determine the 4-velocity 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) and the 4-acceleration 
 
 
 
  of the observer. For an inertial frame centered on the inertial observer 
 
 
 
  the embedding is 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  being an ortho-normal tetrad identifying the Cartesian axes.
The Møller conditions are non-linear differential conditions on the functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , so that it is very difficult to construct explicit examples of admissible 3+1 splittings. Only when these conditions are satisfied then the previous equation describes a global non-inertial frame in Minkowski space-time.
Till now the solution of Møller's conditions is known in few cases:
A) Rigid non-inertial reference frames with Euclidean 3-spaces and with translational acceleration of the time-like observer 
 
 
 
 : 
 
 
 
  (for 
 
 
 
  one recovers an inertial frame).
B) Differentially rotating non-inertial frames with Euclidean 3-spaces centered on time-like observers 
 
 
 
  and without the coordinate singularity of the rotating disk 21 (
 
 
 
 )
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is a rotation matrix going to the identity for 
 
 
 
 . The Euler angles have the expression 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to implement the Møller conditions. In particular global rigid rotations are forbidden in relativistic theories, because as shown in 22 the coordinate singularity of the rotating disk is present for 
 
 
 
 .
C) In 23 there is the definition of a family of global non-inertial frames with non-Euclidean 3-spaces with an embedding of the type (
 
 
 
 )
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are Lorentz matrices. They are motivated by the locality principle 24, according to which at each instant an accelerated detector gives the same data as an instantaneously comoving inertial detector. While the angles of rotations are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , like in B), the parameters of the boosts are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  restricted by the Møller conditions.
In these global non-inertial frames of SR the ten components 
 
 
 
  of the 4-metric and the extrinsic curvature 
 
 
 
  of the 3-spaces 
 
 
 
  as 3-submanifolds of Minkowski space-time (both functionals of the four embedding functions 
 
 
 
 ) play the role of the inertial potentials generating the relativistic fictitious forces in the non-inertial frame. In the NR limit one recovers the usual NR Newtonian inertial forces.,.25
In these global non-inertial frames of SR fields and particles have to be described consistently with the clock synchronization convention. Klein-Gordon fields 
 
 
 
  have to be rewritten as 
 
 
 
 . Positive-energy scalar particles with world-lines 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , are described by 3-coordinates 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , identified by the intersection of their world-lines with the foliation of 3-spaces: 
 
 
 
 ,.26,27
Parametrized Minkowski Theories for Isolated Systems in Global Non-Inertial Reference Frames
In SR one can describe every isolated system (particles, fields, strings, fluids) admitting a Lagrangian description with parametrized Minkowski theories 28,29. One couples the Lagrangian to an external gravitational field and then replaces the 4-metric with the 4-metric 
 
 
 
  induced by an admissible foliation. The new Lagrangian, a functional of the matter described in radar 4-coordinates and of the embedding 
 
 
 
  (through the 4-metric), allows us to define an action which is invariant under frame preserving diffeomorphisms 30. As a consequence, the four embedding functions turn out to be gauge variables: the transition among different non-inertial frames is described as a gauge transformation (so that only the appearances of phenomena change, not the physics) 31,32 33 343536 37 The canonical momenta 
 
 
 
  conjugate to the embedding are determined by the energy-momentum tensor of the isolated system, whose Poincare' generators have the expression 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . The effective Hamiltonian turns out to be the mass 
 
 
 
  of the isolated system.
Inertial and Non-Inertial Rest Frames for Isolated System
For isolated systems there is a special family of inertial systems, the intrinsic inertial rest frames, in which the space-like 3-spaces are ortho-normal to the conserved time-like 4-momentum 
 
 
 
  of the isolated system. The rest 3-spaces 
 
 
 
 , named Wigner 3-spaces, are defined in such a way that they are the same for all the reference inertial systems describing them (modulo a Wigner rotation) and their 3-vectors are Wigner spin-1 3-vectors, so that the covariance under Poincare' transformations is under control.
As a consequence it turns out 38,39,40 that at the Hamiltonian level every isolated system can be described by a decoupled canonical non-covariant relativistic center of mass (whose spatial part is the classical counterpart of the Newton-Wigner position operator)(see relativistic center of mass) carrying a pole-dipole structure, namely an internal 3-space with a well defined total invariant mass 
 
 
 
  and a total rest spin 
 
 
 
  and a well defined realization of the Poincare' algebra of the external Poincare' group for a free point particle, i.e. for the external center of mass, whose mass 
 
 
 
  and spin 
 
 
 
  are Casimir invariants describing the matter of the isolated system in a global way).
Inside the Wigner 3-spaces there is another realization of the Poincare' algebra (the internal Poincare' group) built with the rest 3-coordinates and 3-momenta of the matter of the isolated system starting from its energy-momentum tensor: the internal energy is the invariant mass 
 
 
 
  (as said 
 
 
 
  is the Hamiltonian inside the rest 3-space) and the internal angular momentum is the rest spin 
 
 
 
 . Since we are in rest frames the internal 3-momentum must vanish. Moreover, to avoid a double counting of the center of mass, the internal center of mass, conjugate to the vanishing 3-momentum, has to be eliminated: this can be done by fixing the value of the internal Poincare' boost. If we put it equal to zero, this implies 41 that the time-like observer has to be an inertial observer coinciding with the non-canonical 4-vector describing the Fokker-Pryce center of inertia of the isolated system. Therefore the internal realization of the Poincare' algebra is unfaithful and inside the Wigner rest 3-spaces the matter is described by relative 3-positions and 3-momenta.
Among the global non-inertial frames of SR there are the global non-inertial rest frames of isolated systems: in them the space-like 3-spaces 
 
 
 
  tend to Euclidean 3-spaces at spatial infinity which are orthogonal to the conserved time-like 4-momentum of the isolated system.
The Extension to General Relativity
This type of global non-inertial frames can be introduced also in GR (see the reviews in 42), when the space-times are restricted to globally hyperbolic asymptotically Minkowskian space-times without super-translations, which admit a Hamiltonian ADM formulation and have an asymptotic ADM Poincare' group. The absence of super-translations implies that the asymptotic ADM 4-momentum is orthogonal to the 3-spaces, so that there are global non-inertial rest frames of the 3-universe.
References
"



L.D.Landau and E.M.Lifschitz, Mechanics (London, Pergamon Press, 1960).
E. Fermi, Sopra i fenomeni che avvengono in vicinanza di una linea oraria Atti Acad.Naz. Lincei Rend. Cl.Sci.Fiz.Mat.Nat. Vol 31, 184-187 and 306-309 (1922)
F.K.Manasse and C.W.Misner, Fermi Normal Coordinates and Some Basic Concepts in Differential Geometry, J.Math.Phys. Vol 4, 735 (1963)
K.P.Marzlin, On the Physical Meaning of Fermi Coordinates, Gen.Rel.Grav. vol 26, 619 (1994); Fermi Coordinates for Weak Gravitational Fields, Phys.Rev. Vol D50, 888 (1994); What is the Reference Frame of an Accelerated Observer?, Phys.Lett. Vol A215, 1 (1996)
C.Chicone and B.Mashhoon, Ultrarelativistic Motion: Inertial and Tidal Effects in Fermi Coordinates, Class.Quantum Grav. Vol. 22, 195 (2005) (gr-qc/0409017)
S.Boersma and T.Dray, Slicing, Threading and Parametric Manifolds, Gen.Rel.Grav. Vol.27, 319 (1995) (arXiv gr-qc/9407020)
D.Bini, A.Merloni and R.T.Jantzen, Adapted Frames for Space-Time Splittings with an Additional Observer Family, Nuovo Cimento Vol. 113B, 611 (1998)
R.J.Jantzen, P.Carini and D.Bini, The many Faces of Gravito-Magnetism, Ann.Phys. (N.Y.) Vol. 215}, 1 (1992) (arXiv gr-qc/0106043); Relative Observer Kinematics in General Relativity, Class.Quantum Grav. Vol 12, 2549 (1995)
B.Mashhoon, The Hypothesis of Locality and its Limitatins, in Relativity in Rotating Frames, eds. G.Rizzi and M.L.Ruggiero (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2003) (arXiv gr-qc/0303029)
B.Mashhoon and U.Muench, Length Measurements in Accelerated Systems, Ann.Phys. (Leipzig) Vol. 11, 532 (2002)
W.T.Ni and M.Zimmermann, Inertial and Gravitational Effects in the Proper Reference Frame of an Accelerated, Rotating Observer, Phys.Rev. Vol. D17, 1473 (1978)
W.Q.Li and W.T.Ni, Coupled Inertial and Gravitational Effects in the Proper Reference Frame of an Accelerated, Rotating Observer, J.Math.Phys. Vol. 20, 1473 (1979); Expansions of the Affinity, Metric and Geodesic Equations in Fermi Normal Coordinates about a Geodesic, J.Math.Phys. Vol. 20, 1925 (1979)
L.Lusanna, Relativistic Metrology: from Earth to Astrophysics, In-Tech E-Book Modern Metrology Concerns, 2012 (ISBN 978-953-51-0584-8))
D.Alba and L.Lusanna, Charged Particles and the Electro-Magnetic Field in Non-Inertial Frames: I. Admissible 3+1 Splittings of Minkowski Spacetime and the Non-Inertial Rest Frames, Int.J.Geom.Methods in Physics Vol. 7, 33 (2010) (arXiv 0908.0213) and II. Applications: Rotating Frames, Sagnac Effect, Faraday Rotation, Wrap-up Effect, Int.J.Geom.Methods in Physics, Vol.7, 185 (2010) (arXiv 0908.0215); Generalized Radar 4-Coordinates and Equal-Time Cauchy Surfaces for Arbitrary Accelerated Observers, Int.J.Mod.Phys. Vol. D16, 1149 (2007) (arXiv gr-qc/0501090), L.Lusanna, Non-Inertial Frames in Special and General Relativity, Proceedings of the SIGRAV School "Gravity: Where Do We Stand?", Villa Olmo (Como) 2009, eds. V.Gorini, U.Moschella and R.Peron, to appear in Lecture Notes Physics, Springer
H.W.Crater and L.Lusanna, Non-Inertial Frames in Minkowski Space-Time, Accelerated either Mathematical or Dynamical Observers and Comments on Non-Inertial Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. in Physics, vol. 11, 1450086 (2014), (arXiv 1405.3257)
H. Bondi Assumption and Myth in Physical Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1967)
R. D. Inverno Introducing Einstein Relativity (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1992)
Post-Minkowskian Gravity: Dark Matter as a Relativistic Inertial Effect?,arxiv 0912.2935

C.M. Møller The Theory of Relativity Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1957), C.M. Møller Sur la dinamique des syste'mes ayant un moment angulaire interne, Ann.Inst.H.Poincare' Vol. 11, 251 (1949).




D. Alba and L. Lusanna, Quantum Mechanics in Non-Inertial Frames with a Multi-Temporal Quantization Scheme: I)Relativistic Particles , Int.J.Mod.Phys. A21, Vol. 2781 (2006)(hep-th/0502060), D.Alba, Quantum Mechanics in Non-Inertial Frames with a Multi-Temporal Quantization Scheme: II) Non-Relativistic Particles, Int.J.Mod.Phys. Vol. A21, 3917 (2006) (hep-th/0504060)



L. Lusanna, The N- and 1-Time Classical Descriptions of N-Body Relativistic Kinematics and the Electromagnetic Interaction, Int. J. Mod. Phys. Vol.A12, 645 (1997), The Chrono-Geometrical Structure of Special and General Relativity: A Re-Visitation of Canonical Geometrodynamics, lectures at 42nd Karpacz Winter School of Theoretical Physics: Current Mathematical Topics in Gravitation and Cosmology, Ladek, Poland, 6-11 Feb 2006, Int.J.Geom.Methods in Mod.Phys. Vol. 4, 79 (2007) (gr-qc/0604120)
E.Schmutzer and J.Plebanski, Quantum Mechanics in Noninertial Frames of Reference, Fortschr.Phys. Vol. 25, 37 (1978)


D.Alba, H.W.Crater and L.Lusanna, Towards Relativistic Atom Physics. I. The Rest-Frame Instant Form of Dynamics and a Canonical Transformation for a system of Charged Particles plus the Electro-Magnetic Field, Canad.J.Phys. Vol. 88, 379 (2010) (arXiv 0806.2383) and II. Collective and Relative Relativistic Variables for a System of Charged Particles plus the Electro-Magnetic Field, Canad.J.Phys. Vol. 88, 425 (2010) (arXiv 0811.0715)
L.Lusanna, From Clock Synchronization to Dark Matter as a Relativistic Inertial Effect, Lecture at the Black Objects in Supergravity School BOSS2011, Frascati, 9-13 May 2011 (arXiv 1205.2481), Springer Proc.Phys. Vol. 144, pp.267-343, (Spinger, Berlin, 2013), Canonical ADM tetrad gravity :From Metrological Inertial Gauge Variables to Dynamical Tidal Dirac Observables Int. J. Geom. Methods in Mod. Phys. Vol 12, 1530001 (2015)(arXiv 1401.1375)
D.Alba, H.W.Crater and L.Lusanna, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics and Relativistic Entanglement in the Rest-Frame Instant Form of Dynamics, J.Math.Phys. Vol. 52}, 062301 (2011) (arXiv 0907.1816)
H.W.Crater and L.Lusanna, On Relativistic Entanglement and Localization of Particles and on their Comparison with the Non-Relativistic Theory, Int. J. Mod. Phys. Vol A29, 1450163 (2014) preprint (arXiv 1306.6524)
D.Alba, H.W.Crater and L.Lusanna, Hamiltonian Relativistic Two-Body Problem: Center of Mass and Orbit Reconstruction, J.Phys. A40, 9585 (2007) (gr-qc/0610200)









