


Indulata Sukla




Indulata Sukla

Indulata L. Sukla (born March 7, 1944) is a former Professor of Mathematics, who served for more than three decades at Sambalpur University, Sambalpur, Odisha, India. She was born in Baripada. Her father, Pandit Kashinath Kar Mohapatra, was the royal priest of the erstwhile king of the princely state of Mayurbhanj.
She did her schooling from Maharani Prem Kumari Girls’ School and B.Sc. with Mathematics Honours from M.P.C. College, Baripada. She completed her M.Sc. in Mathematics from Ravenshaw College, Cuttack in 1966, and had a brief stint as a Lecturer in M.P.C. College, before moving to the University of Jabalpur with a CSIR Fellowship to pursue Ph.D under the supervision of Tribikram Pati.1 While pursuing her researches, she joined Sambalpur University in November 1970 as a Lecturer in the School of Mathematical Sciences, and continued there till her retirement in March 2004.
She is the author of the textbook Number Theory and Its Applications to Cryptography (Cuttack: Kalyani Publishers, 2000).23 In her research, she worked with English mathematician Brian Kuttner on Fourier Series.4 She has presented papers at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Kyoto, Japan (1990), Zurich, Switzerland (1994), Beijing, China (2002) and Hyderabad, India (2014). She is a Life Member of the American Mathematical Society (AMS) and the Indian Mathematical Society (IMS).
Awards and honours
The Orissa Mathematical Society (OMS) gave her the Lifetime Achievement Award for her work in Number Theory, Cryptography and Analysis. She received the award from Professor Ramachandran Balasubramanian, Director of the Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai at the 42nd Annual Conference of OMS held at Vyasanagar Autonomous College, Jajpur Road, Orissa on February 7, 2015.56
Selected publications


.

,h(n)) summability methods

| volume = 97
| year = 1985}}.
References
"
Category:1944 births Category:Living people Category:Indian mathematicians Category:Women mathematicians







.↩
.↩




