


Spline wavelet




Spline wavelet

 In the mathematical theory of wavelets, a spline wavelet is a wavelet constructed using a spline function.1 There are different types of spline wavelets. The interpolatory spline wavelets introduced by C.K. Chui and J.Z. Wang are based on a certain spline interpolation formula.2 Though these wavelets are orthogonal, they do not have compact supports. There is a certain class of wavelets, unique in some sense, constructed using B-splines and having compact supports. Even though these wavelets are not orthogonal they have some special properties that have made them quite popular.3 The terminology spline wavelet is sometimes used to refer to the wavelets in this class of spline wavelets. These special wavelets are also called B-spline wavelets and cardinal B-spline wavelets.4 The Battle-Lemarie wavelets are also wavelets constructed using spline functions.5
Cardinal B-splines
Let n be a fixed non-negative integer. Let Cn denote the set of all real-valued functions defined over the set of real numbers such that each function in the set as well its first n derivatives are continuous everywhere. A bi-infinite sequence . . . x-2, x-1, x0, x1, x2, . . . such that xr r+1 for all r and such that xr approaches ±∞ as r approaches ±∞ is said to define a set of knots. A spline of order n with a set of knots {xr} is a function S(x) in Cn such that, for each r, the restriction of S(x) to the interval [xr, xr+1) coincides with a polynomial with real coefficients of degree at most n in x.
If the separation xr+1 - xr, where r is any integer, between the successive knots in the set of knots is a constant, the spline is called a cardinal spline. The set of integers Z = {. . ., -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, . . .} is a standard choice for the set of knots of a cardinal spline. Unless otherwise specified, it is generally assumed that the set of knots is the set of integers.
A cardinal B-spline is a special type of cardinal spline. For any positive integer m the cardinal B-spline of order m, denoted by Nm'(x''), is defined recursively as follows.





 
 , for 
 
 
 
 . Concrete expressions for the cardinal B-splines of all orders up to 5 and their graphs are given later in this article.
Properties of the cardinal B-splines
Elementary properties

The support of 
 
 
 
  is the closed interval 
 
 
 
 .
The function 
 
 
 
  is non-negative, that is, 
 
 
 
  for 


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
The cardinal B-splines of orders m and m-1 are related by the identity
 
 
 
 .
The function 
 
 
 
  is symmetrical about 
 
 
 
 , that is, 
 
 
 
 .
The derivative of 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 .




Two-scale relation
The cardinal B-spline of order m satisfies the following two-scale relation:


 
 .
Riesz property
The cardinal B-spline of order m satisfies the following property, known as the Reisz property: There exists two positive real numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that for any square summable two-sided sequence 
 
 
 
  and for any x,



where 
 
 
 
  is the norm in the ℓ2-space.
Cardinal B-splines of small orders
The cardinal B-splines are defined recursively starting from the B-spline of order 1, namely 
 
 
 
 , which takes the value 1 in the interval [0, 1) and 0 elsewhere. Computer algebra systems may have to be employed to obtain concrete expressions for higher order cardinal B-splines. The concrete expressions for cardinal B-splines of all orders up to 6 are given below. The graphs of cardinal B-splines of orders up to 4 are also exhibited. In the images, the graphs of the terms contributing to the corresponding two-scale relations are also shown. The two dots in each image indicate the extremities of the interval supporting the B-spline.
Constant B-spline
The B-spline of order 1, namely 
 
 
 
 , is the constant B-spline. It is defined by


 
  The two-scale relation for this B-spline is







Constant B-spline


(Figure)
BSplineOfOrder1.png

(Figure)
TwoScaleRelationForBSplineOfOrder1.png




Linear B-spline
The B-spline of order 2, namely 
 
 
 
 , is the linear B-spline. It is given by



The two-scale relation for this wavelet is







Linear B-spline


(Figure)
CardinalBSplineOfOrder2.png

(Figure)
TwoScaleRelationForCardinalBSplineOfOrder2.png




Quadratic B-spline
The B-spline of order 3, namely 
 
 
 
 , is the quadratic B-spline. It is given by



The two-scale relation for this wavelet is







Quadratic B-spline


(Figure)
CardinalBSplineOfOrder3.png

(Figure)
TwoScaleRelationForCardinalBSplineOfOrder3.png




Cubic B-spline
The cubic B-spline is the cardinal B-spline of order 4, denoted by 
 
 
 
 . It is given by the following expressions:



The two-scale relation for the cubic B-spline is







Cubic B-spline


(Figure)
CardinalBSplineOfOrder4.png

(Figure)
TwoScaleRelationForCardinalBSplineOfOrder4.png




Bi-quadratic B-spline
The bi-quadratic B-spline is the cardinal B-spline of order 5 denoted by 
 
 
 
 . It is given by



The two-scale relation is



Quintic B-spline
The quintic B-spline is the cardinal B-spline of order 6 denoted by 
 
 
 
 . It is given by



Multi-resolution analysis generated by cardinal B-splines
The cardinal B-spline 
 
 
 
  of order m generates a multi-resolution analysis. In fact, from the elementary properties of these functions enunciated above, it follows that the function 
 
 
 
  is square integrable and is an element of the space 
 
 
 
  of square integrable functions. To set up the multi-resolution analysis the following notations used.
:* For any integers 
 
 
 
 , define the function 
 
 
 
 .
:* For each integer 
 
 
 
 , define the subspace 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  as the closure of the linear span of the set 
 
 
 
 .
That these define a multi-resolution analysis follows from the following:

The spaces 
 
 
 
  satisfy the property
 
 
 
 .
The closure in 
 
 
 
  of the union of all the subspaces 
 
 
 
  is the whole space 
 
 
 
 .
The intersection of all the subspaces 
 
 
 
  is the singleton set containing only the zero function.
For each integer 
 
 
 
  the set 
 
 
 
  is an unconditional basis for 
 
 
 
 . (A sequence {xn} in a Banach space X is an unconditional basis for the space X if every permutation of the sequence {xn} is also a basis for the same space X.6)

Wavelets from cardinal B-splines
Let m be a fixed positive integer and 
 
 
 
  be the cardinal B-spline of order m. A function 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is a basic wavelet relative to the cardinal B-spline function 
 
 
 
  if the closure in 
 
 
 
  of the linear span of the set 
 
 
 
  (this closure is denoted by 
 
 
 
 ) is the orthogonal complement of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . The subscript m in 
 
 
 
  is used to indicate that 
 
 
 
  is a basic wavelet relative the cardinal B-spline of order m. There is no unique basic wavelet 
 
 
 
  relative to the cardinal B-spline 
 
 
 
 . Some of these are discussed in the following sections.
Wavelets relative to cardinal B-splines using fundamental interpolatory splines
Fundamental interpolatory spline
Definitions
Let m be a fixed positive integer and let 
 
 
 
  be the cardinal B-spline of order m. Given a sequence 
 
 
 
  of real numbers, the problem of finding a sequence 
 
 
 
  of real numbers such that


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 ,
is known as the cardinal spline interpolation problem. The special case of this problem where the sequence 
 
 
 
  is the sequence 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta function 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
 , is the fundamental cardinal spline interpolation problem. The solution of the problem yields the fundamental cardinal interpolatory spline of order m. This spline is denoted by 
 
 
 
  and is given by



where the sequence 
 
 
 
  is now the solution of the following system of equations:



Procedure to find the fundamental cardinal interpolatory spline
The fundamental cardinal interpolatory spline 
 
 
 
  can be determined using Z-transforms. Using the following notations









it can be seen from the equations defining the sequence 
 
 
 
  that



from which we get


 
 .
This can be used to obtain concrete expressions for 
 
 
 
 .
Example
As a concrete example, the case 
 
 
 
  may be investigated. The definition of 
 
 
 
  implies that



The only nonzero values of 
 
 
 
  are given by 
 
 
 
  and the corresponding values are


 
  Thus 
 
 
 
  reduces to



This yields the following expression for 
 
 
 
 .


 
  Splitting this expression into partial fractions and expanding each term in powers of z in an annular region the values of 
 
 
 
  can be computed. These values are then substituted in the expression for 
 
 
 
  to yield



Wavelet using fundamental interpolatory spline
For a positive integer m, the function 
 
 
 
  defined by



is a basic wavelet relative to the cardinal B-spline of order 
 
 
 
 . The subscript I in 
 
 
 
  is used to indicate that it is based in the interpolatory spline formula. This basic wavelet is not compactly supported.
Example
The wavelet of order 2 using interpolatory spline is given by



The expression for 
 
 
 
  now yields the following formula:



Now, using the expression for the derivative of 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
  the function 
 
 
 
  can be put in the following form:



The following piecewise linear function is the approximation to 
 
 
 
  obtained by taking the sum of the terms corresponding to 
 
 
 
  in the infinite series expression for 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is given by


 
  where 
 
 

Compactly supported B-spline wavelets
The spline wavelets generated using the interpolatory wavelets are not compactly supported. Compactly supported B-spline wavelets were discovered by Charles K. Chui and Jian-zhong Wang and published in 1991.78 The compactly supported B-spline wavelet relative to the cardinal B-spline 
 
 
 
  of order m discovered by Chui and Wong and denoted by 
 
 
 
 , has as its support the interval 
 
 
 
 . These wavelets are essentially unique in a certain sense explained below.
Definition
The compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order m is given by



This is an m-th order spline. As a special case, the compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 1 is



which is the well-known Haar function.
Properties

The support of 
 
 
 
  is the closed interval 
 
 
 
 .
The wavelet 
 
 
 
  is the unique wavelet with minimum support in the following sense: If 
 
 
 
  generates 
 
 
 
  and has support not exceeding 
 
 
 
  in length then 
 
 
 
  for some nonzero constant 
 
 
 
  and for some integer 
 
 
 
 .9


 
  is symmetric for even m and antisymmetric for odd m.

Two-scale relation


 
  satisfies the two-scale relation:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 .
Decomposition relation
The decomposition relation for the compactly supported B-spline wavelet has the following form:



where the coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are given by






Here the sequence 
 
 
 
  is the sequence of coefficients in the fundamental interpolatoty cardinal spline wavelet of order m.
Compactly supported B-spline wavelets of small orders
Compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 1
The two-scale relation for the compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 1 is



The closed form expression for compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 1 is



Compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 2
The two-scale relation for the compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 2 is



The closed form expression for compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 2 is



Compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 3
The two-scale relation for the compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 3 is











The closed form expression for compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 3 is



Compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 4
The two-scale relation for the compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 4 is











The closed form expression for compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 4 is



Compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 5
The two-scale relation for the compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 5 is














The closed form expression for compactly supported B-spline wavelet of order 5 is



Images of compactly supported B-spline wavelets



(Figure)
CardinalBSplineWaveletOfOrder1.png

(Figure)
CardinalBSplineWaveletOfOrder2.png





B-spline wavelet of order 1

B-spline wavelet of order 2



(Figure)
CardinalBSplineWaveletOfOrder3.png

(Figure)
CardinalBSplineWaveletOfOrder4.png

(Figure)
CardinalBSplineWaveletOfOrder5.png




B-spline wavelet of order 3

B-spline wavelet of order 4

B-spline wavelet of order 5



Battle-Lemarie wavelets
The Battle-Lemarie wavelets form a class of orthonormal wavelets constructed using the class of cardinal B-splines. The expressions for these wavelets are given in the frequency domain; that is, they are defined by specifying their Fourier transforms. The Fourier transform of a function of t, say, 
 
 
 
 , is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Let m be a positive integer and let 
 
 
 
  be the cardinal B-spline of order m. The Fourier transform of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . The scaling function 
 
 
 
  for the m-th order Battle-Lemarie wavelet is that function whose Fourier transform is



The m-th order Battle-Lemarie wavelet is the fumction 
 
 
 
  whose Fourier transform is
$$\hat{\psi}_{BL,m}(\omega) = - \frac{e^{-i\omega/2}\,\, \overline{\hat{\phi}_m(\omega + 2\pi)}\,\,\hat{\phi}_m\left(\frac{\omega}{2}\right)}{\overline{ \hat{\phi}_m\left(\frac{\omega}{2}+\pi\right)}}$$
References
Additional reading






"
Category:Wavelets Category:Continuous wavelets Category:Splines
















