


Wear coefficient




Wear coefficient

The wear coefficient is a physical coefficient used to measure, characterize and correlate the wear of materials.
Background
Traditionally, the wear of materials has been characterized by weight loss and wear rate. However, studies have found that wear coefficient is more suitable. The reason being that it takes the wear rate, the applied load, and the hardness of the wear pin into account. Although, measurement variations by an order of 10-1 have been observed, the variations can be minimized if suitable precautions are taken.12
A wear volume versus distance curve can be divided into at least two regimes, the transient wear regime and the steady-state wear regime. The volume or weight loss is initially curvilinear. The wear rate per unit sliding distance in the transient wear regime decreases until it has reached a constant value in the steady-state wear regime. Hence the standard wear coefficient value obtained from a volume loss versus distance curve is a function of the sliding distance.3
Measurement







Table 1: K values for various materials



Material



Mild steel (on mild steel)



α- / β-brass4



PTFE



Copper-beryllium



Hard tool steel



Ferritic stainless steel



Polythene



PMMA






The steady-state wear equation was proposed as:5


where 
 
 
 
  is the Brinell hardness, 
 
 
 
  is the volumetric loss, 
 
 
 
  is the normal load, and 
 
 
 
  is the sliding distance. 
 
 
 
  is the dimensionless standard wear coefficient.
Therefore, the wear coefficient 
 
 
 
  in the abrasive model is defined as:6


As 
 
 
 
  can be estimated from weight loss 
 
 
 
  and the density 
 
 
 
 , the wear coefficient can also be expressed as:7


As the standard method uses the total volume loss and the total sliding distance, there is a need to define the net steady-state wear coefficient:



where 
 
 
 
  is the steady-state sliding distance, and 
 
 
 
  is the steady-state wear volume.
With regard to the sliding wear model K can be expressed as:8


where 
 
 
 
  is the plastically deformed zone.
If the coefficient of friction is defined as:9


where 
 
 
 
  is the tangential force. Then K can be defined for abrasive wear as work done to create abrasive wear particles by cutting

 
  to external work done

 
 :10


In an experimental situation the hardness of the uppermost layer of material in the contact may not be known with any certainty, consequently, the ratio 
 
 
 
  is more useful; this is known as the dimensional wear coefficient or the specific wear rate. This is usually quoted in units of mm3 N−1 m−1.11
Composite material
As metal matrix composite (MMC) materials have become to be used more often due to their better physical, mechanical and tribological properties compared to matrix materials it is necessary to adjust the equation.
The proposed equation is:12


where 
 
 
 
  is a function of the average particle diameter 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the volume fraction of particles. 
 
 
 
  is a function of the apllied load 
 
 
 
 , the pin hardness 
 
 
 
  and the gradient 
 
 
 
  of the 
 
 
 
  curve at 
 
 
 
 .



Therefore, the effects of load and pin hardness can be shown:13


As wear testing is a time consuming process it was shown to be possible to save time by using a predictable method.14
See also

wear rate
weight loss

References
Notes
Further reading

Nam P. Suh, Tribophysics, Prentice-Hall, 1986, ISBN 9780139309830

External links
Materials science
"
Category:Materials science Category:Materials degradation Category:Building engineering



↩
↩

Cu/Zn with 30-45% Zn↩



↩


↩


↩




