


Draft:Shields diagram




Draft:Shields diagram

The Shields diagram is used in studies of sediment transport by fluids, such as the movement of sediments by rivers and streams. It was first used in 1936 by Albert F. Shields. It is used to determine the threshold at which the fluid can begin to transport material.
Background
The Shields diagram was first created by Albert Frank Shields in his doctoral thesis submitted to the Technischen Hochschule Berlin in 1936. The thesis has been used by many researchers over the years and contributed to a large body of research literature. Moreover, Shields’ work on incipient motion and sediment transport inspired many hydraulic engineers and researchers and is extensively applied in fields such as hydraulic engineering, fluvial geomorphology, aquatic biology, physical oceanography, and economic geology. 1However, despite the widespread use of his work, the details of his experimental methods and results as reported by others are quite variable1. Many researchers over the years have tried to replicate and interpret Shields’ work. Figure 1 is the original Shields diagram created by Albert Shields.
Shields equation
Shields’ original work has been widely used and extended since 1936. To avoid misinterpretation by other researchers, this section focuses on Shields’ mathematical explanation of the diagram. Because of the uncertainties in turbulent flows and loose boundary materials, critical shear stress became difficult to formulate analytically. Shields employed two dimensionless variables by turning to a similarity solution or dimensional analysis –the first one being the dimensionless shear stress,


 
 ,
And the second being the particle Reynolds number,


 
 ,
Where: Τ=bed shear stress (F/L2)
ρx = density of sediment (F/L3)
ρ = density of water (F/L3)
g = gravitational acceleration (L/Time2)
D = sediment diameter (L)
u* = (Τ/ ρ)0.5 = shear velocity (L/Time)
v = kinematic viscosity of water (F/(L*Time))
In equation (1), the dimensionless parameter,τ* is often termed the “Shields number”. Shields then later determined the relationship between equation (1) and (2) experimentally and arrived at the Shields diagram. He created a mathematical relationship, where


 
 ,
where
τ*c=Critical shear stress
Re*c=critical Reynold number
However, determining sediment incipient motion was limited to using the diagram without a mathematical expression for critical shear stress. And with the increased usage and wide application of modeling, a mathematical expression for critical shear stress became necessary. In this regards, Guo (1990)2 successfully developed an empirical equation –


 
 ,
where


 
 ,


 
 ,
s = specific gravity of water
Equation (4) is usually termed as “Shields equation”.
With the basis of Shields’ diagram and equation established, there are improved versions of the Shields Diagram, for example: the Shields-Rouse diagram and the Shield-Rouse diagram in terms of dimensionless d*. Ultimately, it was Rouse, who promoted Shields’ work in the field of hydraulics. Rouse also created an equation to determine Reynolds number –


 
 ,
Example

Set-up

Determine the critical shear stress required to initiate motion for particles that have an average diameter (d) of 2mm. Assume a water temperature of 20oC.

Solution

At a temperature of 20oC, water has a kinematic viscosity, ν, of 1.004x10-6 m2/s and density, ρ, of 998.2 kg/m3. The density of the particles, ρs, is 2650 kg/m3. Use the Shields-Rouse equation to determine the particle Reynolds number (Re).



Using Shields diagram – see figure


 
 ,
therefore,



Then assume flow is in steady flow condition and that the channel’s width is much greater than its depth, with a shallow slope, the bed shear stress can be calculated by using



Therefore, since the density of water is typically known and depended on temperature, the unknown are the depth of water and slope. If one of the two parameters is known, the other can then be calculated. In this case, assume the channel has a slope of 0.001 m/m,
thus




In conclusion, given the above condition, a water depth of 0.15 meter or higher in a width channel will cause 2mm diameter sediment to be just on the brink of motion.
References








"





Buffington, J. M. (1999). The legend of A. F. Shields.. J. Hydr. Engrg., ASCE, 125(4), 376-387.↩
Guo, Junke (2002). "Hunter Rouse and Shields Diagram". Advances in Hydraulics and Water Engineering – Proceedings of the 13th IAHR–APD Congress, Singapore, 6–8 August 2002 2. World Scientific. pp. 1096–1098.↩




