


Teapot Industries




Teapot Industries

'''Teapot Industries '''(also known as Teapot Industries Inc.) are an Italian indie rock band, formed in 2011 in Rome, Italy by Andrea Lomuscio (Arcadetar, vocals, ThereminPi, synths) and Matilde Illiano (guitar, drums). They are known for their unusual custom-built instruments used during live performances.
History
The band name is inspired by Bertrand Russell's article titled "Is There a God?" commissioned, but never published, by Illustrated magazine in 1952:1
Band members

Official members

 

Andrea Lomuscio – vocals, Arcadetar, keyboards, synthesizers, ThereminPi, Live Loops (2011–present)
Matilde Illiano – drums, percussion, guitars (2012–present)

Instruments
 During live shows the band uses custom-built instruments, like the Arcadetar and ThereminPi, designed by Teapot Industries themselves and other collaborators. Andrea Lomuscio usually performs using a custom-built purple piano, the Arcadetar, and a pedalboard to trigger chords; being able to play a bass part, a chord pattern, a lead instrument and a vocal part contemporaneously. No pre-recorded sequences are used during live performances.2
Musical style
Teapot Industries' sound has been described as a combination of various genres, including a psychedelic version of Jeff Buckley, the prog of Genesis and King Crimson, Pink Floyd, the ballads of Deep Purple, Empire of the Sun's synthpop, and Muse.3 The main peculiarity is the absence of a verse-chorus structure, with frequent key and tempo changes in the same song. This characteristic is directly taken from the 70's prog-rock, as mentioned before, but Teapot Industries go further corrupting the prog-rock sound with the alternative and electronic ones, and always keeping the song duration very short. It is not just a chance that Relligion Town contains a lot of musical references, it is a pastiche and a programmatic piece that introduces the listener to Teapot Industries' music.4
Lyrics
The Teapot Industries Corporation is obviously a reference to the authority and dominance of religions. Frequently the lyrics deal with the awakening from dogmatic slumber, in particular He, Religion Town and Bertrand. Teapot Industries Inc. proposes itself as an handbook for this awakening.5
Vieillesse Time is about a terminally ill man who spent all his money to fulfil his last wish: spending his last days in orbit. This is the first case of euthanasia in space. The American poet and painter Jonathan Clark realized a triptych based on Viellesse Time, interpreting the song as the end of the pain as a consequence of an ethereal vision. He exposed this work in a local hospital in Kentucky,USA as a form of Art-Therapy.6
At the moment Teapot Industries have not released an official explanation of Bag and Baggage lyrics, so different interpretations are plausible.
Like to Be Alone, Pt.2 is about multiverse travels. If we could travel enough far, about 
 
 
 
  meters away, we could discover an entire universe identical to ours.7 In particular Like to Be Alone, Pt.2 is about having sex with your doppelgänger.

File:Tyresius, Weeping for Lost Time.jpg|Pt. 1: Tyresius, Weeping for Lost Time File:Ascension at Night (The Rocket).jpg|Pt. 2: Ascension at Night (The Rocket) File:The Ethereal Plane.jpg|Pt. 3: The Ethereal Plane
The triptych based on the emotive quality of Viellesse Time realised by Jonathan Clark in 2012.

Use in media
Vieillesse Time has been used for an alternative version of the 6th season trailer of the TV series Skins.8
Like to Be Alone, Pt. 2 and Vieillesse Time (Live) are part of the OST of Odyssey: On the Lands of Sam Neill directed by Matthieu Blomme in 2015
Discography
(Figure)
Teapot Industries playing as opening act for Sonja Kristina and Oak9

EPs

2011: Teapot Industries Inc. (Ware-Labs / AWAL)


He - 2:43
Rob the Cradle - 3:17
Religion Town - 4:39
Vieillesse Time - 3:56
Bag and Baggage - 2:48


2014: Teapot Industries Goes Live (Ware-Labs / AWAL)


Like to Be Alone, Pt. 2 - 3:33
Introduction - 0:58
Rob the Cradle (Live) - 4:15
He (Live) - 4:03
Jesus' Money (Live) - 4:36
Vieillesse Time (Live) - 6:48

Singles

2014: Vanessa Laino ft. Teapot Industries - Dioniso (Life Sentence Rec.)
2015: Teapot Industries - Bertrand (remixes) (Katana Sounds)

Videos

2015: Bertrand (Paki Palmieri Main Mix) - directed by Juan Behrens

References
External links

Official Website


"
Category:2011 establishments in Italy Category:Ableton Live users Category:Ambient music groups Category:Dream pop musical groups Category:Italian electronic music groups Category:Italian post-rock groups Category:Musical groups established in 2011 Category:Italian musical duos Category:Shoegazing musical groups Category:Synthpop groups



Quadriproject.com, 3 May 2012↩
 An interview about the creative process behind the construction of the Arcadetar↩

Atom Heart Magazine, 10 May 2012↩

Teapot Industries Press Kit, 2013↩
Tegmark, Max, "Parallel Universes." Scientific American, May 2003: 40-51.↩






