


Draft:Kleiman's intersection theory




Draft:Kleiman's intersection theory

This is the intersection theory introduced by Snapper in 1959-60 and developed later by Cartier and Kleiman. The basic idea is to intersect cycles with Cartier divisors (in fact line bundles), which results in technical simplification.
Basic definition
Let X be a scheme over a scheme S, Pic(X) the Picard group of X and G the Grothendieck group of the category of coherent sheaves on X whose support is proper over an Artinian subscheme of S.
For each L in Pic(X), define the endomorphism c1(L) of G (called the first Chern class of L) by


 
  It is additive on G since tensoring with a line bundle is exact. One also has:



 
 ; in particular, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  commute.





 
  (this is nontrivial and follows from a dévissage argument.)

The intersection number


 
  of line bundles Li's is then defined by:


 
  where χ denotes the Euler characteristic. Alternatively, one has by induction:


 
  Each time F is fixed, 
 
 
 
  is a symmetric functional in Li's.
If Li = OX(Di) for some Cartier divisors Di's, then we will write 
 
 
 
  for the intersection number.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a morphism of S-schemes, 
 
 
 
  line bundles on X and F in G with 
 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
 .1
Cycles
TODO: copy the definition of A'_d from 2
Equivariant Chow ring
Let X be an equidimensional smooth scheme with the action of a linear algebraic group G. We note:

A universal G-bundle EG on X admits an approximation by algebraic bundles of arbitrary large codimension. (Note 
 
 
 
  is an ind-scheme.)
X can be covered by invariant quasi-projective open subsets.

(1. is always true and 2. holds by Sumihiro's theorem as X is normal.) Then one defines the equivariant Chow group to be


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an invariant open subset with codimension at least n. (The definition is an analog of equivariant cohomology.) Like the usual Chow ring, 
 
 
 
 
  is a graded ring with respect to intersection product. Moreover, it is a graded algebra over 
 
 
 
  via the map induced by 
 
 
 
 .
There is the cycle map


 
  from the equivariant Chow ring to the equivariant cohomology ring. The map is an isomorphism if X admits a cell decomposition (e.g., X is a T-variety by the Białynicki-Birula decomposition.)
References




Further reading

http://math.columbia.edu/~dejong/seminar/note_on_intersections.pdf"
 




↩
Vakil, Math 216: Foundations of algebraic geometry, § 20.3.↩




