


Fulkerson–Chen–Anstee theorem




Fulkerson–Chen–Anstee theorem


The Fulkerson–Chen–Anstee theorem is a result in graph theory, a branch of combinatorics. It provides one of two known approaches solving the digraph realization problem, i.e. it gives a necessary and sufficient condition for pairs of nonnegative integers

 
  to be the indegree-outdegree pairs of a simple directed graph; a sequence obeying these conditions is called "digraphic". D. R. Fulkerson 1 (1960) obtained a characterization analogous to the classical Erdős–Gallai theorem for graphs, but in contrast to this solution with exponentially many inequalities. In 1966 Chen 2 improved this result in demanding the additional constraint that the integer pairs must be sorted in non-increasing lexicographical order leading to n inequalities. Anstee 3 (1982) observed in a different context that it is suffient to have 
 
 
 
 . Berger 4 reinvented this result and gives a direct proof.
Theorem statement
A sequence 
 
 
 
  of nonnegative integer pairs with 
 
 
 
  is digraphic if and only if 
 
 
 
  and the following inequality holds for k such that 
 
 
 
 :



Stronger versions
Berger 5 proved that it suffices to consider the 
 
 
 
 th inequality such that 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and for 
 
 
 
 .
Other notations
The theorem can also be stated in terms of zero-one matrices. The connection can be seen if one realizes that each directed graph has an adjacency matrix where the column sums and row sums correspond to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Note that the diagonal of the matrix only contains zeros. There is a connection to the relation majorization. We define a sequence 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . Sequence 
 
 
 
  can also be determined by a corrected Ferrers diagram. Consider sequences 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  by applying the principle of double counting (proof technique), the theorem above states that a pair of nonnegative integer sequences 
 
 
 
  with nonincreasing 
 
 
 
  is digraphic if and only if vector 
 
 
 
  majorizes 
 
 
 
 .
Generalization
A sequence 
 
 
 
  of nonnegative integer pairs with 
 
 
 
  is digraphic if and only if 
 
 
 
  and there exists a sequence 
 
 
 
  such that the pair 
 
 
 
  is digraphic and 
 
 
 
  majorizes 
 
 
 
 .6
Characterizations for similar problems
Similar theorems describe the degree sequences of simple graphs, simple directed graphs with loops, and simple bipartite graphs. The first problem is characterized by the Erdős–Gallai theorem. The latter two cases, which are equivalent see Berger,7 are characterized by the Gale–Ryser theorem.
See also

Kleitman–Wang algorithms

References


"
Category:Theorems in graph theory



D.R. Fulkerson: Zero-one matrices with zero trace. In: Pacific J. Math. No. 12, 1960, pp. 831–836↩
Wai-Kai Chen: On the realization of a (p,s)-digraph with prescribed degrees . In: Journal of the Franklin Institute No. 6, 1966, pp. 406–422↩
Richard Anstee: Properties of a class of (0,1)-matrices covering a given matrix. In: Can. J. Math., 1982, pp. 438–453↩
Annabell Berger: A Note on the Characterization of Digraphic Sequences In: Discrete Mathematics, 2014, pp. 38–41↩

Annabell Berger: The connection between the number of realizations for degree sequences and majorization In: arXiv1212.5443, 2012↩





