


Sitnikov problem




Sitnikov problem

 The Sitnikov problem is a restricted version of the three-body problem named after Russian mathematician Kirill Alexandrovitch Sitnikov that attempts to describe the movement of three celestial bodies due to their mutual gravitational attraction. A special case of the Sitnikov problem was first discovered by the American scientist William Duncan MacMillan in 1911, but the problem as it currently stands wasn't discovered until 1961 by Sitnikov.
Definition
The system consists of two primary bodies with the same mass

 
 , which move in circular or elliptical Kepler orbits around their center of mass. The third body, which is substantially smaller than the primary bodies and whose mass can be set to zero 
 
 
 
 , moves under the influence of the primary bodies in a plane that is perpendicular to the orbital plane of the primary bodies (see Figure 1). The origin of the system is at the focus of the primary bodies. The combined mass of the primary bodies 
 
 
 
 , the orbital period of the bodies 
 
 
 
 , and the radius of the orbit of the bodies 
 
 
 
  are used for this system. In addition, the gravitational constant is 1. In such a system that the third body only moves in one dimension – it moves only along the z-axis.
Equation of motion
In order to derive the equation of motion (which for circular orbits are the primary bodies) the total energy

 
  has to be determined first:



After differentiating with respect to time, the equation becomes:



This, according to Figure 1, is also true:



Thus, the equation of motion is as follows:



Significance
Although it is nearly impossible in the real world to find or arrange three celestial bodies exactly as in the Sitnikov problem, the problem is still widely and intensively studied for decades: although it is a simple case of the more general three-body problem, all the characteristics of a chaotic system can nevertheless be found within the problem, making the Sitnikov problem ideal for general studies on effects in chaotic dynamical systems.
See also

Celestial mechanics
Chaos theory
Two-body problem

Literature

K. A. Sitnikov: '' The existence of oscillatory motions in the three-body problems.'' In: Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, 133/1960, S. 303–306,  (English Translation in Soviet Physics. Doklady., 5/1960, S. 647–650)
K. Wodnar: The original Sitnikov article - new insights., In: Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 56/1993, S. 99–101, , [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-data_query?bibcode=1993CeMDA..56...99W&link;_type=ARTICLE&db;_key=AST pdf]
D. Hevia, F. Rañada: Chaos in the three-body problem: the Sitnikov case. IN: European Journal of Physics, 17/1996, S. 295–302, , pdf (255 KB)
Rudolf Dvorak, Florian Freistetter, J. Kurths, Chaos and Stability in Planetary Systems., Springer, 2005, ISBN 3540282084

References
External links

Sitnikov problem - Scholarpedia
Fault Analysis of the Sitnikov Problem for High Orders using automated derivation Methods in Mathematics
Florian Freistetter, Seltsame Welten: Sitnikov Planets

"
Category:Orbits Category:Classical mechanics


