


Serre's criterion on normality




Serre's criterion on normality

In algebra, Serre's criterion on normality, introduced by Jean-Pierre Serre, gives necessary and sufficient conditions for a commutative Noetherian ring A to be a normal ring. The criterion involves the following two conditions for A:



 
  is a regular local ring for any prime ideal 
 
 
 
  of height ≤ k.


 
  for any prime ideal 
 
 
 
 .1

The statement is:

A is a reduced ring

 
  hold.
A is a normal ring 
 
 
 
  hold.
A is a Cohen–Macaulay ring

 
  hold for all k.

Items 1, 3 trivially follow from the definitions. Item 2 is much deeper.
For an integral domain, the criterion is due to Krull. The general case is due to Serre.
Proof
Sufficiency
(After EGA IV. Theorem 5.8.6.)
Suppose A satisfies S2 and R1. Then A in particular satisfies S1 and R0; hence, it is reduced. If 
 
 
 
  are the minimal prime ideals of A, then the total ring of fractions K of A is the direct product of the residue fields 
 
 
 
 : see total ring of fractions of a reduced ring. That means we can write 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are idempotents in 
 
 
 
  and such that 
 
 
 
 . Now, if A is integrally closed in K, then each 
 
 
 
  is integral over A and so is in A; consequently, A is a direct product of integrally closed domains Aei's and we are done. Thus, it is enough to show that A is integrally closed in K.
For this end, suppose


 
  where all f, g, ai's are in A and g is moreover a non-zerodivisor. We want to show:


 
 . Now, the condition S2 says that 
 
 
 
  is unmixed of height one; i.e., each associated primes

 
  of 
 
 
 
  has height one. By the condition R1, the localization 
 
 
 
  is integrally closed and so 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the localization map, since the integral equation persists after localization. If 
 
 
 
  is the primary decomposition, then, for any i, the radical of 
 
 
 
  is an associated prime 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
 ; the equality here is because 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -primary ideal. Hence, the assertion holds.
Necessity
Suppose A is a normal ring. For S2, let 
 
 
 
  be an associated prime of 
 
 
 
  for a non-zerodivisor f; we need to show it has height one. Replacing A by a localization, we can assume A is a local ring with maximal ideal 
 
 
 
 . By definition, there is an element g in A such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Put y = g/f in the total ring of fractions. If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a faithful 
 
 
 
 -module and is a finitely generated A-module; consequently, 
 
 
 
  is integral over A and thus in A, a contradiction. Hence, 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , which implies 
 
 
 
  has height one (Krull's principal ideal theorem).
For R1, we argue in the same way: let 
 
 
 
  be a prime ideal of height one. Localizing at 
 
 
 
  we assume 
 
 
 
  is a maximal ideal and the similar argument as above shows that 
 
 
 
  is in fact principal. Thus, A is a regular local ring. 
 
 

Notes
References


H. Matsumura, Commutative algebra, 1970.

"
Category:Theorems in abstract algebra Category:Ring theory



↩




