


Localizing subcategory




Localizing subcategory

In mathematics, Serre and localizing subcategories form important classes of subcategories of an abelian category. Localizing subcategories are certain Serre subcategories. They are strongly linked to the notion of a quotient category.
Serre subcategories
Let 
 
 
 
  be an abelian category. A non-empty full subcategory

 
  is called a Serre subcategory (or also a dense subcategory), if for every short exact sequence

 
  in 
 
 
 
  the object 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
  if and only if the objects 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  belong to 
 
 
 
 . In words: 
 
 
 
  is closed under subobjects, quotient objects and extensions.
The importance of this notion stems from the fact that kernels of exact functors between abelian categories have this property, and that one can build (for locally small 
 
 
 
 ) the quotient category (in the sense of Gabriel, Grothendieck, Serre) 
 
 
 
 , which has the same objects as 
 
 
 
 , is abelian, and comes with an exact functor (called the quotient functor) 
 
 
 
  whose kernel is 
 
 
 
 .
Localizing subcategories
Let 
 
 
 
  be locally small. The Serre subcategory 
 
 
 
  is called localizing, if the quotient functor 
 
 
 
  has a right adjoint

 
 . Since then 
 
 
 
 , as a left adjoint, preserves colimits, each localizing subcategory is closed under colimits. The functor 
 
 
 
  (or sometimes 
 
 
 
 ) is also called the localization functor, and 
 
 
 
  the section functor. The section functor is left-exact and fully faithful.
If the abelian category 
 
 
 
  is moreover cocomplete and has injective hulls (e.g. if it is a Grothendieck category), then a Serre subcategory 
 
 
 
  is localizing if and only if 
 
 
 
  is closed under arbitrary coproducts (a.k.a. direct sums). Hence the notion of a localizing subcategory is equivalent to the notion of a hereditary torsion class.
If 
 
 
 
  is a Grothendieck category and 
 
 
 
  a localizing subcategory, then the quotient category 
 
 
 
  is again a Grothendieck category.
The Gabriel-Popescu theorem implies that every Grothendieck category is the quotient category of a module category 
 
 
 
  (with 
 
 
 
  a suitable ring) modulo a localizing subcategory.
See also

Giraud subcategory

References

Nicolae Popescu; 1973; Abelian Categories with Applications to Rings and Modules; Academic Press, Inc.; out of print.

"
Category:Category theory Category:Homological algebra


