


Rocha–Thatte cycle detection algorithm




Rocha–Thatte cycle detection algorithm

Rocha–Thatte algorithm1 is a distributed algorithm in graph theory for detecting cycles on large-scale directed graphs based on the bulk synchronous message passing abstraction. This algorithm for detecting cycles by message passing is suitable to be implemented in distributed graph processing systems, and it is also suitable for implementations in systems for disk-based computations, such as the GraphChi,2 where the computation is mainly based on secondary memory. Disk-based computations are necessary when we have a single computer for processing large-scale graphs, and the computation exceeds the primary memory capacity.
Overview
The Rocha–Thatte algorithm is a general algorithm for detecting cycles in a directed graph 
 
 
 
  by message passing among its vertices, based on the bulk synchronous message passing abstraction. This is a vertex-centric approach in which the vertices of the graph work together for detecting cycles. The bulk synchronous parallel model consists of a sequence of iterations, in each of which a vertex can receive messages sent by other vertices in the previous iteration, and send messages to other vertices.
In each pass, each active vertex of 
 
 
 
  sends a set of sequences of vertices to its out-neighbours as described next. In the first pass, each vertex 
 
 
 
 
  sends the message 
 
 
 
  to all its out-neighbours. In subsequent iterations, each active vertex 
 
 
 
  appends 
 
 
 
  to each sequence it received in the previous iteration. It then sends all the updated sequences to its out-neighbours. If 
 
 
 
  has not received any message in the previous iteration, then 
 
 
 
 
  deactivates itself. The algorithm terminates when all the vertices have been deactivated.
For a sequence 
 
 
 
  received by vertex 
 
 
 
 , the appended sequence is not forwarded in two cases: (i) if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  has detected a cycle, which is reported; (ii) if 
 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  has detected a sequence that contains the cycle 
 
 
 
 ; in this case, the sequence is discarded, since the cycle must have been detected in an earlier iteration; to be precise, this cycle must have been detected in iteration 
 
 
 
 . Every cycle 
 
 
 
 
  is detected by all 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  in the same iteration; it is reported by the vertex 
 
 
 
 .
References


"
Category:Graph algorithms



↩
↩




