


Lieb–Oxford inequality




Lieb–Oxford inequality

In quantum chemistry and physics, the Lieb–Oxford inequality provides a lower bound for the indirect part of the Coulomb energy of a quantum mechanical system. It is named after Elliott H. Lieb and Stephen Oxford.
The inequality is of importance for density functional theory and plays a role in the proof of stability of matter.
Introduction
In classical physics, one can calculate the Coulomb energy of a configuration of charged particles in the following way. First, calculate the charge density

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a function of the coordinates 
 
 
 
 . Second, calculate the Coulomb energy by integrating:



In other words, for each pair of points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , this expression calculates the energy related to the fact that the charge at 
 
 
 
  is attracted to or repelled from the charge at 
 
 
 
 . The factor of 
 
 
 
  corrects for double-counting the pairs of points.
In quantum mechanics, it is also possible to calculate a charge density 
 
 
 
 , which is a function of 
 
 
 
 . More specifically, 
 
 
 
  is defined as the expectation value of charge density at each point. But in this case, the above formula for Coulomb energy is not correct, due to exchange and correlation effects. The above, classical formula for Coulomb energy is then called the "direct" part of Coulomb energy. To get the actual Coulomb energy, it is necessary to add a correction term, called the "indirect" part of Coulomb energy. The Lieb–Oxford inequality concerns this indirect part. It is relevant in density functional theory, where the expectation value ρ plays a central role.
Statement of the inequality
For a quantum mechanical system of 
 
 
 
  particles, each with charge 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -particle density is denoted by



The function 
 
 
 
  is only assumed to be non-negative and normalized. Thus the following applies to particles with any "statistics". For example, if the system is described by a normalised square integrable

 
 -particle wave function



then



More generally, in the case of particles with spin having 
 
 
 
  spin states per particle and with corresponding wave function


 
  the 
 
 
 
 -particle density is given by


 
  Alternatively, if the system is described by a density matrix 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is the diagonal



The electrostatic energy of the system is defined as



and the direct part of the Coulomb energy of the system of 
 
 
 
  particles is defined as the electrostatic energy associated with the charge density 
 
 
 
 , i.e.



The Lieb–Oxford inequality states that the difference between the true energy 
 
 
 
  and its semiclassical approximation 
 
 
 
  is bounded from below as
where 
 
 
 
  is a constant independent of the particle number 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is referred to as the indirect part of the Coulomb energy and in density functional theory more commonly as the exchange plus correlation energy. A similar bound exists if the particles have different charges 
 
 
 
 . No upper bound is possible for 
 
 
 
 .
The optimal constant
While the original proof yielded the constant 
 
 
 
 ,1 Lieb and Oxford managed to refine this result to 
 
 
 
 .2 Later, the same method of proof was used to further improve the constant to 
 
 
 
 .3 With these constants the inequality holds for any particle number 
 
 
 
 .
The constant can be further improved if the particle number 
 
 
 
  is restricted. In the case of a single particle 
 
 
 
  the Coulomb energy vanishes, 
 
 
 
 , and the smallest possible constant can be computed explicitly as 
 
 
 
 . 4 The corresponding variational equation for the optimal 
 
 
 
  is the Lane–Emden equation of order 3. For two particles (
 
 
 
 ) it is known that the smallest possible constant satisfies 
 
 
 
 .5 In general it can be proved that the optimal constants 
 
 
 
  increase with the number of particles, i.e 
 
 
 
 .6 Any lower bound on the optimal constant for fixed particle number 
 
 
 
  is also a lower bound on the optimal constant in () for arbitrary particle number. The largest presently known numerically obtained lower bound on 
 
 
 
  was proved for 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .7 To summarise, the best known bounds for 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 .
The Dirac constant
Historically, the first approximation of the indirect part 
 
 
 
  of the Coulomb energy in terms of the single particle charge density was given by Paul Dirac in 1930 for fermions.8 The wave function under consideration is



With the aim of evoking perturbation theory, one considers the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian in a large cubic box of volume 
 
 
 
  and sets



where 
 
 
 
  forms an orthonormal basis of 
 
 
 
 . The allowed values of 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . For large 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and fixed 
 
 
 
 , the indirect part of the Coulomb energy can be computed to be



with 
 
 
 
 .
This result can be compared to the lower bound (). In contrast to Dirac's approximation the Lieb–Oxford inequality does not include the number 
 
 
 
  of spin states on the right-hand side. The dependence on 
 
 
 
  in Dirac's formula is a consequence of his specific choice of wave functions and not a general feature.
Generalisations
The constant 
 
 
 
  in () can be made smaller at the price of adding another term to the right-hand side. By including a term that involves the gradient of a power of the single particle charge density 
 
 
 
 , the constant 
 
 
 
  can be improved to 
 
 
 
 .910 Thus, for a uniform density system $C ≤ 1.45$.
References
Further reading



"
Category:Inequalities Category:Density functional theory

















