


Cotangent sheaf




Cotangent sheaf

In algebraic geometry, given a morphism f: X → S of schemes, the cotangent sheaf on X is the sheaf of 
 
 
 
 -modules that represents (or classifies) S-derivations 1 in the sense: for any 
 
 
 
 -modules F, there is an isomorphism


 
  that depends naturally on F. In other words, the cotangent sheaf is characterized by the universal property: there is the differential 
 
 
 
 
  such that any S-derivation 
 
 
 
  factors as 
 
 
 
  with some 
 
 
 
 .
In the case X and S are affine schemes, the above definition means that 
 
 
 
  is the module of Kähler differentials. The standard way to construct a cotangent sheaf (e.g., Hartshorne, Ch II. § 8) is through a diagonal morphism (which amounts to gluing modules of Kähler differentials on affine charts to get the globally-defined cotangent sheaf.) The dual module of the cotangent sheaf on a scheme X is called the tangent sheaf on X and is sometimes denoted by 
 
 
 
 
 .In concise terms, this means:



There are two important exact sequences:

If S →T is a morphism of schemes, then
 
 


If Z is a closed subscheme of X with ideal sheaf I, then
 
 

23

The cotangent sheaf is closely related to smoothness of a variety or scheme. For example, an algebraic variety is smooth of dimension n if and only if ΩX is a locally free sheaf of rank n.4
Construction through a diagonal morphism
Let 
 
 
 
  be a morphism of schemes as in the introduction and Δ: X → X ×S X the diagonal morphism. Then the image of Δ is locally closed; i.e., closed in some open subset W of X ×S X (the image is closed if and only if f is separated). Let I be the ideal sheaf of Δ(X) in W. One then puts:


 
  and checks this sheaf of modules satisfies the required universal property of a cotangent sheaf (Hartshorne, Ch II. Remark 8.9.2). The construction shows in particular that the cotangent sheaf is quasi-coherent. It is coherent if S is Noetherian and f is of finite type.
Relation to a tautological line bundle
The cotangent sheaf on a projective space is related to the tautological line bundle O(-1) by the following exact sequence: writing 
 
 
 
  for the projective space over a ring R,



(See also Chern class#Complex projective space.)
Cotangent stack
For this notion, see § 1 of

A. Beilinson and V. Drinfeld, Quantization of Hitchin’s integrable system and Hecke eigensheaves 15


There, the cotangent stack on an algebraic stack X is defined as the relative Spec of the symmetric algebra of the tangent sheaf on X. (Note: in general, if E is a locally free sheaf of finite rank, 
 
 
 
  is the algebraic vector bundle corresponding to E.)
See also: Hitchin fibration (the cotangent stack of 
 
 
 
  is the total space of the Hitchin fibration.)
Notes
See also

cotangent complex

References

http://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/01UM


External links

http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1001941/questions-about-tangent-and-cotangent-bundle-on-schemes

"
Category:Algebraic geometry



http://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/08RL↩
↩
http://mathoverflow.net/questions/79956/jacobian-criterion-for-smoothness-of-schemes as well as ↩
↩
see also: § 3 of http://www.math.harvard.edu/~gaitsgde/grad_2009/SeminarNotes/Sept22(Dmodstack1).pdf↩




