


Metric-affine gravitation theory




Metric-affine gravitation theory

In comparison with General Relativity, dynamic variables of metric-affine gravitation theory are both a  pseudo-Riemannian metric and a  general linear connection on a world manifold

 
 . Metric-affine gravitation theory has been suggested as a natural generalization of Einstein–Cartan theory of gravity with  torsion where a linear connection obeys the condition that a covariant derivative of a metric equals zero.
Metric-affine gravitation theory straightforwardly comes from gauge gravitation theory where a general linear connection plays the role of a  gauge field. Let 
 
 
 
  be the tangent bundle over a manifold 
 
 
 
  provided with bundle coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 . A general linear connection on 
 
 
 
  is represented by a  connection tangent-valued form



It is associated to a  principal connection on the principal frame bundle

 
  of frames in the tangent spaces to 
 
 
 
  whose structure group is a general linear group

 
 
  . Consequently, it can be treated as a  gauge field. A pseudo-Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is defined as a global section of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Lorentz group. Therefore, on can regard it as a  classical Higgs field in gauge gravitation theory.  Gauge symmetries of metric-affine gravitation theory are general covariant transformations.
It is essential that, given a pseudo-Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
 
 , any linear connection 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  admits a splitting



in the Christoffel symbols



a nonmetricity tensor



and a contorsion tensor



where



is the torsion tensor of 
 
 
 
 .
Due to this splitting, metric-affine gravitation theory possesses a different collection of dynamic variables which are a pseudo-Riemannian metric, a non-metricity tensor and a torsion tensor. As a consequence, a Lagrangian of metric-affine gravitation theory can contain different terms expressed both in a  curvature of a connection 
 
 
 
  and its torsion and non-metricity tensors. In particular, a  metric-affine f(R) gravity, whose Lagrangian is an arbitrary function of a scalar curvature

 
  of 
 
 
 
 , is considered.
A linear connection 
 
 
 
  is called the metric connection for a pseudo-Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is its integral section, i.e., the metricity condition



holds. A metric connection reads



For instance, the Levi-Civita connection in General Relativity is a torsion-free metric connection.
A metric connection is associated to a principal connection on a Lorentz  reduced subbundle

 
  of the frame bundle 
 
 
 
  corresponding to a section 
 
 
 
  of the quotient bundle 
 
 
 
 . Restricted to metric connections, metric-affine gravitation theory comes to the above-mentioned  Einstein – Cartan gravitation theory.
At the same time, any linear connection 
 
 
 
  defines a principal  adapted connection

 
  on a Lorentz reduced subbundle 
 
 
 
  by its restriction to a Lorentz subalgebra of a Lie algebra of a general linear group 
 
 
 
 . For instance, the Dirac operator in metric-affine gravitation theory in the presence of a general linear connection 
 
 
 
  is well defined, and it depends just of the adapted connection 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, Einstein – Cartan gravitation theory can be formulated as the metric-affine one, without appealing to the metricity constraint.
In metric-affine gravitation theory, in comparison with the Einstein - Cartan one, a question on a matter source of a non-metricity tensor arises. It is so called hypermomentum, e.g., a  Noether current of a  scaling symmetry.
References

F.Hehl, J. McCrea, E. Mielke, Y. Ne'eman, Metric-affine gauge theory of gravity: field equations, Noether identities, world spinors, and breaking of dilaton invariance, Physics Reports 258 (1995) 1-171; arXiv: gr-qc/9402012
V. Vitagliano, T. Sotiriou, S. Liberati, The dynamics of metric-affine gravity, Annals of Physics 326 (2011) 1259-1273; arXiv: 1008.0171
 G. Sardanashvily, Classical gauge gravitation theory, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys. 8 (2011) 1869-1895; arXiv: 1110.1176
C. Karahan, A. Altas, D. Demir, Scalars, vectors and tensors from metric-affine gravity, General Relativity and Gravitation 45 (2013) 319-343; arXiv: 1110.5168

See also

Gauge gravitation theory
Einstein-Cartan theory
Affine gauge theory

"
Category:Theories of gravitation


