


Ball-pen probe




Ball-pen probe

 A ball-pen probe is novel technique used to measure directly the plasma potential12 in strongly as well as weakly magnetized plasmas. The probe was invented by Jiří Adámek1 in the Institute of Plasma Physics 2 AS CR in 2004. The ball-pen probe balances the electron saturation current to the same magnitude as that of the ion saturation current. In this case, its floating potential becomes identical to the plasma potential. This goal is attained by a ceramic shield, which screens off an adjustable part of the electron current from the probe collector due to the much smaller gyro–radius of the electrons. First systematic measurements have been performed on the CASTOR tokamak.345 The probe has been already used at different fusion devices as ASDEX Upgrade,6789 COMPASS10111213143, ISTTOK,15 TJ-K164, RFX 5, MAST,1718 H-1NF,19 IR-T1 2021 as well as low temperature devices as DC cylindrical magnetron in Prague2223242526 and linear magnetized plasma devices in Nancy27 and Ljubljana.2829
How the ball-pen probe measures the plasma potential
 If Langmuir probe (electrode) is inserted into a plasma, its potential generally lies considerably below the plasma potential 
 
 
 
  due to what is termed a Debye sheath. Thus, the potential of Langmuir probe is named as floating potential

 
 . Therefore, it is impossible to measure directly the plasma potential by simple Langmuir probe. The difference between plasma and floating potential is given by the electron temperature

 
 [eV]:



and the coefficient 
 
 
 
 . The coefficient is given by the ratio of the electron and ion saturation current density (
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) and collecting areas for electrons and ions (
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 )



The ball-pen probe, in magnetized plasma, modifies the collecting areas for electrons and ions and makes the ratio 
 
 
 
  equal to one. Thus, the coefficient 
 
 
 
  is equal to zero and floating potential of ball-pen probe is equal to the plasma potential independently on electron temperature



The ball-pen probe inserted into the magnetized plasma is directly on the plasma potential without additional power supplies or electronics.
The ball-pen probe design
  The design of the ball-pen probe is shown in the schematic picture. The probe consists of a conically shaped collector (non-magnetic stainless steel, tungsten, copper, molybdenum), which is shielded by an insulating tube (boron nitride, Alumina). The collector is fully shielded and the whole probe head must be oriented perpendicularly to the magnetic field lines. It is necessary to find the sufficient retraction of ball-pen probe collector in order to reach 
 
 
 
 , which strongly depends on value of the magnetic field. The physics of ball-pen probe is not yet fully understood, but the collector retraction should be roughly below the ion Larmor radius. This "calibration" can be done in two different ways:
1) the ball-pen probe collector is biased by swept voltage (low frequency) to provide the I-V characteristics and see both electron and ion saturation currents. The ball-pen probe collector is systematically retracted until the I-V characteristics become symmetric. In this case, the ratio 
 
 
 
  is close to one. However, the experimental observation at different fusion devices confirmed that the ratio 
 
 
 
  is close to one, but not equal.303132 The I-V characteristics remain symmetric as well as for deeper position of ball-pen probe collector.
2) the ball-pen probe collector is fully floating. The ball-pen probe collector is systematically retracted until its potential saturates at some value, which is above Langmuir probe potential. The floating potential of ball-pen probe remains almost constant as well as for deeper position.
The electron temperature measurements without power supply
    The electron temperature can be measured by using ball-pen probe and common Langmuir probe with high temporal resolution in magnetized plasma without any external power supply. The electron temperature can be obtain from previous equation, assuming Maxwellian plasma



The value of coefficient 
 
 
 
  is given by the Langmuir probe geometry, plasma gas (Hydrogen, Deuterium, Helium, Argon, Neon,...) and magnetic field. It can be partially effected by other features like secondary electron emission, sheath expansion etc. The coefficient 
 
 
 
  can be calculated theoretically,3334 and its value is around 3 for non-magnetized hydrogen plasma. This value is obtained under assumption that the ion and electron temperatures are equal and there are no other above mentioned effects (sheath expansion, ...). It should be also taken into account that ratio 
 
 
 
  of ball-pen probe is close to one, but not equal to one as mentioned above.35 Therefore, the difference between ball-pen probe and Langmuir probe potential is given by the electron temperature, coefficient 
 
 
 
  of Langmuir probe and empirical value of the ratio 
 
 
3637383940 of ball-pen probe (or you can use approximation 
 
 
 
 ). Therefore, the electron temperature can be simply measured by using formula



with new coefficient 
 
 
 
  for different plasma condition




Device

Magnetic field

gas









COMPASS

1.15T

Deuterium

2.2



COMPASS (divertor region)

1.15T

Deuterium

2.2



ASDEX Upgrade

1.9T (on LFS)

Deuterium

2.2



MAST

0.6T

Deuterium

2.2



CASTOR

1T

Hydrogen

2.8



ISTTOK

0.6T

Hydrogen

2.3



TJ-K

0.07T

Hydrogen

3.0



IR-T1

0.7T

Hydrogen

2.8



DC cylindrical magnetron

0.04T

Argon

5.2



Linear device Mirabelle

0.08T

Argon

4.1



Linear device Mirabelle

0.08T

Helium

2.9



References
External links

PhD thesis, Jiri Adamek (Czech and English language) 6
Overview: Ball-pen probe design, theory and first results at different fusion devices 7.
40th EPS Conference on Plasma, ISTTOK measurements 8.
Examination of plasma current spikes and general analysis of H-mode shots in the tokamak COMPASS 9
Electrical Probe Measurements on the COMPASS Tokamak 10
Probe Measurements on the COMPASS Tokamak 11
Scanning ion sensitive probe for plasma profile measurements in the boundary of the Alcator C-Mod tokamak 12
Development of Probes for Assessment of Ion Heat Transport and Sheath Heat Flux in the Boundary of the Alcator C-Mod Tokamak 13

"
Category:Tokamaks Category:Fusion power


































↩












