


Vinogradov's mean-value theorem




Vinogradov's mean-value theorem

Vinogradov's mean value theorem is an upper bound for 
 
 
 
 , the number of solutions to the system of 
 
 
 
  simultaneous Diophantine equations in 
 
 
 
  variables given by



with 
 
 
 
 . An analytic expression for 
 
 
 
  is



where



A strong estimate for 
 
 
 
  is an important part of the Hardy-Littlewood method for attacking Waring's problem and also for demonstrating a zero free region for the Riemann zeta-function in the critical strip.1 Various bounds have been produced for 
 
 
 
 , valid for different relative ranges of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The classical form of the theorem applies when 
 
 
 
  is very large in terms of 
 
 
 
 .
The conjectured form
By considering the 
 
 
 
  solutions where 
 
 
 
  we can see that 
 
 
 
 . A more careful analysis (see Vaughan 2 equation 7.4) provides the lower bound



The main conjectural form of Vinogradov's mean value theorem is that the upper bound is close to this lower bound. More specifically that for any 
 
 
 
  we have



If 
 
 
 
  this is equivalent to the bound



Similarly if 
 
 
 
  the conjectural form is equivalent to the bound



Stronger forms of the theorem lead to an asymptotic expression for 
 
 
 
 , in particular for large 
 
 
 
  relative to 
 
 
 
  the expression 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a fixed positive number depending on at most 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , holds.
Vinogradov's bound
Vinogradov's original theorem3 showed that for fixed 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  there exists a positive constant 
 
 
 
  such that



although a ground-breaking result, this falls short of the full conjectured form. Instead this demonstrates the conjectured form for 
 
 
 
 .
Subsequent improvements
Vinogradov's approach was improved upon by Karatsuba 4 and Stechkin 5 who showed that for 
 
 
 
  there exists a positive constant 
 
 
 
  such that



where



Note that for 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  and so this proves that the conjectural form holds for 
 
 
 
  of this size.
The method can be sharpened further to prove the asymptotic estimate



for large 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 .
In 2012 Wooley 6 improved the range of 
 
 
 
  for which the conjectural form holds. He proved that for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and for any 
 
 
 
  we have



Ford and Wooley 7 have shown that the conjectural form is established for small 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 . Specifically they show that for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
  we have



References
"
Category:Theorems in analytic number theory



E. C. Titchmarsh (rev. D. R. Heath-Brown): The theory of the Riemann Zeta-function, OUP↩
R.C. Vaughan: The Hardy-Littlewood method, CUP↩
I. M. Vinogradov, New estimates for Weyl sums, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 8 (1935), 195–198↩
A. A. Karatsuba, The mean value of the modulus of a trigonometric sum, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR 37 (1973), 1203–1227.↩
S. B. Stechkin, On mean values of the modulus of a trigonometric sum, Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklov 134 (1975), 283–309.↩
T. D. Wooley, Vinogradov’s mean value theorem via efficient congruencing, Annals of Math. 175 (2012), 1575–1627.↩
Kevin Ford and Trevor D. Wooley: On Vinogradov’s mean value theorem: strong diagonal behaviour via efficient congruencing http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~ford/wwwpapers/ec3vindiag.pdf↩




