


Lieb–Thirring inequality




Lieb–Thirring inequality

In mathematics and physics, Lieb–Thirring inequalities provide an upper bound on the sums of powers of the negative eigenvalues of a Schrödinger operator in terms of integrals of the potential. They are named after E. H. Lieb and W. E. Thirring.
The inequalities are useful in studies of quantum mechanics and differential equations and imply, as a corollary, a lower bound on the kinetic energy of 
 
 
 
  quantum mechanical particles that plays an important role in the proof of stability of matter.1
Statement of the inequalities
For the Schrödinger operator 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  with real-valued potential 
 
 
 
 , the numbers 
 
 
 
  denote the (not necessarily finite) sequence of negative eigenvalues. Then, for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfying one of the conditions



there exists a constant 
 
 
 
 , which only depends on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , such that
where 
 
 
 
 
  is the negative part of the potential 
 
 
 
 . The cases 
 
 
 
  as well as 
 
 
 
  were proven by E. H. Lieb and W. E. Thirring in 1976 2 and used in their proof of stability of matter. In the case 
 
 
 
  the left-hand side is simply the number of negative eigenvalues, and proofs were given independently by M. Cwikel.,3 E. H. Lieb 4 and G. V. Rozenbljum.5 The resulting 
 
 
 
 
  inequality is thus also called the Cwikel–Lieb–Rosenbljum bound. The remaining critical case 
 
 
 
  was proven to hold by T. Weidl 6 The conditions on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are necessary and cannot be relaxed.
Lieb–Thirring constants
Semiclassical approximation
The Lieb–Thirring inequalities can be compared to the semi-classical limit. The classical phase space consists of pairs 
 
 
 
 . Identifying the momentum operator

 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and assuming that every quantum state is contained in a volume 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional phase space, the semi-classical approximation



is derived with the constant



While the semi-classical approximation does not need any assumptions on 
 
 
 
 , the Lieb–Thirring inequalities only hold for suitable 
 
 
 
 .
Weyl asymptotics and sharp constants
Numerous results have been published about the best possible constant 
 
 
 
  in () but this problem is still partly open. The semiclassical approximation becomes exact in the limit of large coupling, that is for potentials 
 
 
 
  the Weyl asymptotics



hold. This implies that 
 
 
 
 . Lieb and Thirring7 were able to show that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . M. Aizenman and E. H. Lieb 8 proved that that for fixed dimension 
 
 
 
  the ratio 
 
 
 
  is a monotonic, non-increasing function of 
 
 
 
 . Subsequently 
 
 
 
  was also shown to hold for all 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  by A. Laptev and T. Weidl.9 For 
 
 
 
  D. Hundertmark, E. H. Lieb and L. E. Thomas 10 proved that the best constant is given by 
 
 
 
 .
On the other hand it is known that 
 
 
11 and for 
 
 
 
 .12 In the former case Lieb and Thirring conjectured that the sharp constant is given by



The best known value for the physical relevant constant 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
13 and the smallest known constant in the Cwikel–Lieb–Rosenbljum inequality is 
 
 
 
 .14 A complete survey of the presently best known values for 
 
 
 
  can be found in the literature.15
Kinetic energy inequalities
The Lieb–Thirring inequality for 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to a lower bound on the kinetic energy of a given normalised 
 
 
 
 -particle wave function

 
  in terms of the one-body density. For an anti-symmetric wave function such that



for all 
 
 
 
 , the one-body density is defined as



The Lieb–Thirring inequality () for 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to the statement that
\mathrm{d}^n x |2}}
where the sharp constant 
 
 
 
  is defined via



The inequality can be extended to particles with spin states by replacing the one-body density by the spin-summed one-body density. The constant 
 
 
 
  then has to be replaced by 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the number of quantum spin states available to each particle (
 
 
 
  for electrons). If the wave function is symmetric, instead of anti-symmetric, such that



for all 
 
 
 
 , the constant 
 
 
 
  has to be replaced by 
 
 
 
 . Inequality () describes the minimum kinetic energy necessary to achieve a given density 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  particles in 
 
 
 
  dimensions. If 
 
 
 
  was proven to hold, the right-hand side of () for 
 
 
 
  would be precisely the kinetic energy term in Thomas–Fermi theory.
The inequality can be compared to the Sobolev inequality. M. Rumin16 derived the kinetic energy inequality () (with a smaller constant) directly without the use of the Lieb–Thirring inequality.
The stability of matter
The kinetic energy inequality plays an important role in the proof of stability of matter as presented by Lieb and Thirring.17 The Hamiltonian under consideration describes a system of 
 
 
 
  particles with 
 
 
 
  spin states and 
 
 
 
  fixed nuclei at locations 
 
 
 
  with charges

 
 . The particles and nuclei interact with each other through the electrostatic Coulomb force and an arbitrary magnetic field can be introduced. If the particles under consideration are fermions (i.e. the wave function 
 
 
 
  is antisymmetric), then the kinetic energy inequality () holds with the constant 
 
 
 
  (not 
 
 
 
 ). This is a crucial ingredient in the proof of stability of matter for a system of fermions. It ensures that the ground state energy 
 
 
 
  of the system can be bounded from below by a constant depending only on the maximum of the nuclei charges, 
 
 
 
 , times the number of particles,



The system is then stable of the first kind since the ground-state energy is bounded from below and also stable of the second kind, i.e. the energy of decreases linearly with the number of particles and nuclei. In comparison, if the particles are assumed to be bosons (i.e. the wave function 
 
 
 
  is symmetric), then then the kinetic energy inequality () holds only with the constant 
 
 
 
  and for the ground state energy only a bound of the form 
 
 
 
  holds. Since the power 
 
 
 
  can be shown to be optimal, a system of bosons is stable of the first kind but unstable of the second kind.
Generalisations
If the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  is replaced by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a magnetic field vector potential in 
 
 
 
 , the Lieb–Thirring inequality () remains true. The proof of this statement uses the diamagnetic inequality. Although all presently known constants 
 
 
 
  remain unchanged, it is not known whether this is true in general for the best possible constant.
The Laplacian can also be replaced by other powers of 
 
 
 
 . In particular for the operator 
 
 
 
 , a Lieb–Thirring inequality similar to () holds with a different constant 
 
 
 
  and with the power on the right-hand side replaced by 
 
 
 
 . Analogously a kinetic inequality similar to () holds, with 
 
 
 
  replaced by 
 
 
 
 , which can be used to prove stability of matter for the relativistic Schrödinger operator under additional assumptions on the charges 
 
 
 
 .18
In essence, the Lieb–Thirring inequality () gives an upper bound on the distances of the eigenvalues 
 
 
 
  to the essential spectrum

 
  in terms of the perturbation 
 
 
 
 . Similar inequalities can be proved for Jacobi operators.19
References
Literature






"
Category:Inequalities



E. H. Lieb, W. E. Thirring, Inequalities for the moments of the eigenvalues of the Schrödinger hamiltonian and their relation to Sobolev inequalities, Studies in Mathematical Physics, Princeton University Press (1976), 269–303↩

M. Cwikel, Weak type estimates for singular values and the number of bound states of Schrödinger operators, Ann. of Math. (2) 106 (1977), no. 1, 93–100↩
E. H. Lieb, Bounds on the eigenvalues of the Laplace and Schroedinger operators, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 82 (1976), no. 5, 751–753↩
G. V. Rozenbljum, Distribution of the discrete spectrum of singular differential operators, Izv. Vysš. Učebn. Zaved. Matematika (1976), no. 1(164), 75–86↩
T. Weidl, On the Lieb–Thirring constants 
 
 
 
  for $\gamma \ge 1/2$, Comm. Math. Phys. 178 (1996), no. 1, 135–146↩

M. Aizenman and E. H. Lieb, On semiclassical bounds for eigenvalues of Schrödinger operators, Phys. Lett. A 66 (1978), no. 6, 427–429↩
A. Laptev and T. Weidl, Sharp Lieb–Thirring inequalities in high dimensions, Acta Math. 184 (2000), no. 1, 87–111↩
D. Hundertmark, E. H. Lieb and L. E. Thomas, A sharp bound for an eigenvalue moment of the one-dimensional Schrödinger operator, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998), no. 4, 719–731↩

B. Helffer and D. Robert, Riesz means of bounded states and semi-classical limit connected with a Lieb–Thirring conjecture. II, Ann. Inst. H. Poincaré Phys. Théor. 53 (1990), no. 2, 139–147↩
J. Dolbeault, A. Laptev, and M. Loss, Lieb–Thirring inequalities with improved constants, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 10 (2008), no. 4, 1121–1126↩

A. Laptev, Spectral inequalities for partial differential equations and their applications, Fifth International Congress of Chinese Mathematicians. Part 1, 2, AMS/IP Stud. Adv. Math., 51, pt. 1, vol. 2, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2012, pp. 629–643↩
M. Rumin, Balanced distribution-energy inequalities and related entropy bounds, Duke Math. J. 160 (2011), no. 3, 567–597↩

R. L. Frank, E. H. Lieb, and R. Seiringer, Hardy–Lieb–Thirring inequalities for fractional Schrödinger operators, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 21 (2008), no. 4, 925–950↩
D. Hundertmark and B. Simon, Lieb–Thirring inequalities for Jacobi matrices, J. Approx. Theory 118 (2002), no. 1, 106–130↩




