   Laminar flamelet model      Laminar flamelet model   The Laminar Flamelet Model is one of the methods of modelling turbulent combustions apart from SCRS, Eddy flamelet model and others. 1 The combustion is very important process with huge applications and thus a CFD modeling of combustion has become indispensable. The laminar flamelet model is basically for non pre-mixed fuel (the system in which the fuel and oxygen is supplied from two different pipes). Laminar flamelet model is different from much more popular SCRS model as it includes the experimental information also which helps in bringing out much more intricate relationship between variables like temperature, mixture fractions and mass fractions.  Theory  The flamelet concept considers the turbulent flame as an aggregate of thin, laminar(Re  Assumptions  The following assumptions are made in the study of all the flamelet models: 2 -  1. While modelling only a single mixture fraction are allowed. Modelling of two-mixture-fraction flamelet models is not possible.  2. It is assumed that the mixture fraction follow the β-function PDF, and scalar dissipation fluctuations are not considered.  3. Empirically-based streams cannot be used.  Logic and Formulae  To model a non-premixed combustion, governing equations for fluid elements are required. The conservation equation for the species mass fraction is as follows:-  Lek→lewis number of kth species And the above formula was derived with keeping constant heat capacity . The energy equation with variable heat capacity:-  As can be seen from above formulas that the mass fraction and temperature are dependent on  1. Mixture fraction Z  2. Scalar dissipation χ  3. Time  Many a times we neglect the unsteady terms in above equation and assume the local flame structure having a balance between steady chemical equations and steady diffusion equation which result in Steady Laminar Flamelet Models(SLFM). For this an average value of χ is computed known as favre value 3  }={\tilde{\chi} \over \int\limits_{0}^{1}\frac{F(Z)}{F(Z_{st})}\ P(Z)dZ}| 3 }}  The basic assumption of a SLFM model is that a turbulent flame front behaves locally as a one dimensional,steady and laminar which proves to be a very useful while reducing the situation to a much simpler terms but it does create problems as few of the effects are not accounted for.  Advantages  The advantages of using this combustion model are as follows:-  1. They have the advantage of showing strong coupling between chemical reactions and molecular transport.  2. The steady laminar flamelet model is also used to predict chemical non-equilibrium due to aerodynamic straining of the flame by the turbulence.  Disadvantages  The disadvantages of Steady Laminar Flamelet model due to above mentioned reason are: 4  1. It doesn’t account for the curvature effects which can change the flame structure and is more detrimental while the structure hasn’t reached the quasi- steady state.  2. Such Transient effects also arise in turbulent flow, the scalar dissipation experience a sudden change. As the flame structure take time to get stabilize.  To improve the above SLFM models, few more models has been proposed like Transient laminar flamelet model ( TLFM) by Ferreira .  References    Further reading  1. Versteeg H.K. and Malalasekera W., An introduction to computational fluid dynamics, ISBN 978-81-317-2048-6.  2. Stefano Giuseppe Piffaretti, Flame Age Model: a transient laminar flamelet approach for turbulent diffusion flames, A dissertation submitted to the Swiss Federal Institute Of Technology Zurich.  3. N. Peters, Institut fur Technische Mechanik RWTH Aachen, Four Lectures on turbulent Combustion.  "  Category:Combustion  Category:Combustion engineering     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     