


Cartesian monoidal category




Cartesian monoidal category

In mathematics, specifically in the field known as category theory, a monoidal category where the monoidal ("tensor") product is the categorical product is called a cartesian monoidal category. Any category with finite products (a "finite product category") can be thought of as a cartesian monoidal category. In any cartesian monoidal category, the terminal object is the tensor unit. Dually, a monoidal finite coproduct category with the monoidal structure given by the coproduct and unit the initial object is called a cocartesian monoidal category, and any finite coproduct category can be thought of as a cocartesian monoidal category.
Properties
Cartesian monoidal categories have a number of special and important properties, such as the existence of diagonal maps Δx : x → x ⊗ x and augmentations ex : x → I for any object x. In applications to computer science we can think of Δ as ‘duplicating data’ and e as ‘deleting’ data. These maps make any object into a comonoid. In fact, any object in a cartesian monoidal category becomes a comonoid in a unique way.
Examples
Cartesian monoidal categories:

Set, the category of sets with the singleton set serving as the unit.
Cat, the bicategory of small categories with the product category, where the category with one object and only its identity map is the unit.

Cocartesian monoidal categories:

Vect, the category of vector spaces over a given field, can be made cocartesian monoidal with the "tensor product" given by the direct sum of vector spaces and the trivial vector space as unit.
Ab, the category of abelian groups, with the direct sum of abelian groups as monoidal product and the trivial group as unit.
More generally, the category R-mod of (left) modules on a ring (commutative or not) becomes a cocartesian monoidal category with the direct sum of modules as tensor product and the trivial module as unit.

In each of these categories of modules equipped with a cocartesian monoidal structure, finite products and coproducts coincide (in the sense that the product and coproduct of finitely many objects are isomorphic), or more formally that if f : X1 ∐ ... ∐ Xn → X1 × ... × Xn is the "canonical" map from the n-ary coproduct of objects Xj to their product, for a natural number n, in the event that the map f is an isomorphism, we say that a biproduct for the objects Xj is an object 
 
 
 
  isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  together with maps ij : Xj → X and pj : X →  Xj such that the pair (X, {ij}) is a coproduct diagram for the objects Xj and the pair (X, {pj}) is a product diagram for the objects Xj , and where pj ∘ ij = idXj. If in addition the category in question has a zero object, so that for any objects A and B there is a unique map 0A,B : A → 0 → B, it often follows that pk ∘ ij = : δij, the Kronecker delta, where we interpret 0 and 1 as the 0 maps and identity maps of the objects Xj and Xk, respectively. See pre-additive category for more.
References
1
"
Category:Category theory Category:Monoidal categories



↩




