


Draft:Geometry of an algebraic curve




Draft:Geometry of an algebraic curve

Arithmetic of an algebraic curve (e.g., rationa points) is outside the scope of the article (would require another Wikipedia article; but see arithmetic surface and other articles.) In fact, we will work over the complex numbers, which allow us to use the Hodge theory. Especially in the context of degeneration/deformation of curves, it is imperative to talk about "reducible" curves with singularities.
Genus of a stable curve
Proof: Let 
 
 
 
  be the normalization of an irreducible component 
 
 
 
  of X. Then, by the Riemann–Roch formula,



Line bundles and dual graph
Let X be a possibly singular curve. Then


 
  where r is the number of irreducible components of X, 
 
 
 
  is the normalization and 
 
 
 
 . (To get this use the fact 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 )
Taking the long exact sequence of the exponential sheaf sequence gives the degree map:


 
 . By definition, the Jacobian variety J(X) of X is the identity component of the kernel of this map. Then the previous exact sequence gives:



We next define the dual graph of X; a one-dimensional CW complex defined as follows. (related to whether a curve is of compact type or not)
Flat families of curves
By which we mean


 
  such that



 
  is flat (but need not be proper)


 
  is a smooth curve for all t ≠ 0.

By the degeneration or specialization as t → 0 we mean
Automorphism group
The automorphism group of a smooth curve of genus g had order at most 84(g-1)
Vanishing sequence
Given a linear series V on a curve X, the image of it under 
 
 
 
  is a finite set and following the tradition we write it as


 
  This sequence is called the vanishing sequence. For example, 
 
 
 
  is the multiplicity of a base point p. We think of higher 
 
 
 
  as encoding information about inflection of the Kodaira map

 
 . The ramification sequence is then


 
 . Their sum is called the ramification index of p. The global ramification is given by the famous formula: 
Hurwitz scheme
By definition, Hurwitz scheme 
 
 
 
  is the scheme parametrizing pairs (
 
 
 
 ) where C is a smooth curve of genus g and π has degree d.
Severi variety
A variety in a Hilbert scheme that parametrizes curves in projective space with given degree and geometric genus and at most node singularities. Its dimension is 3d+g-1.
It is a difficult theorem that Severi variety is a variety; I.e., irreducible.
Further topics
Moduli stack of principal bundlea on a complex curve
Gromov–Witten theory
See also

Algebraic curve
Enriques’ conjecture

References

Joe Harris and Ian Morrison. Moduli of curves.

https://www2.bc.edu/maksym-fedorchuk/papers/thesis.pdf - possible source?
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1503.04465v2.pdf

"


