


Positive real numbers




Positive real numbers

In mathematics, the set of positive real numbers, 
 
 
 
 , is the subset of those real numbers that are greather than zero.
Notation
Alternative to 
 
 
 
 , the non-standard symbols 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are often used. However, this may lead to confusion, as some authors use them to denote the set of non-negative real numbers, 
 
 
 
 , which explicitly includes zero. The non-negative reals serve as the range for metrics, norms and measures in mathematics.
Properties
The set 
 
 
 
  is closed under addition, multiplication, and division. It inherits a topology from the real line and, thus, has the structure of a multiplicative topological group or of an additive topological semigroup.


 
  and the multiplicative inverse function exchanges the intervals. The functions floor, 
 
 
 
 , and excess, 
 
 
 
 , have been used to describe an element 
 
 
 
  as a continued fraction

 
  which is a sequence of integers obtained from the floor function after the excess has been reciprocated. For 
 
 
 
  the sequence terminates with an exact fractional expression of 
 
 
 
 , and for quadratic irrational

 
  the sequence becomes a periodic continued fraction.
In a complex plane, 
 
 
 
  is identified with the positive real axis and is usually drawn as a horizontal ray. This ray is used as reference in the polar form of a complex number. The real positive axis corresponds to complex numbers

 
  with argument

 
 .
In the study of classical groups, for every 
 
 
 
 , there is a normal subgroup relation SL(n,ℝ ◁ GL(n,ℝ), the general linear group, such that the quotient group is the positive real numbers. In this context 
 
 
 
  is considered to be a Lie group.
Logarithmic measure
If 
 
 
 
  is an interval, then 
 
 
 
  determines a measure on certain subsets of 
 
 
 
 . In fact, it is an invariant measure with respect to multiplication 
 
 
 
  by a 
 
 
 
 . In the context of topological groups, this measure is an example of a Haar measure.
The utility of this measure is shown in its use for describing stellar magnitudes and noise levels in decibels, among other applications of the logarithmic scale. For purposes of international standards ISO 80000-3 the dimensionless quantities are referred to as level (logarithmic quantity).
References

Joseph Kist and Sanford Leetsma (1970) "Additive semigroups of positive real numbers", Mathematische Annalen 188:214 to 18.

"
Category:Topological groups Category:Measure theory


