


Draft:Distributions on an algebraic group




Draft:Distributions on an algebraic group

The algebra of distributions on an algebraic group G, denoted by Dist(G), generalizes Lie(G), the Lie algebra associated to G. Over a field of characteristic zero, it is isomorphic to the enveloping algebra of the Lie algebra of G and thus gives no new information. In the positive characteristic case, it can be used as a substitute for the Lie group–Lie algebra correspondence and its variant for algebraic groups in the characteristic zero.
Definition
Let X = Spec A be an affine scheme over a field k and let Ix be the kernel of the restriction map 
 
 
 
 , the residue field of x. By definition, a ''distribution f supported at x'' is a k-linear functional on A such that 
 
 
 
  for some n. (Note: the definition is still valid if k is an arbitrary ring.)
Now, if G is an algebraic group over k, we let Dist(G) be the set of all distributions on G supported at the identity element. If f, g are in it, we define the product of f and g, demoted by f * g, to be the linear functional


 
  where Δ is the comultiplication that is the homomorphism induced by the multiplication 
 
 
 
 
 . The multiplication turns out to be associative (use 
 
 
 
 ) and thus Dist(G) is an associative algebra, as the set is closed under the muplication by the formula:

(*) 
 
 
 
 .
 

It is also unital with the unity that is the linear functional 
 
 
 
 , the Dirac's delta measure.
The Lie algebra Lie(G) sits inside Dist(G). Indeed, by definition, Lie(G) is the tangent space to G at the identity element 1; i.e., the dual space of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, a tangent vector amounts to a linear functional on I1 that has no constant term and kills the square of I1 and the formula (*) implies 
 
 
 
 
  is still a tangent vector.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the Lie algebra of G. Then, by the universal property, the inclusion 
 
 
 
  induces the algebra homomorphism:


 
 . When the base field k has characteristic zero, this homomorphism is an isomorphism.1
Examples
Additive group
Let 
 
 
 
  be the additive group; i.e., G(R) = R for any k-algebra R. As a variety G is the affine line; i.e., the coordinate ring is k[t] and I0n = (tn).
Multiplicative group
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the multiplicative group; i.e., G(R) = R* for any k-algebra R. The coordinate ring of G is k[t, t-1] (since G is really GL1(k).)
Correspondence

For any closed subgroups H, 'K of G, if k is perfect and H is irreducible, then





 
 .
 




If V is a G-module (that is a representation of G), then it admits a natural structure of Dist(G)-module, which in turns gives the module structure over 
 
 
 
 .
Any action G on an affine algebraic variety X induces the representation of G on the coordinate ring k[G]. In particular, the conjugation action of G induces the action of G on k[G]. One can show I1n is stable under G and thus G acts on (k[G]/I1n)* and whence on its union Dist(G). The resulting action is called the adjoint action of G.

The case of finite algebraic groups
Let G be an algebraic group that is "finite" as a group scheme; for example, any finite group may be viewed as a finite algebraic group. There is an equivalence of categories between the category of finite algebraic groups and the category of finite-dimensional cocommutative Hopf algebras given by mapping G to k[G]*, the dual of the coordinate ring of G. Note that Dist(G) is a (Hopf) subalgebra of k[G]*.
Notes
References

J. C. Jantzen, Representations of Algebraic groups, Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 131, Boston, etc., 1987 (Academic).

"



↩




