


Draft:Six Energies - Symmetry and Spaces




Draft:Six Energies - Symmetry and Spaces


Six energies with their symmetries are generating a real 6-dimensional vector space or complex 
 
 
 
  space, particle series and relativities. The symmetries are - as Moebius transformations - extending the Pauli spin calculus, used in Quantum Mechanics QM, to operators and spaces for energy carrying systems PG. Kalmbach: Quantum Measures and Spaces. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1998., G. Kalmbach: MINT (Mathematik, Informatik, Naturwissenschaften, Technik)..
Basic for physical calculations are vector spaces on which operators in form of matrices act. Spin generates three space coordinates for them, Einstein adds with his special relativity an imaginary time coordinate and physics uses 4-dimensional vectors. If QM describes also states of P it uses countably infinite complex Hilbert space and 
 
 
 
  wave descriptions for them. The alternative, described in the above quoted literature and in 1 is a (6- or) 7-dimensional projective space as minimal projective extension to the 4-dimensional Einstein affine spacetime. QM's infinite dimensions are not needed for this, nor 
 
 
 
 -waves. The new operators are essentially acting on bounding imaginary 2-dimensional spheres 
 
 
 
  of solid 3- or complex 2-dimensional (idealized) locations of P in spacetime. The symmetries of 
 
 
 
  are Moebius transformations MT which include the QM spin matrices of Pauli. An additional comment is added in the first section to Einstein relativity and curvature since the affine and gravity action is described through MT's in this model. Vector space coordinates are local, an empty universe has no coordinates nor metric. Light is added as a 7th dimension to 
 
 
 
  with a its rolled U(1) symmety 
 
 
 
  coordinate. The article ends with a possible mathematical solution to Einstein’s unfinished work, quoted in the following section.
Einstein Evolution
For physics the name evolution is attached to Einstein's book2 . An attempt in the Einstein book was to translate facts known for fluids to descriptions in field theory. He introduced two new pseudo- and curved space-time metrics, named after Minkowski and Schwarzschild.
An article of Aditiya Tatu, Curve Evolution in Subspaces. (2010, Dept. Computer Sc., Univ. of Copenhagen) is quoted text from this and slightly changed here: Curve evolution ... often comes out of maximized/minimized cost functions 
 
 
 
  where v is the velocity vector and N is the inner normal to the closed curve C and t is time. Depending on the flow chosen, the initial curve changes to other curves in a space of all curves. We focus on the evolution of curves restricted to a given subspace of all curves.
For a flat orbit or linear expanding curve system P in a Schwarzschild metrics gravitational field, the gravitational Einstein accelerating vector can split in the tangent bundle of P into two orthogonal vectors, one as accelerating P's v speed vector and a second N as accelerating normal vector. N changes locally the C curvature. Einstein accelerated its orbit starts new. For instance the new curve for earth' orbit has been determined as a rosette. In 3 an MT G = 
 
 
 
  of order 6 and the ‘‘projection theorem‘‘ which holds for all finite or infinte dimensional Hilbert spaces was suggested for this purpose. - A vector can be splitted into two orthogonal ones and G describes a symmetry for this. G is the scaled Schwarzschild factor of the Schwarzschild metric.
For gravity the field quantums gravitons not detected as particles until today, - as waves, Einstein's computations are in use. The CERN particle search (see the next section) goes for heavy particles, not for massless ones. For gravitons, in G. Kalmbach: Quantum Measures and Spaces. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1998. a new MT group 
 
 
 
  was introduced for gravitons as the symmetry of a quark triangle in a nucleon. This group evolved to the transferG. Kalmbach: Evolution of Nucleons and Hydrogen. from inner nucleon flows, available in ="" name="">'‘Cooroll Mills.'‘ to energy vectors for field descriptions in the outer environment of the nucleon="" name="">G. Kalmbach H.E.: '‘Hedgehog Balls for Nucleons.''..
CERN, space coordinates and energy vectors
Concerning the CERN success: the Higgs boson is confirmed. The datas are recorded and checked by several scientists independently. A Higgs mass field HMF exists which uses Higgs bosons and operates for decaying energy systems.
Mass as energy is for a possible black hole situation in this experiment first inverted at the Schwarzschild radius of a sphere 
 
 
 
 . The CERN Higgs bosons decay shows that it is unstable in our environment, like most hadrons are. Changing mass from quarks mass of the universe to black holes mass K. Stierstadt: Physik der Materie., the first Pauli matrix of particles spin can be usedG. Kalmbach: Quantum Measures and Spaces. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1998., and the changing radii for a given mass is computed, - in projective, homogeneous coordinates 
 
 
 
 . Hence all swallowed mass of a Higgs boson can sit inside a small solid ball of radius 
 
 
 
 . This is the first operator which CERN could use with its eigen vectors for describing the Higgs finding.
In an environment, barycentrical coordinates set for the Higgs bosons decay products local mass barycenters by using Euclidean coordinates which are in most cases a many bodies problem. In their computed barycenter no mass may be sitting at all; for three items, like 3 quarks in a nucleon, the computation of barycenters is always flat in a triangles plane. For more than 3, the simplex notation is used where the masses sit in the simplex' vertices, also in higher dimensions.
Adding to the first Pauli matrix, usually carrying the first spin coordinate 
 
 
 
  and generating the first Euclidean space coordinate x, the second Pauli matrix 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  is imaginary, not real like the first one. Its eigenvector can be written for a complex Gauss plane generated with 
 
 
 
  coordinates. For the new masses with Schwarzschild inverted radius by Higg's explosions can, a barycenter B as origin on this 
 
 
 
  plane for newly generated physical energy systems can be set.
x is in spherical coordinates is replaced by a spherical radius for an imaginary bounding 
 
 
 
  of such a system, having its energies confined inside. This model postulates4 that nucleons do this when created after a big bang in the universe. As open systems which can exchange inner energies with an environment, on its 
 
 
 
  boundary, complex energy poles can sit. They are initial points of vectors as used in Einstein's and physical fields. Since there are only finitely many kinds of energy available for physics, there are only finitely many such poles on 
 
 
 
  for energy vectors..
One can extend the two 
 
 
 
  operator and eigenvectors to force, speed or other energy vectors having poles on 
 
 
 
  as initial points. The origin of that plane was set before. For a third pole on 
 
 
 
 , Pauli sets the 
 
 
 
  eigenvector of spin with this third operator as real cross product of the two before. (z is here not the 
 
 
 
  of Gauss, but the third orthogonal line for space.) Two Newtonian or other energy vectors, rotating in opposite directions in an idealized plane, can have generated a common origin as barycenter and also a 3-dimensional z-axis. With Pauli this as a new rotation axis for the collapsed or generated system and its energies can sit as solid ball inside a 
 
 
 
  as boundary of the generated system. As energy vector 
 
 
 
  is attached to 
 
 
 
 , adding angular frequency 
 
 
 
 for rotations energy. - This description is uselful for further operators and energies5. Observe that all spin vectors have a fixed length, so 
 
 
 
  sets on it an additional weight.
To complete the former description, two energy vectors for the 
 
 
 
  poles on the 
 
 
 
  lines are: an electrical charge 
 
 
 
  as scaling weight on 
 
 
 
  ; for the 
 
 
 
  vector 
 
 
 
  heat is preferred, - an inner entropy as energy vector. Its 
 
 
 
  weight is also useful for chaotic explosions. Their inner heat generates the enlarged volumes 
 
 
 
  from the 
 
 
 
  .
A Gleason frame like the three spin vectors can have other weights attached than length, generates a measure, metric, probability distribution as operator, and is complex extendable to 3 dimensions. The spin vectors weights of three quarks masses in a nucleon can be set by a Gleason operator. For energy vectors with initial point on 
 
 
 
 , the figure hedgehog illustrates vector locations.
(Figure)
Spheres and Hedgehog Ball

Imaginary Boundaries
For the new vectors in the hedgehog figure, magnetic energy 
 
 
 
  or a magnetic momentum 
 
 
 
  can be added as energy vector which is for electrical charged particles always aligned with spin 
 
 
 
  in the gyromagnetic relation 
 
 
 
  . The helicity of neutral leptons shows that spin can alternatively align with linear momentum 
 
 
 
  which, according to Newton, is attached to every energy system in the universe. Two more poles on 
 
 
 
  on the sphere are described with them.
One pole is for an imaginary (Minkowski metric) time vector as magnetic momentum having two poles, north-south. For this one has also a Moebius tranformation6 MT, acting as symmetry on 
 
 
 
  like the three Pauli matrices. For 
 
 
 
  one pole is the initial point of 
 
 
 
  , the other one is directed towards an electrical charge by induction. - Describing a pole for a linear 
 
 
 
  means, its mass is interpreted by Einstein as frequency 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  . Linear 
 
 
 
  is not angular frequency associated with rotation axes. The pole and vector for 
 
 
 
  is independent of Pauli spin or time. Spacetime coordinates and 4 dimensions are already generated by the former poles.
Described here are now 5 poles on 
 
 
 
 . 5 dimensions are also in use, for instance to unify potentials for electromagnetism and gravity in 7. Also Kaluza-Klein theory uses a fifth dimension for the universe. It is rolled, Schmutzer's is a vector. His 5GF projection admit three field equations in spacetime: a metrical (gravitational) Einstein AR field, a new scalar field and an electromagnetic field. They deal with three physical independent phenomenons. The derivations come from a 5-dimensional Hamilton principle.
For a sixth hedgehog mass vector a pole for 
 
 
 
  is added, it is for potentials of mass carrying systems and their cosmic speeds.
Forces and Energies
As basic forces in physics, one is for gravity, two for the strong and weak nuclear forces and one for electromagnetic force, photons and light. The last one is best described by the spectral series of atoms where the Bohr radii 
 
 
 
  of electrons allow lights emission from atoms. The photon vectors are on these 
 
 
 
  boundaries, their symmetry is a rolled U(1) circle, added as 7th dimension to 
 
 
 
 . For the strong and weak fields, exchange particles as gluons and weak bosons exist. The confinement of 3 quarks in an energetically stable nucleon shows that the symmetry8 of the triangle 
 
 
 
  with the 3 quark barycenters as vertices is suitable for the hedgehog. Take two of its three reflections as operators for 
 
 
 
  and its covering rotation in the mathematical positive sense for 
 
 
 
  . The symmetry for the weak interaction WI is the Pauli spin SU(2) group, blown up 3x3 Pauli matrices to the GellMann matrices of SU(3), the symmetry of the strong force.
Mentioned earlier was a matrix G for mass and for transformed local Einstein metrics. To get a good description for the fermions 12 series, you can take the product of 
 
 
 
  with the conjugation operator of physics C and identity. for them. As group of order 12 it contains a member of order 6. The MT G is mapped to its member as the couple of a covering rotation of the triangle with C, scaling Minkowski to Schwarzschild metric. If a group with this matrix and with the MT for the scaled special relativistic factor 
 
 
 
  is generated, an isomorphic copy to the product of the groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is obtained.
In case an answer to the former unsolved Einstein question is wanted9: Using the findings of modern nucleon and particle findings, a mathematical description in ="">''E. Schmutzer: Projektive einheitliche Feldtheorie.. This is a modern nuclear fluid description for outer generated field vectors and fields, not Einstein.
Translating it to fields: The symmetry of a quark triangle, together with the conjugation operator C (which reverses all quantum numbers) allows for two physical systems P, Q with two generated spacetime metrics 
 
 
 
  for their 4-vectors of physics through the C operator to set a special relativistic scaling factor as speed for measuring in one system the two time and length measures of the other. This generates, as computed by Einstein, the Minkowski metric for 
 
 
 
 . In case P is in gravitational interaction with a central system Q, the Minkowski metric gets in the tangent bundle for the spacetime of Q an accelerating Schwarzschild scaling as MT of order 6 factor and computed by Einstein for the Schwarzschild metric of Q. The nuclear setting is through its MT of order 6 as a product of a quark triangles covering rotation with C. The translation from a mathematical nuclar flow to Einstein's wanted field description can be due to imaginary spherical nuclear boundaries with the six hedgehog energy vectors attached.
See also

Field (physics)
Symmetry in physics
Symmetry in quantum mechanics

References

W. C. Chew: Quantum Mechanics. U. Of Illinois, Urbana, 2012
Cooroll Mills. Under: Wikipedia in the Internet.
A. Dvurecenskij: Gleason's Theorem and its Applications. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1993
A. Einstein et al.: Die Evolution der Physik. rororo, Reinbek, 1995
D. Ghost, M. Wiebusch: The dimension 6 triple gluon operator in Higgs+jet observables. arXiv.org>hep-ph>arXiv:1411.2029
A. Gleason: Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. J. Math. Mech. 65, 1957, S. 885-893
R.C. Greenhow: Introductory Quantum Mechanics. Inst. Physics Publ., Bristol, 1994
W. Greiner, A. Schaefer: Quantum Chromodynamics. Springer, New York, 1994
W. H. Greub: Lineare Algebra. Springer, Berlin, 1975
D. Griffiths: Introduction to Elementary Particles. Wiley, New York, 1987
F. Halzen, A. Martin: Quarks and Leptons. Wiley, New York, 1984
G. Hall: Symmetries and Curvature Structure in General Relativity. World Scientific, Singapore, 2004
G. Kalmbach (Chief ed. with Editorial Board): MINT (Mathematik, Informatik, Naturwissenschaften, Technik). Aegis-Verlag, Ulm, 1997-2012 and MINT Verlag, Bad Woerishofen 2013-2015, vol. 1-30 with ISBN numbers
G. Kalmbach: Quantum Measures and Spaces. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1998, ISBN 0-7923-5288-2
G. Kalmbach: Evolution of Nucleons and Hydrogen. Intern. JPAM 57, 2009, S. 111-120
G. Kalmbach: A Universe with Moebius Transformations. Intern. JPAM 52, 2009, S. 289-300
G. Kalmbach H.E.: Hedgehog Balls for Nucleons. PJAAM 7, 2013, 1-5
G. Kalmbach H.E.: Cross Ratios and Gleason Frames. PJAAM 8, 2014, 1-15, open access
L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifschitz: Classical Theory of Fields. Pergamon, London, 1971
I. Leonhard: Quantum Mechanics. McGraw Hill, 1968
W. Rindler: Introduction to Special Relativity. Oxford University Press, 1991
H. Samelson: Ueber die Sphaeren, welche als Gruppenraeume auftreten. Comm. Math. Helv. 13, 1940, S. 144-155
E. Schmutzer: Relativistische Physik. Akad. Verlagsges., Leipzig, 1968
E. Schmutzer: Projektive einheitliche Feldtheorie. Harri Deutsch, Frankfurt, 2004
B. F. Schutz: Gravity from the ground up - an introductory guide to gravity and general relativity. University Press, Cambridge, 2003
N. Steenrod: The Topology of Fibre Bundles. Princeton Univ. Press, 1951
K. Stierstadt: Physik der Materie. VCH, Weinheim, 1989
O. Veblen, J. Young: ''Projective Geometry. '' Ginn, Boston, 1910

External links

Sphere (PlanetMath.org website)
1

Möbius Transformation Module by John H. Mathews
A Conception of the World
2


A java applet demonstrating iterated application of a Möbius transformation to a circle
The Review of Particle Physics, the ultimate source of information on particle properties.
Quantum Chromodynamics

:Category:Projective geometry :Category:Science :Category:Symmetry"



Gudrun Kalmbach H.E.: '‘Cross ratios and Gleason Frames.''
A. Einstein et al.: Die Evolution der Physik.
'‘MINT (Mathematik, Informatik, Naturwissenschften, Technik).''
'‘MINT (Mathematik, Informatik, Naturwissenschften, Technik).''
'‘MINT (Mathematik, Informatik, Naturwissenschften, Technik).''
G. Kalmbach: "Quantum Measures and Spaces.''
E. Schmutzer: Projektive einheitliche Feldtheorie.
G. Kalmbach: "Quantum Measures and Spaces.''
MINT (Mathematik, Informatik, Naturwissenschaften, Technik).




