


Fair item assignment




Fair item assignment

Fair item assignment is a kind of a fair division problem in which the items to divide are indivisible. The items have to be divided among several partners who value them differently. A typical scenario is when several heirs want to divide the inherited property, which contains e.g. a house, a car, a piano and several paintings.
The indivisibility of the items implies that a fair division may not be possible. As an extreme example, if there is only a single item (e.g. a house), it must be given to a single partner, but this is not fair to the other partners. There are several solutions to such cases, like monetary payments or time-based rotation.
Division Procedures
There are various procedures for fair item assignment, depending on the number of partners, the type of their valuation functions, and the desired fairness criterion.
Two partners, ordinal valuations, envy-free allocation
Suppose there are two partners, Alice and George, whose valuations are ordinal. I.e, each partner can order the items from the most preferred to the least preferred (without ties).
An item assignment is called envy-free for Alice if there is an injection f from George's items to Alice's items, such that for each item x received by George, Alice prefers f(x) to x. The property envy-free for George is defined analogously. An item assignment is called envy-free (EF) if it is envy-free for both partners. Note that in an EF assignment, Alice and George receive the same number of items.
The following division procedure can be used to find an EF allocation:1

Put all items on the table.
While there are items on the table, do:
 
Ask the partners to choose their favorite item from all items on the table.
If the choices are different, then give each partner his/her favorite item and continue.
If the choices are identical, then move the chosen item to the Contested Pile. It will not be allocated.


This procedure, while very simple, is not very efficient, since many items are discarded to the contested pile. A slightly more complicated procedure 2 finds an EF allocation which is also Pareto efficient (PE), i.e., there is no other EF allocation which is weakly better for both partners. The idea is that, before moving an item to the contested pile, the procedure tries to allocate it to one partner while compensating the other partner with another item. Only if this doesn't succeed, the item is sent to the contested pile.
For example, suppose there are 4 items (1, 2, 3, 4) and the preferences of the partners are:

Alice: 1 > 2 > 3 > 4
George: 2 > 3 > 4 > 1

The first procedure gives 1 to Alice and 2 to George, since these are their favorites and they are different. Then, both Alice and George choose 3 so it is discarded. Then, both choose 4 so it is also discarded. The final allocation is: Alice←{1}, George←{2}. It is EF but not PE.
The second procedure also starts by giving 1 to Alice and 2 to George. Then, instead of discarding item 3, it is given to Alice, and George is compensated with item 4. The final allocation is: Alice←{1,3}, George←{2,4}. It is EF and PE.
Both procedures are manipulable: a partner can gain by reporting incorrect preferences. However, such manipulation requires knowledge of the other partner's preferences, so it is difficult in practice.
Many partners, additive valuations, MMS allocation
Suppose there are n partners whose valuations are additive set functions, i.e., the value of a set of items is the sum of the values of the individual items.
Ideally, we would like to give each partner a bundle worth for him at least 
 
 
 
  of the total value; this is called proportional division. However, this may be impossible with indivisible items. So we define a relaxed fairness notion called MMS (max-min-share):3 each partner's value for his allocation should be at least as high as what he can guarantee by dividing the items into n bundles and receiving his least desirable bundle. Such allocations almost always exist, but there are very rare cases in which they do not exist. However, allocations guaranteeing each partner 2/3 of the above value always exist.
This division procedure have been implemented in the spliddit website.4
Empirical evidence
Several experiments have been conducted with people, in order to find out what is the relative importance of several division criteria. In particular, what is the importance of fairness versus efficiency? Do people prefer divisions which are fair but inefficient, or efficient but unfair?
In one experiment,5 subjects were asked to answer questionnaires regarding the division of indivisible items between two people. The subjects were shown the subjective value that each (virtual) person attaches to each item. The predominant aspect considered was equity - satisfying each individual's preferences. The efficiency aspect was secondary. This effect was slightly more pronounced in economics students, and less pronounced in law students (who chose a Pareto-efficient allocation more frequently).
In another experiment,6 subjects were divided into pairs and asked to negotiate and decide how to divide a set of 4 items between them. Each combination of items had a pre-specified monetary value, which was different between the two subjects. Each subject knew both his own values and the partner's values. After the division, each subject could redeem the items for their monetary value.
The items could be divided in several ways: some divisions were equitable (e.g., giving each partner a value of 45), while other divisions were Pareto efficient (e.g., giving one partner 46 and another partner 75). The interesting question was whether people prefer the equitable or the efficient division. The results showed that people preferred the more efficient division, but only as long as it was not "too much" unfair. A difference of 2-3 units of value was considered sufficiently small for most subjects, so they preferred the efficient allocation. But a difference of 20-30 units (such as in the 45:45 vs. 46:75 example) was perceived as too large: 51% preferred the 45:45 division.
The effect were less pronounced when the subjects were only shown the rank of the item combinations for each of them, rather than the full monetary value.
This experiment also revealed a recurring process which was used during the negotiation. The subjects first find the most equitable division of the goods. They take this as a reference point, and try to find Pareto improvements. An improvement is implemented only if the inequality it causes is not too large. Hence the authors call this process CPIES: Conditioned Pareto Improvement from Equal Split.
References
"
Category:Fair division



↩
↩
↩
http://www.spliddit.org/apps/goods↩
↩
↩




