


Draft:Strategarchery




Draft:Strategarchery

Strategarchery (also known as "Strategic Archery") is an archery game played by two or more competing archers, each with their own target, with one eventual victor. In the game, the competitors shoot a round of three arrows at either their target or at an opponent's target; arrows which strike the archer's own target count towards their score, while arrows which strike an opponent's target count against their opponent's score. At the end of the round, the archer whose score is highest wins that round and is awarded two points. The purpose of the game is to obtain 12 points; the archer who does so shall be the winner.
The sport was developed as a more inclusive alternative to traditional Target archery, where each archer's score is independent of the rest, by making the final score of an archer dependent upon the performance and decisions of the others. Due to the intertwined nature of scores in strategarchery, an archer must use strategic and predictive measures to ensure that their score is the highest possible. In this way does strategarchery differ from traditional target archery; whereas in the traditional form the final score was determined by one's skill with a bow alone, in strategarchery the final score is determined by one's strategic, predictive, and psychological capabilities alongside their skill with a bow.
History
The initial inspiration for the sport came from a statement made by an archer to another, who had shot a near-perfect round: "I wish archery were like shuffleboard or curling, so that I would be able to ruin your perfect score and shatter your happiness." Fueled by boredom with the repetitive nature of archery (specifically archery practice) and sparked by this remark, a collaborative effort among three archers arose to develop a more entwined and competitive form of the sport. Through a process of experimentation, the sport and its rules were developed.
The name "strategarchery" is a portmanteau of the words "strategy" and "archery." This name was proposed as it embodies the two major characteristics of the sport. In formal situations it may be referred to as Strategic Archery, yet that is not the true name of the sport.
Rules
The rules to strategarchery are simple and straightforward:

Strategarchery shall be played as a match.
There may be any amount of archers, two or above, although the optimal number is three.
Each archer will be given their own target and their own lane.
The lanes shall be arranged consecutively and the targets placed such that the bottoms of all targets are equidistant from the ground.
Each archer shall have three arrows, all of which may be shot at any target.
 
For arrows which strike the archer's own target, the archer shall be awarded a number of points equal to the value of the ring which the arrow has broken to their round score.
For arrows which strike an opponent's target, the number of points equal to the value of the ring which the arrow has broken shall be deducted from the opponent's round score whose target has been struck.
For arrows which strike no target, no points are awarded or deducted from any score.

A round consists of every archer shooting all three of their arrows.
 
At the beginning of each round, each archer's round score is naught.
Each archer's round score is defined as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the set of values for all arrows in the archer's target shot by the archer themself, and 
 
 
 
  is the set of values for all arrows in the archer's target shot by opponents.
The order of shooting shall be in the order of decreasing score from the previous round; this is to say, the archer with the highest score score in the previous round shall shoot first.
 
At the beginning of the match, the order of shooting is preferably voluntary, but if there is a disagreement, any means may be used to settle the order.

After the primary arrows have been shot, the rest is unordered and purely voluntary.

The archer whose score is the highest at the end of each round shall be awarded two match points.
 
If there be a tie among any number of archers, each archer with the highest round score shall be awarded one match point.

The archers compete in a series of rounds until a competitor reaches a predefined required match score; the default is 12.
 
If there is a tie and two or more archers obtain the required match score simultaneously, the round is ignored and done again, until there is a victor.


Games"


