


Byers-Yang theorem




Byers-Yang theorem

In quantum mechanics, the Byers-Yang theorem states that all physical properties of a doubly-connected system (an annulus) enclosing a magnetic flux 
 
 
 
  through the opening are periodic in the flux with period 
 
 
 
  (the magnetic flux quantum). The theorem was first stated and proven by Nina Byers and Chen-Ning Yang (1961),1 and further developed by Felix Bloch (1970).2
Proof
An enclosed flux 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a vector potential 
 
 
 
  inside the annulus with a line integral 
 
 
 
  along any path 
 
 
 
  that circulates around once. One can try to eliminate this vector potential by the gauge transformation


 
  of the wave function

 
  of electrons at positions 
 
 
 
 . The gauge-transformed wave function satisfies the same Schrödinger equation as the original wave function, but with a different magnetic vector potential

 
 . It is assumed that the electrons experience zero magnetic field 
 
 
 
  at all points 
 
 
 
  inside the annulus, the field being nonzero only within the opening (where there are no electrons). It is then always possible to find a function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  inside the annulus, so one would conclude that the system with enclosed flux 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to a system with zero enclosed flux.
However, for any arbitrary 
 
 
 
  the gauge transformed wave function is no longer single-valued: The phase of 
 
 
 
  changes by


 
  whenever one of the coordinates 
 
 
 
  is moved along the ring to its starting point. The requirement of a single-valued wave function therefore restricts the gauge transformation to fluxes 
 
 
 
  that are an integer multiple of 
 
 
 
 . Systems that enclose a flux differing by a multiple of 
 
 
 
  are equivalent.
Applications
An overview of physical effects governed by the Byers-Yang theorem is given by Yoseph Imry.3 These include the Aharonov-Bohm effect, persistent current in normal metals, and flux quantization in superconductors.
Notes
"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Theorems in quantum physics



↩
↩
↩




