


Representation on coordinate rings




Representation on coordinate rings

In mathematics, a representation on coordinate rings is a representation of a group on coordinate rings of affine varieties.
Let X be an affine algebraic variety over an algebraically closed field k of characteristic zero with the action of a reductive algebraic group G.1 G then acts on the coordinate ring 
 
 
 
  of X as a left regular representation

 
 . This is a representation of G on the coordinate ring of X.
The most basic case is when X is an affine space (that is, X is a finite-dimensional representation of G) and the coordinate ring is a polynomial ring. The most important case is when X is a symmetric variety; i.e., the quotient of G by a fixed-point subgroup of an involution.
Isotypic decomposition
Let 
 
 
 
  be the sum of all G-submodules of 
 
 
 
  that are isomorphic to the simple module 
 
 
 
 ; it is called the 
 
 
 
 -isotypic component of 
 
 
 
 . Then there is a direct sum decomposition:


 
  where the sum runs over all simple G-modules 
 
 
 
 . The existence of the decomposition follows, for example, from the fact that the group algebra of G is semisimple since G is reductive.
X is called multiplicity-free (or spherical variety2) if every irreducible representation of G appears at most one time in the coordinate ring; i.e., 
 
 
 
 . For example, 
 
 
 
  is multiplicity-free as 
 
 
 
 -module. More precisely, given a closed subgroup H of G, define


 
  by setting 
 
 
 
  and then extending 
 
 
 
  by linearity. The functions in the image of 
 
 
 
  are usually called matrix coefficients. Then there is a direct sum decomposition of 
 
 
 
 -modules (N the normalizer of H)


 
 , which is an algebraic version of the Peter–Weyl theorem (and in fact the analytic version is an immediate consequence.) Proof: let W be a simple 
 
 
 
 -submodules of 
 
 
 
 . We can assume 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the linear functional of W such that 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 . That is, the image of 
 
 
 
  contains 
 
 
 
  and the opposite inclusion holds since 
 
 
 
  is equivariant.
Examples

Let 
 
 
 
  be a B-eigenvector and X the closure of the orbit 
 
 
 
 . It is an affine variety called the highest weight vector variety by Vinberg–Popov. It is multiplicity-free.

The Kostant–Rallis situation
See also

Algebra representation
Spherical representation

Notes
References

Roe Goodman, Nolan R. Wallach, Symmetry, Representations, and Invariants (2009)

"
Category:Group theory Category:Representation theory Category:Representation theory of groups



G is not assumed to be connected so that the results apply to finite groups.↩
↩




