


Draft:Hawkes process




Draft:Hawkes process

Hawkes process are used to study social network. The Hawkes model of 
 
 
 
  users is in figure 1:  Hawkes models is to quantify the tendency of any users to make actions in a social network. In order to achieve it, we would like to set up some notations as follows:



 
  is a counting process of actions to all users made by a user i up to time t. We define a total count vectors. 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 

Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
  matrix. Each entry 
 
 
 
  is a coefficient that quantifies the influence from a user 
 
 
 
  to a user 
 
 
 
 . Note 
 
 
 
  is an asymmetric matrix which makes sense in reality because influence from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is not equal to that from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  in general.


 
  is a baseline intensity (basic intensity) which mean a user 
 
 
 
 's basic tendency to make actions without any effects by other users.


 
  is a decay function accounting for an influence diminishing from a user 
 
 
 
  to a user 
 
 
 
  along time 
 
 
 
 . A common decay function 
 
 
 
 .
If we let a parameter 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is an intensity of 
 
 
 
  at the time 
 
 
 
  depending on 
 
 
 
 . It can be interpreted as the rate/tendency for a user 
 
 
 
  to make a decision given 
 
 
 
 . The relations are described as follows
 
 
 
  and 
 
 


Minimization of Loss Function
Let 
 
 
 
  be a true intensity of the Hawkes model. Note that 
 
 
 
  may not satisfy the intensity formula in the Hawkes model. We define a loss function 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Note that the loss function is random because 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are random variables. Therefore, 
 
 


 
  The second line is because 
 
 
 
  is a martingale. Therefore, 
 
 
 
  is a martingale with expectation 
 
 
 
 . From the calculation, the expectation of the loss function achieve minimum when 
 
 
 
 . We wold like to minimize 
 
 
 
  to find the best estimator 
 
 
 
  but the matrix 
 
 
 
  in the estimator 
 
 
 
  may not be sparse which does not match the reality which most of a user ' members and the user are not active to each other. In order to get a sparse matrix 
 
 
 
 , a trace norm or nuclear norm penalization is added to the loss function. Let 
 
 
 
  be a trace/nuclear norm of a square matrix and 
 
 
 
  or it can be interpreted as a sum of all singular values of 
 
 
 
  Therefore, what we minimize is the following
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a smooth parameter that balance goodness-of-fit and penalization.
Remark: Any non-differentiable norm is a penalization for sparse solution.
Control of 
 
 

The main concern is how close the best estimator 
 
 
 
  is to the true intensity 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 . The ultimate goal is to control 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  only which is yet to overcome. The details is in the paper 1. "



Emmanuel Bacry, Stéphane Gaïffas, Jean-François Muzy, "Concentration for matrix martingales in continuous time and microscopic activity of social networks" http://xxx.tau.ac.il/abs/1412.7705↩




