


Draft:Forces between polymer-coated surfaces




Draft:Forces between polymer-coated surfaces


The forces between polymer-coated surfaces arise from the van der Waals and electrostatic interactions between the polymers on either surface as well as the interactions between the polymer and a given solvent. All of these are of practical importance since the principles that govern the forces between such surfaces are used to model many molecular interactions in the biological sciences as well as for the stabilization of colloidal suspensions. Colloids are generally stabilized by grafting polymer chains onto the suspended particles and allowing repulsive forces between the grafted polymers to prevent the colloids from coalescing. The interactions can generally be understood as a function of how much of polymer is attached to the surface and how it is attached. The former of these is treated here. The See Also sections lists some sources of information about specific methods of coating surfaces with polymers, which lies outside the scope of what is presented here.
Forces Between Particles
van der Waals
The van der Waals force is described as the sum of the attractive or repulsive forces between molecules (or between parts of the same molecule), excluding those that arise due to covalent bonding or the electrostatic interactions among ions or (neutral or polar) molecules. The basic understanding of this intermolecular force is given through Coulomb's law1. A van der Waals force may result from three general scenarios. First, they can exist as an attraction between two permanent dipoles, also referred to as Keesom interactions. These forces are generally small and do not occur in electrolytic solutions. Secondly, the forces are present between a permanent dipole and induced-dipole. This Debye force is due to interactions occurring between rotating permanent dipoles and the dipolar polarization of atoms and molecules. This interaction force is far weaker than the dipole-dipole interaction. Lastly, van der Waal interactions occur because of the natural fluctuations in electron cloud densities. These densities constantly fluctuate, allowing for non-zero instantaneous changes in electrical charges. These constantly changing electrical charges thus allow for the interaction between all atoms and molecules. While being the most common, these interactions between induced dipoles exert incredibly small forces between each of the structures.
Electrostatic
In general, when looking at a charged surface of an object in a solution, the system aims to create electro-neutrality. This occurs by forming a single layer of counter ions against the object to neutralize the object called the Stern layer, with another layer of co-ions and counter ions to neutralize the Stern layer called the diffuse layer:2. The Stern layer with the diffuse layer combine to form the double layer. The electric double layer will have an electrostatic potential across the electrolytes solution which will decay to the neutrality of the solution.
Following this idea, examine a system of two plates with charged surfaces of 
 
 
 
 . Each plate will then form a double layer consisting of co-ions and counter-ions. If the plates are close enough, an interaction of repulsive electrostatic forces will occur as a result of the overlap of the electric double layers3. Refer to DLVO theory page for more specifics and background. The interaction energy can be modeled by the following equation:


4
Where 
 
 
 
  is the interaction energy between the two plates per unit area, 
 
 
 
  is the inverse Debye length, 
 
 
 
  is the distance between the two plates, 
 
 
 
  is the bulk number concentration of ions in solution, 
 
 
 
  is Boltzmann's constant, 
 
 
 
  is temperature and 
 
 
 
  is the reduced surface potential (not to be confused with surface excess) given by the equation:


5
Where 
 
 
 
  is the charge of the ions in solution, and 
 
 
 
  is the surface charge in volts.
This model is a good introduction into understanding electrostatic interactions between two different bodies. When looking at systems in real life settings, geometries and surface coatings call more a more complex approach than the parallel plate model.
Consider the situation with two parallel plates covered in polyelectrolyte brushes in a solution. This case differs from the normal parallel plate model in that the brushes carry the charge. Different models have been proposed to explain the interactions between the two plates. One proposed theory states that as the plates come closer together, the two brushes come in contact and are squeezed against each other but do not intertwine causing a more uniform repulsion force6. An adaptation on this model, updated the interaction into three steps explaining how coatings are more likely to under the following three step process: stage 1- repulsion between intact brushes before contact, stage 2- repulsion between interdigitated brushes, and stage 3 – repulsion between the compressed brushes 7. Each stage has its own set of equations to predict the interactions as the plates get closer, but this is still a relatively new area of research and mathematical expressions are in the proposal stages.
Steric Forces
Steric forces are entropically driven repulsive forces that affect interactions between polymer-coated surfaces. As these surfaces approach each other, the thermal movement of the adsorbed polymers is reduced, and therefore its individual entropy is reduced.8 Utilization of this repulsion is present in colloid stabilization.9 Adsorbing polymers to the surfaces of the particles that would normally attract and coagulate creates a stronger repulsion than attraction. Advantages of polymer-coated surfaces include equal efficacy in both aqueous and non-aqueous solutions, rather insensitive to the addition of salts in solution, equal efficacy in high and low solid contents, and the possibility to reverse flocculation. 10 The practice of grafting polymers to particles dispersed in solution is used in many industrial processes. The coated particles are able to remain dispersed in solution despite varying conditions because of these steric forces.
(Figure)
Electro-Steric Stabilization

Factors that Affect Forces
Solvent-Polymer Interaction
The interaction between the polymer in solution and the solvent is typically modeled using Flory-Huggins theory and the associated 
 
 
 
  parameter, which functions as a measure of the thermodynamics of polymer-solvent interactions compared to the self-interaction of both polymer and solvent. By estimating the effective entropy of mixing

 
  (which must take into account the size disparity between the individual solvent molecules and the large macromolecular solute chains, resulting in a dependence on the volume fraction

 
  rather than the mole fraction

 
 ) and the enthalpy of mixing, which also diverges from ideality (where 
 
 
 
 ) when 
 
 
 
 , the standard free energy of mixing 
 
 
 
  can be approximated by the equation when evaluated at room temperature (298 K):


11
where 
 
 
 
  is the universal gas constant, 
 
 
 
  is the thermodynamic temperature, 
 
 
 
  is the number of moles and 
 
 
 
  the volume fraction (make sure not to confuse with the surface potential described above) of solvent (s) or polymer (p), and 
 
 
 
  is:


12
where 
 
 
 
  is the real volume of a polymer segment, and 
 
 
 
  represents the Hansen solubility parameter. Generally if the difference between these parameters is less than 5, the polymer should be soluble. Because 
 
 
 
 , it can provide important information about the system, as shown in the table below




Parameter

Polymer Coil Morphology

Solvent Classification













Expanded Coil

Miscible

Exothermic







Self-avoiding walk

Ideal

Athermal







Random walk

θ solvent

Endothermic







Contracted globule

Insoluble

Unfavorably endothermic



Surface Coverage and Grafting Density
Surface coverage and, alternatively, grafting density can be used to describe how much of a surface is coated with a polymer. Here the surface coverage will refer to fractional amount of the surface that is covered and grafting density will refer to the number of molecules on the surface per unit area.
If the surface coverage is low and the particles are close together there exists attractive bridging. Bridging is when one polymer molecule is bonded to two different surfaces, bringing the particles closer together. The bridging attraction is caused by the increase in entropy as the particles approach one another. At far distances this attraction is the dominant force. As the surfaces get closer together, the steric forces take over and the particles repel each other. As the surface coverage is increased, the bridging effect decreases (independent of the distance between particles).13
When the surface coverage increases, the interaction between the polymer layers becomes more significant. The first effect is the osmotic interaction which is caused by the polymer chains on different particles overlapping with one another. This effect can be repulsive or attractive depending on the solvent. In a good solvent, overlap of the polymer chains is unfavorable - this causes a repulsive force. In a poor solvent, the polymer chains favor overlapping with one another and cause an attractive force. The other effect at high surface coverage is due to the decrease in possible shapes or arrangements of the polymer chains. This causes a decrease in the conformational entropy, which is undesirable and therefore the force is repulsive.14
The surface coverage, 
 
 
 
 , can be directly related to the grafting density, 
 
 
 
 .


15

 
  is the molar area 
 
 
 
 .
The grafting density, 
 
 
 
 , is the number of molecules present per unit area of the surface and is a function of the radius of gyration, 
 
 
 
 . Low grafting density is when 
 
 
 
 ; high grafting density is when 
 
 
 
 . In a good solvent, the repulsive force per unit area can be determined using the grafting density.
Low grafting density:

For 
 
 




16





For 
 
 




17






High grafting density:

For 
 
 




18








 
  is the repulsive force as a function of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the Boltzmann constant, 
 
 
 
  is temperature (K), 
 
 
 
  is grafting density, 
 
 
 
  is the distance between surfaces, 
 
 
 
  is radius of gyration, and 
 
 
 
  is the thickness of the polymer coating.19 As the grafting density is increased, the impact that it has on the repulsive force is also increased.
See Also
DLVO theory
Physisorption
Coating processes
Double Layer Forces
References
Forces between polymer-coated surfaces
"




Probstein, Ronald F. "Suspension Stability and Particle Capture." Physicochemical Hydrodynamics: An Introduction. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2003. N. pag. Print.



de Gennes PG (1987) Adv Colloid Interface Sci 27:189
Ohshima, Hiroyuki. "Electrostatic Repulsion Between Two Parallel Plates Covered with Polyelectrolyte Brush Layers. Effects of Interdigitation." Colloid and Polymer Science, 292.2 (2014): 431-439.



"Thermodynamics of High Polymer Solutions," Paul J. Flory Journal of Chemical Physics, August 1941, Volume 9, Issue 8, p. 660 [http://link.aip.org/getabs/servlet/GetabsServlet?prog=normal&id;;=JCPSA6000009000008000660000002&idtype;=cvips&gifs;=Yes Abstract]. Flory suggested that Huggins' name ought to be first since he had published several months earlier: Flory, P.J., "Thermodynamics of high polymer solutions," J. Chem. Phys. 10:51-61 (1942) Citation Classic No. 18, May 6, 1985












