


Local inverse




Local inverse

The local inverse is a kind of inverse function or matrix inverse used in image and signal processing, as well as other general areas of mathematics.
The concept of local inverse came from interior reconstruction of the CT image. One of the interior reconstruction methods was done through that first approximately reconstructs the image outside the ROI (region of interest) and then subtracts the re-projection data of the image at outside the ROI from the original projection data; then the above created data are used to make a new reconstruction. This idea can be widened to inverse. Instead of directly making an inverse, the unknowns at the outside of the local region can be first inverted. Recalculate the data from these unknowns (at outside the local region). Subtract this recalculated data from the original data, then the inverse for the unknowns inside the local region is done through the above newly produced data.
This concept is a direct extension of local tomography, generalized inverse and iterative refinement method. It is used to solve the inverse problem with incomplete input data, similar to local tomography. However this concept of local inverse also can be applied to complete input data.
Local inverse for full field of view system or over-determined system



Assume there is 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that satisfies,



Here 
 
 
 
  is not equal to 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 
  is close to 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is identical matrix. Examples of this kind of matrix 
 
 
 
  are for example, filtered back-projection method for image reconstruction, the inverse with regularization. In this case an approximate solution can be found as following,
and



A better solution for 
 
 
 
  can be found as following,



In the above formula 
 
 
 
  is useless, hence



In the same way, there is



In the above the solution is only divided to as two parts. 
 
 
 
  is inside the ROI(region of Interest) 
 
 
 
  is at outside of ROI. f is inside of FOV(field of view) y is outside of FOV.
The two parts can be extended to many parts, in this case, the extended method is referred as the sub-region iterative refinement method method 1
Local inverse for Limited field of view system or under-determined system



Assume 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are known matrices; 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are unknown vectors; 
 
 
 
  is known vector; 
 
 
 
  is unknown vector. It is interested to know the vector x. What is the better solution?
Assume the above matrix inverse exists 
 
 




Here 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is close to 
 
 
 
 . The local inverse algorithm is as follows:
(1) 
 
 
 
 . An extrapolated 
 
 
 
  function is obtained by



(2) 
 
 
 
 . An approximate 
 
 
 
  function is calculated by



(3) 
 
 
 
 . A correction for 
 
 
 
  is done by



(4) 
 
 
 
 . A corrected function for 
 
 
 
  is calculated by



(5) 
 
 
 
 . An extrapolated 
 
 
 
  function is obtained by



(6) 
 
 
 
 . A local inverse solution is obtained



In the above algorithm, there are two time extrapolations for 
 
 
 
  functions which are used to overcome the data truncation problem. There is a correction for 
 
 
 
 . This correction can be a constant correction to correct the DC values of 
 
 
 
  function or a linear correction according to the prior knowledges about the 
 
 
 
  function. This algorithm can be found in reference.2
In the example of reference,3 it is found that 
 
 
 
 , here 
 
 
 
 . In that example the constant correction is made. More complicated correction can be made, for example linear correction, which perhaps achieves better results.


 
  is close to 
 
 

Shuang-ren Zhao defined a Local inverse4 to solve the above problem. First consider the simplest solution.


 
  or



Here 
 
 
 
  is the correct data in which there is no the influence of the object function in outside. From this data it is easy to get correct solution,
or



Here 
 
 
 
  is a correct(or exact) solution of the unknown 
 
 
 
 , that means 
 
 
 
 . In case that 
 
 
 
  is not a square matrix or it has no inverse, generalized inverse can applied,



Since 
 
 
 
  is unknown, if it is set to 
 
 
 
 , a approximate solution is obtained.



On the above solution the result 
 
 
 
  is related to the unknown vector 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  can be any values, this way the result 
 
 
 
  has very strong artifacts which is



This kind of artifact is referred as truncation artifacts in the field of CT image reconstruction. In order to minimize the above artifacts of the solution, a special matrix 
 
 
 
  is considered, which satisfies



Hence,



solve the above equation with Generalized inverse



Here 
 
 
 
  is generalized inverse of the matrix 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is a solution for 
 
 
 
 . It is easy to find a matrix Q which satisfy 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  can be written as following:



This kind of matrix 
 
 
 
  is referred as transverse projection of matrix 
 
 

Here 
 
 
 
  is the generalized inverse of the matrix 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  satisfies



It can be proven that



It is easy to prove that 
 
 




and hence



Hence Q is also the generalized inverse of Q
That means



Hence,



or



The matrix



 
  is referred as the local inverse of Matrix 
 
 
 
  . Using local inverse instead of generalized inverse or inverse can avoid the artifacts from unknown input data. Considering,



Hence there is,



Hence 
 
 
 
  is only related the correct data 
 
 
 
 . This kind error can be calculated as



This kind error are called bowl effect. Bowl effect does not related the unknown object 
 
 
 
 
 , it is only related the correct data 
 
 

In case the contribution of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  are smaller than that of 
 
 
 
 , or



the local inverse solution 
 
 
 
  is better than 
 
 
 
  for this kind of inverse problem. Using 
 
 
 
  instead of 
 
 
 
 , the truncation artifacts are replaced as bowl effect. This result is same as local tomography, hence local inverse is a direct extension of the concept of the local tomography.
It is well known that the solution of the generalized inverse is a minimal L2 norm method. From the above derivation it is clear that the solution of local inverse is a minimal L2 norm method subject to the condition that the influence of unknown object 
 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . Hence the local inverse is also an direct extension of the concept of the generalized inverse.
See also

Formulation of the Jacobian conjecture
Interior image reconstruction of CT scans
interior reconstruction
extrapolation
matrix inverse
generalized inverse
iterative refinement
Local tomography

References


"
Category:Inverse functions



Shuangren Zhao, Xintie Yang, ''Iterative reconstruction in all sub-regions '', SCIENCEPAPER ONLINE. 2006; 1(4): page 301–308, http://www.paper.edu.cn/uploads/journal/2007/42/1673-7180(2006)04-0301-08.pdf
Shuangren Zhao, Kang Yang, Dazong Jiang, Xintie Yang, Interior reconstruction using local inverse, J Xray Sci Technol. 2011; 19(1): 69–90
S. Zhao, D Jaffray, Iterative reconstruction and reprojection for truncated projections, AAPM 2004, Abstract in Medical Physics 2004, Volume 31, P1719, http://imrecons.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/iterative_extro.pdf





