


Reflection lines




Reflection lines

Engineers use reflection lines to judge a surface's quality. Reflection lines reveal surface flaws, particularly discontinuities in normals indicating that the surface is not 
 
 
 
 . Reflection lines may be created and examined on physical surfaces or virtual surfaces with the help of computer graphics. For example, the shiny surface of an automobile body is illuminated with reflection lines by surrounding the car with parallel light sources. Virtually, a surface can be rendered with reflection lines by modulating the surfaces point-wise color according to a simple calculation involving the surface normal, viewing direction and a square wave environment map.
(Figure)
Reflection lines visualized on surfaces completed using a biharmonic and triharmonic equation with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  surface continuity respectively. Derivative discontinuities near the yellow-purple boundary on the left reveal normal discontinuities. Below are pseudocolor visualizations of curvature.

Mathematical Definition
Let us consider a point 
 
 
 
 
  on a surface 
 
 
 
  with (possibly non-unit length) normal 
 
 
 
 . If an observer views this point from infinity at a incoming direction 
 
 
 
  then the reflected view direction 
 
 
 
  is:



For reflection lines we consider repeated infinite, non-dispersive light sources parallel to some line 
 
 
 
  and therefore perpendicular to a plane 
 
 
 
 . Define the vector 
 
 
 
  to be the reflection direction 
 
 
 
  projected onto the plane 
 
 
 
 
 :



and similarly let 
 
 
 
  be the unit viewing direction projected onto 
 
 
 
 :



Finally, define 
 
 
 
 
  to be the direction lying in 
 
 
 
  perpendicular to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :



Then the *reflection line function* 
 
 
 
 
  is a scalar function mapping points on the surface to angles between 
 
 
 
  and the projected reflected view direction 
 
 
 
 :



where 
 
 
 
  is the atan2 function producing a number in the range 
 
 
 
 
 .
Finally, to render the reflection lines positive values 
 
 
 
  are mapped to a light color and non-positive values to a dark color.1
Highlight lines
Highlight lines are a view-independent alternative to reflection lines.2 Here the projected normal is directly compared against some arbitrary vector 
 
 
 
  perpendicular to the light source:



where 
 
 
 
  is the surface normal projected on the light source plane 
 
 
 
 
 :



The relationship between reflection lines and highlight lines is likened to that between specular and diffuse shading.
References
"
Category:Computer graphics Category:Differential geometry



Gingold et al. "Shape Optimization Using Reflection Lines"
Beier and Chen. "Highlight-line algorithm for realtime surface-quality assessment"




