   Draft:BVA-100      Draft:BVA-100     The BVA-100 is an FDA approved semi-automated Blood Volume Analyzer, providing a direct measure of intravascular blood volume 1  2  3 for use in clinical settings. Results can be available in 1.5 hours with ±2.5% accuracy, preliminary results in 30 minutes in emergency situations. Developed and designed by Daxor Corporation, Headquartered in New York City, it is currently used in hospitals, clinics and medical centers 1 along with a diagnostic kit, for the treatment of a broad range of medical conditions, such as Euvolemia.. , congestive heart failure 4 , sepsis 5 , CFS 6 , Hyponatremia 7 , Syncope 8 and more. This tool for measuring blood volume may foster improved patient care 9 as both a stand-alone and complementary diagnostic tool as there has been a statistically significant increase in patient survival 10  11  Device (BVA-100) Functionality  The machine calculates and reports the Total Blood Volume (TBV), Plasma Volume (PV) and Red Cell Volume (RCV) using the indicator dilution principle, microhematocrit centrifugation and the Ideal Height and Weight Method 12 . The indicator or tracer, I-131 albumin injection, commercially known as Volumex 13 , was developed by the Daxor Corporation to be used with the BVA-100. An equal amount of the tracer is injected into a known and unknown volume. For precision and quality, the Volumex comes as a pre-measured injectate. Clinically, the unknown volume is the patient’s blood volume, with the tracer having been injected into the patient’s blood stream and tagged to the blood plasma. Once the tracer is injected a technician can take five blood samples, requiring a single venipuncture 14 per patient, in 6 minute intervals, starting 12 minutes after injection. Each of the 5 blood samples has microhematocrit measurements taken. These five hematocrit data points are used to extrapolate the true blood volume at time 0, and a standard deviation is reported by the BVA-100 for technicians to determine the relevance of the reported information. The concentration of the I-131in the blood is determined from the blood radioactivity against the standard which has a known I-131 dilution in a known volume. The unknown volume is inversely proportional to the concentration of the indicator in the known volume; the larger the unknown volume, the lower the tracer concentration, thus the unknown volume can be calculated. The microhematocrit data along with the I-131 indicator data provide a normalized hematocrit number. It is important to note that the tests are carried out in duplicate to minimize human error. In addition to the extrapolation, the Measurements are taken 5 times in 6 minute intervals so that the BVA-100 can calculate the albumin transudation time to understand the flux of liquid through capillary membranes. The slope of the 5 data points (total blood volume (mL) on the y-axis and time (min) on the x-axis) is the rate of transudation. A slope of .005 or greater may indicate a state of heightened capillary permeability.  Surrogate Techniques  For an accurate cell mass reading of red cells and plasma, a radionuclide evaluation is necessary 15  Dual Isotope/Dual Tracer Technique  The Dual Isotope method takes up to 6 hours and requires double labeling of the blood; that is 2 injections and 2 standards (51Cr-RBC for tagging red blood cells and I-HAS for tagging plasma volume)as well as withdrawing and re-infusing patients with their own blood for blood volume analysis results.  peripheral Hematocrit  A 2012 NYU study, presented at the American Society of Nephrology concluded that pHct is a poor surrogate for RBCV and that normalized Hct (nHct) 16 . The pHct could be misleading, a surrogate to a full blood volume analysis, and is contingent on each patient’s individual condition . For example, someone who is dehydrated, thereby a lowered total blood volume, will appear to have a sufficient hematocrit number because they have a blood plasma deficiency 17 .  Crit-Line Monitor  A 2012 NYU study presented at the American Society of Nephrology 18 found good correlation between results of the Crit-Line Monitor and BVA-100.  Hemoglobin  Like the Hematocrit testing, Hemoglobin testing is a surrogate to direct blood volume testing. There are two ways used to measure hemoglobin. The first method proves to be a poor surrogate in that an insufficient volume or a lack of anticoagulation can lead to a false reading 19 . The hematocrit will give quicker and more accurate results. In the first method a tube of EDTA-anticoagulated blood is filled and the hemoglobin is converted to cyanomethoglobin. The degree of color change as measured using a colorimeter gives the results. The second hemoglobin test involves electrophoresing the hemoglobin. This test will only successfully detect those problems associated with a hemoglobin charge problem 20 . The hemoglobin is usually electrophoresed on cellulose acetate. Electrophoresing on starch gel generally requires a specialized laboratory, a time consuming process. A mild to moderate degree of thalassemia cannot be diagnosed by electrophoresis.  Bioimpedence Measurement  This method works on the premise of electric conductivity through water. In the case of blood volume analysis, water makes up more than 90% of blood plasma. Resistance to flow of electric current through the blood is measured and from there the water content can be calculated. Dehydration would increase resistance, hydration would decrease resistance.  Initial Research and Development  In 1977 Feldschuch and Enson 21 studied the relationship between Blood Volume to deviation from ideal weight and looked at 2 other traditional methods of correlation.  Method 1: This method assumes that BV relates to body weight and body surface area by a constant value. The BV to body weight constant is 72.6 ml/kg for men and 66.3 ml/kg for women. A peripheral hematocrit of 45% for men and 41% for women is assumed . BV to surface area ratio is 2566 ml/m3 for men and 2245 ml/m3 for women 22 .  Method 2: This method doesn’t assume a constant value as does method 1. Regression of data for a range of body weight and surface area are employed for a relation to blood volume.  Method 3 (Ideal Height and Weight Method): 23 Initial research in accurately determining blood volume was spearheaded by Dr. J Feldschuh and Dr. Y Enson and established a reliable reference value for each individual’s blood volume. The Ideal Height and Weight Method 24 was researched by studying 160 individuals, 80 men and 80 women, 18 to 61 years old, 138.4 to 193.0 cm tall, with a weight deviation from ideal weight 25 ranging from severely underweight (-38%) to very obese (+210%). A regression of BV(ml/kg) to body weight ratio vs Deviation from ideal weight ( in percent -38-210%) defined a hyperbolic trend.  This close correlation is utilized by the BVA-100 to determine if a patient’s blood volume is in or out of a range. A technician enters a patient’s height, weight and gender, and from there the Ideal Blood Volume can be determined. Using a patient’s ideal weight and actual weight, the percent deviation from the desirable weight is found using the following equation:      ±  %  Desirable Weight  =    Actual Weight  -  Desirable Weight   Desirable Weight   ×  100     fragments  plus-or-minus  percent  Desirable Weight       Actual Weight  Desirable Weight   Desirable Weight    100    \pm\%\text{ Desirable Weight}=\frac{\text{Actual Weight}-\text{Desirable %
 Weight}}{\text{Desirable Weight}}\times 100     Using the deviation from desirable weight, the BV ratio (ml/kg), i.e. Ideal Blood Volume, can be determined.  Results of Study: 26 Method 1 is the least accurate of the 3 methods, erring by ±1529 mL when using body weight as the reference standard and ±684 mL when surface area is used as the reference standard. Method 2 has a standard error of BV estimate significantly less than that of method 1. When using body weight as the reference standard the error is ±531mL, when surface area is the reference standard the error is ±510ml. With P-value<.005 .="" a="" additionally="" all="" allowing="" and="" as="" between="" bias="" blood="" body="" compared="" desirable="" diagnostic="" error="" estimate="" for="" free="" has="" hawaii="" hypothesized="" is="" method="" name="Number17" no="" of="" or="" other="" reference="" relationship="" smallest="" standard="" stroke="" study="" systematic="" techniques="=" that="" the="" there="" this="" to="" types.="=Correlation" university="" uses="" variation="==" volume="" weight="" when="">. The BVA-100 was used to get a direct measurement of blood volume. Stroke Volume is used as a tool in fluid management by monitoring fluid responsiveness. As was hypothesized there was no correlation (R2 value of .012) between BV and SVV, but the study does conclude that what the direct blood volume measurement determined as hypovolemia, SVV sometimes assesses as fluid non-responsiveness, potentially leading to misdiagnoses of cardiac output problems. .005  BNP Test  Studies carried out in 2007, by the Society of Critical Care Medicine, and 2010, published in the Journal of Cardiac Failure, sought to determine if there is a correlation between BNP and Blood Volume 27  28 .The studies concluded that there is little correlation between the two. Though BNP does accurately determine if the patient is experiencing myocardial distension it may not show intravascular volume status. Further, the study concluded that BV analysis can help in fluid management when intravascular volume is uncertain as in complex patients. It may also be useful to look into further research in using BV analysis and BNP test in conjunction with one another to optimize patient care 29  Pulmonary Artery Catheterization (PAC) Measurements  In 2006, Researchers from the University of Hawaii26 sought to find if there is a correlation between intravascular BV, determined by the BVA-100, and volume as related to cardiac function ( Central venous pressure , CVP, and Pulmonary Artery Occlusion Pressure , PAOP) . The data showed a statistically significant correlation between the two, but the BV analysis helped guide patient treatment leading to enhanced patient care .  References  "     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩    ↩   ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩       ↩    ↩   ↩  ↩  ↩     