


Graph amalgamation




Graph amalgamation

In graph theory, a graph amalgamation is a relationship between two graphs (one graph is an amalgamation of another). Similar relationships include subgraphs and minors. Amalgamations can provide a way to reduce a graph to a simpler graph while keeping certain structure intact. The amalgamation can then be used to study properties of the original graph in an easier to understand context. Applications include embeddings,1 computing genus distribution,2 and Hamiltonian decompositions.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two graphs with the same number of edges where 
 
 
 
  has more vertices than 
 
 
 
 . Then we say that 
 
 
 
  is an amalgamation of 
 
 
 
  if there is a bijection

 
  and a surjection

 
  and the following hold:

If 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are two vertices in 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , and both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are adjacent by edge 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are adjacent by edge 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a loop on a vertex 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a loop on 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  joins 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , but 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a loop on 
 
 
 
 .3

Note that while 
 
 
 
  can be a graph or a pseudograph, it will usually be the case that 
 
 
 
  is a pseudograph.
Properties
Edge colorings are invariant to amalgamation. This is obvious, as all of the edges between the two graphs are in bijection with each other. However, what may not be obvious, is that if 
 
 
 
  is a complete graph of the form 
 
 
 
 , and we color the edges as to specify a Hamiltonian decomposition (a decomposition into Hamiltonian paths, then those edges also form a Hamiltonian Decomposition in 
 
 
 
 .
Example
 Figure 1 illustrates an amalgamation of 
 
 
 
 . The invariance of edge coloring and Hamiltonian Decomposition can be seen clearly. The function 
 
 
 
  is a bijection and is given as letters in the figure. The function 
 
 
 
  is given in the table below.


































































Hamiltonian decompositions
One of the ways in which amalgamations can be used is to find Hamiltonian Decompositions of complete graphs with 2n + 1 vertices.4 The idea is to take a graph and produce an amalgamation of it which is edge colored in 
 
 
 
  colors and satisfies certain properties (called an outline Hamiltonian decomposition). We can then 'reverse' the amalgamation and we are left with 
 
 
 
  colored in a Hamiltonian Decomposition.
In 5 Hilton outlines a method for doing this, as well as a method for finding all Hamiltonian Decompositions without repetition. The methods rely on a theorem he provides which states (roughly) that if we have an outline Hamiltonian decomposition, we could have arrived at it by first starting with a Hamiltonian decomposition of the complete graph and then finding an amalgamation for it.
Notes

References

Bahmanian, Amin; Rodger, Chris (2012), "What Are Graph Amalgamations?", Auburn University
Hilton, A. J. W (1984), "Hamiltonian Decompositions of Complete Graphs, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 36, 125–134
Gross, Jonathan L.; Tucker, Thomas W. (1987), Topological Graph Theory, Courier Dover Publications, 151
Gross, Jonathan L. (2011), "Genus Distributions of Cubic Outerplanar Graphs", Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, Vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 295–316

"
Category:Graph theory



Gross, Tucker 1987
Gross 2011
Hilton 1984
Bahmanian, Amin; Rodger, Chris 2012





