


Plethystic substitution




Plethystic substitution

Plethystic substitution is a shorthand notation for a common kind of substitution in the algebra of symmetric functions and that of symmetric polynomials. It is essentially basic substitution of variables, but allows for a change in the number of variables used.
Definition
The formal definition of plethystic substitution relies on the fact that the ring of symmetric functions 
 
 
 
  is generated as an R-algebra by the power sum symmetric functions



For any symmetric function 
 
 
 
  and any formal sum of monomials 
 
 
 
 , the plethystic substitution f[A] is the formal series obtained by making the substitutions



in the decomposition of 
 
 
 
  as a polynomial in the pk's.
Examples
If 
 
 
 
  denotes the formal sum 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .
One can write 
 
 
 
  to denote the formal sum 
 
 
 
 , and so the plethystic substitution 
 
 
 
  is simply the result of setting 
 
 
 
  for each i. That is,


 
 .
Plethystic substitution can also be used to change the number of variables: if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding symmetric function in the ring 
 
 
 
  of symmetric functions in n variables.
Several other common substitutions are listed below. In all of the following examples, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are formal sums.

If 
 
 
 
  is a homogeneous symmetric function of degree 
 
 
 
 , then





If 
 
 
 
  is a homogeneous symmetric function of degree 
 
 
 
 , then



 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the well-known involution on symmetric functions that sends a Schur function

 
  to the conjugate Schur function 
 
 
 
 .

The substitution 
 
 
 
  is the antipode for the Hopf algebra structure on the Ring of symmetric functions.



The map 
 
 
 
  is the coproduct for the Hopf algebra structure on the ring of symmetric functions.


 
  is the alternating Frobenius series for the exterior algebra of the defining representation of the symmetric group, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the complete homogeneous symmetric function of degree 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the Frobenius series for the symmetric algebra of the defining representation of the symmetric group.

External links

Combinatorics, Symmetric Functions, and Hilbert Schemes (Haiman, 2002)

References

M. Haiman, Combinatorics, Symmetric Functions, and Hilbert Schemes, Current Developments in Mathematics 2002, no. 1 (2002), pp. 39–111.

"
Category:Combinatorics Category:Symmetric functions


