


Polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution




Polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution

In signal processing, the polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution is a quasiprobability distribution that generalizes the Wigner distribution function. It was proposed by Boualem Boashash and Peter O'Shea in 1994.
Introduction
Many signals in nature and in engineering applications can be modeled as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial phase and 
 
 
 
 .
For example, it is important to detect signals of an arbitrary high-order polynomial phase. However, the conventional Wigner–Ville distribution have the limitation being based on the second-order statistics. Hence, the polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution was proposed as a generalized form of the conventional Wigner–Ville distribution, which is able to deal signals with nonlinear phase.
Definition
The polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution 
 
 
 
 
  is defined as



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Fourier transform with respect to 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the polynomial kernel given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the input signal and 
 
 
 
  is an even number. The above expression for the kernel may be rewritten in symmetric form as



The discrete-time version of the polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution is given by the discrete Fourier transform of



where 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the sampling frequency. The conventional Wigner–Ville distribution is a special case of the polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution with 
 
 

Example
One of the simplest generalizations of the usual Wigner–Ville distribution kernel can be achieved by taking 
 
 
 
 . The set of coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  must be found to completely specify the new kernel. For example, we set






The resulting discrete-time kernel is then given by



Applications
Nonlinear FM signals are common both in nature and in engineering applications. For example, the sonar system of some bats use hyperbolic FM and quadratic FM signals for echo location. In radar, certain pulse-compression schemes employ linear FM and quadratic signals. The Wigner–Ville distribution has optimal concentration in the time-frequency plane for linear frequency modulated signals. However, for nonlinear frequency modulated signals, optimal concentration is not obtained, and smeared spectral representations result. The polynomial Wigner–Ville distribution can be designed to cope with such problem.
References
1. B. Boashash and P. O’Shea, “Polynomial Wigner–Ville distributions and their relationship to time varying high order spectra,”IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 42, pp. 216–220, Jan. 1994.
 2. M. Benidir and B. Boashash, “On the polynomial Wigner–Ville dis-tribution,” in Proc. SPIE, June 1995, San Diego, CA, vol. 2563, pp. 69–79.
 3. “Polynomial Wigner–Ville distributions and time-varying higher spectra,” in Proc. Time-Freq. Time-Scale Anal., Victoria, B.C., Canada, Oct. 1992, pp. 31–34.
"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Continuous distributions Category:Concepts in physics Category:Mathematical physics Category:Exotic probabilities Category:Polynomials


