


Harmonic morphism




Harmonic morphism

In mathematics, a harmonic morphism is a (smooth) map 
 
 
 
  between Riemannian manifolds that pull back real-valued harmonic functions on the codomain to harmonic functions on the domain. Harmonic morphisms form a special class of harmonic maps—i.e., those that are horizontally (weakly) conformal.1
In local coordinates, 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , the harmonicity of 
 
 
 
  is expressed by the non-linear system



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are the Christoffel symbols on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. The horizontal conformality is given by



where the conformal factor 
 
 
 
  is a continuous function called the dilation. Harmonic morphisms are therefore solutions to non-linear over-determined systems of partial differential equations, determined by the geometric data of the manifolds involved. For this reason, they are difficult to find and have no general existence theory, not even locally.
Complex Analysis
When the codomain of 
 
 
 
 
  is a surface, the system of partial differential equations that we are dealing with, is invariant under conformal changes of the metric 
 
 
 
 . This means that, at least for local studies, the codomain can be chosen to be the complex plane with its standard flat metric. In this situation a complex-valued function

 
  is a harmonic morphisms if and only if



and



This means that we look for two real-valued harmonic functions

 
 
  with gradients

 
  that are orthogonal and of the same norm at each point. This shows that complex-valued harmonic morphisms 
 
 
 
  from Riemannian manifolds generalize holomorphic functions

 
  from Kähler manifolds and possess many of their highly interesting properties. The theory of harmonic morphisms can therefore be seen as a generalization of complex analysis.2
Minimal Surfaces
In differential geometry, one is interested in constructing minimal submanifolds of a given ambient space 
 
 
 
 . Harmonic morphisms are useful tools for this purpose. This is due to the fact that every regular fibre 
 
 
 
 
  of such a map 
 
 
 
  ,with values in a surface, is a minimal submanifold, of the domain, of codimension 2.3 This gives an attractive method for manifacturing whole families of minimal surfaces in 4-dimensional manifolds

 
 , in particular, homogeneous spaces, such as Lie groups and symmetric spaces.
Examples

Identity and constant maps are harmonic morphisms.
Holomorphic functions in the complex plane are harmonic morphisms.
Holomorphic functions in the complex vector space

 
  are harmonic morphisms.
Holomorphic maps from Kähler manifolds with values in a Riemann surface are harmonic morphisms.
The Hopf maps

 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are harmonic morphisms.
For compact Lie groups

 
  the standard Riemannian fibration

 
  is a harmonic morphism.
Riemannian submersions with minimal fibres are harmonic morphisms.

References
External links

The Bibliography of Harmonic Morphisms, offered by Sigmundur Gudmundsson

"
Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Harmonic functions Category:Analytic functions










