


Steiner conic




Steiner conic

   The Steiner conic or more precisely Steiner's generation of a conic, named after the Swiss mathematician Jakob Steiner, is an alternative method to define a non-degenerate projective conic section in a projective plane over a field.
The usual definition of a conic uses a quadratic form (see Quadric (projective geometry)). Another alternative definition of a conic uses a hyperbolic polarity. It is due to K. G. C. von Staudt and sometimes called a von Staudt conic. The disadvantage of von Staudt's definition is that it only works when the underlying field has odd characteristic (i.e., 
 
 
 
 ).
Definition of a Steiner conic

Given two pencils 
 
 
 
  of lines at two points 
 
 
 
  (all lines containing 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  resp.) and a projective but not perspective mapping 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
 . Then the intersection points of corresponding lines form a non-degenerate projective conic section123 4 (figure 1)

A perspective mapping 
 
 
 
 
  of a pencil 
 
 
 
  onto a pencil 
 
 
 
  is a bijection (1-1 correspondence) such that corresponding lines intersect on a fixed line 
 
 
 
 , which is called the axis of the perspectivity 
 
 
 
  (figure 2).
A projective mapping is a finite sequence of perspective mappings.
Examples of commonly used fields are the real numbers 
 
 
 
 
 , the rational numbers 
 
 
 
  or the complex numbers 
 
 
 
 . The construction also works over finite fields, providing examples in finite projective planes.
Remark: The fundamental theorem for projective planes states,5 that a projective mapping in a projective plane over a field (pappian plane) is uniquely determined by prescribing the images of three lines. That means that, for the Steiner generation of a conic section, besides two points 
 
 
 
  only the images of 3 lines have to be given. These 5 items (2 points, 3 lines) uniquely determine the conic section.
Remark: The notation "perspective" is due to the dual statement: The projection of the points on a line 
 
 
 
  from a center 
 
 
 
 
  onto a line 
 
 
 
  is called a perspectivity (see below).6
Example
For the following example the images of the lines 
 
 
 
  (see picture) are given
 
 
 
 . The projective mapping 
 
 
 
  is the product of the following perspective mappings 
 
 
 
 
 : 1) 
 
 
 
  is the perspective mapping of the pencil at point 
 
 
 
  onto the pencil at point 
 
 
 
  with axis 
 
 
 
 . 2) 
 
 
 
 
  is the perspective mapping of the pencil at point 
 
 
 
  onto the pencil at point 
 
 
 
  with axis 
 
 
 
 . First one should check that 
 
 
 
  has the properties
 
 
 
 . Hence for any line 
 
 
 
  the image 
 
 
 
  can be constructed and therefore the images of an arbitrary set of points. The lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  contain only the conic points 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  resp.. Hence 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are tangent lines of the generated conic section.
A proof that this method generates a conic section follows from switching to the affine restriction with line 
 
 
 
  as the line at infinity, point 
 
 
 
 
  as the origin of a coordinate system with points 
 
 
 
  as points at infinity of the x- and y-axis resp. and point 
 
 
 
 . The affine part of the generated curve appears to be the hyperbola

 
 .7
Remark:

The Steiner generation of a conic section provides simple methods for the construction of ellipses, parabolas and hyperbolas which are commonly called the parallelogram methods.
The figure that appears while constructing a point (figure 3) is the 4-point-degeneration of Pascal's theorem.8

Steiner generation of a dual conic
 
Definitions and the dual generation
Dualizing (see duality (projective geometry)) a projective plane means exchanging the points with the lines and the operations intersection and connecting. The dual structure of a projective plane is also a projective plane. The dual plane of a pappian plane is pappian and can also be coordinatized by homogenous coordinates. A nondegenerate dual conic section is analogously defined by a quadratic form.
A dual conic can be generated by Steiner's dual method:

Given the point sets of two lines 
 
 
 
  and a projective but not perspective mapping 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
 . Then the lines connecting corresponding points form a dual non-degenerate projective conic section.

A perspective mapping

 
  of the point set of a line 
 
 
 
  onto the point set of a line 
 
 
 
 
  is a bijection (1-1 correspondence) such that the connecting lines of corresponding points intersect at a fixed point 
 
 
 
 , which is called the centre of the perspectivity 
 
 
 
  (see figure).
A ''projective '' mapping is a finite sequence of perspective mappings.
It is usual, when dealing with dual and common conic sections, to call the common conic section a point conic and the dual conic a line conic.
In the case that the underlying field has 
 
 
 
  all the tangents of a point conic intersect in a point, called the knot (or nucleus) of the conic. Thus, the dual of a non-degenerate point conic is a subset of points of a dual line and not an oval curve (in the dual plane). So, only in the case that 
 
 
 
  is the dual of a non-degenerate point conic a non-degenerate line conic.
Example
For the following example the images of the points 
 
 
 
 
  are given
 
 
 
 . The projective mapping 
 
 
 
  can be represented by the product of the following perspectivities 
 
 
 
 :

1) 
 
 
 
  is the perspectivity of the point set of line 
 
 
 
 
  onto the point set of line 
 
 
 
  with centre 
 
 
 
 .
 
2) 
 
 
 
  is the perspectivity of the point set of line 
 
 
 
  onto the point set of line 
 
 
 
 
  with centre 
 
 
 
 .
 

One easily checks that the projective mapping 
 
 
 
  fulfills 
 
 
 
 . Hence for any arbitrary point 
 
 
 
  the image 
 
 
 
 
  can be constructed and line 
 
 
 
  is an element of a non degenerate dual conic section. Because the points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are contained in the lines 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  resp.,the points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are points of the conic and the lines 
 
 
 
  are tangents at 
 
 
 
 .
Notes
References



(PDF; 891 kB).


"
Category:Conic sections Category:Theorems in projective geometry



, p. 80


Jacob Steiner’s Vorlesungen über synthetische Geometrie, B. G. Teubner, Leipzig 1867 (from Google Books: (German) Part II follows Part I) Part II, pg. 96








