


Draft:Chow group




Draft:Chow group

The article mainly concerns a Chow group when it is not a Chow ring; for example, it discusses the relation to homology (Borel−Moore homology to be precise) instead of cohomology.
If X is a smooth algebraic variety of dimension d, then one sets


 
 . The intersection product makes 
 
 
 
  a graded ring called the Chow ring of X.
Definition
Let X be an algebraic scheme, by which we mean a separated scheme of finite type over a field. Let 
 
 
 
  be the free abelian group generated by symbols [V] with closed subvarieties V of dimension k; an element of the group is called a k-cycle on X. If W is a (k+1)-dimensional subvariety of X, then each nonzero rational function f on W determines the k-cycle:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the order-of-vanishing function, just as in the definition of the principal Weil divisor. Next let 
 
 
 
  be the subgroup generated by such cycles (with arbitary W); thus explicitly, if x is in 
 
 
 
 , then it can be written as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are nonzero rational functions on a (k+1)-dimensional subvariety  One then puts:


 
  it is the k-th Chow group of X. Two k-cycles x, y on X are said to be rationally equivalent if they belong to the same class in 
 
 
 
  and in such a case one writes 
 
 
 
 .
Example: If X has pure dimension k, then it determines the k-cycle


 
  where V runs over all irreducible components of X.1 It is called the fundamental class of X.
If 
 
 
 
  is a proper morphism between algebraic schemes, then define


 
  by linearity and the requirement


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is zero if the image 
 
 
 
  has dimension smaller than that of V and is otherwise the degree of the finite field extension of the function field of V over the function field of f(V) (the degree of a finite morphism). It turns out that the map respects a rational equivalence
 
 
2 and consequently it induces:


 
  The upshot is that "
 
 
 
  is a covariant functor from the category of algebraic schemes to the category of abelian groups."
Relation to Grothendieck groups of coherent sheaves
Let G(X) denote the Grothendieck group of coherent sheaves on an algebraic scheme X. It has a filtration 
 
 
 
 . With respect to this filtration one can form the associated graded group 
 
 
 
  and then there is a natural transformation of (covariant) functors


 
  which becomes an isomorphism after tensored with ℚ.3 The fact suggests that one might develop the intersection theory with 
 
 
 
  in place of V; this is the starting point for Draft:Kleiman's intersection theory.
Basic properties
Let X be an algebraic scheme. ). |For any closed subscheme Z of X, there is the exact sequence:


 
  which extends further to the left by means of "#higher Chow group". |Let 
 
 
 
  be a closed immersion and 
 
 
 
  be a proper morphism such that 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism. Then there is the exact sequence:


 
  (as a special case, this gives the Mayer–Vietoris sequence.) |If 
 
 
 
  is a vector bundle of rank r, then for all k


 
  is an isomorphism. |
 
 
 
  is independent of t.}} The last property is an instance of the "principle of continuity":
Intersecting with Cartier divisors
Let X be an algebraic scheme. Then each Cartier divisor D on X and a k-dimensional closed subvariety V of X determines the class (the Weil divisor class)


 
  in 
 
 
 
  as follows:

If 
 
 
 
 , then it is the Weil divisor class associated to the restriction of D to V (the Cartier divisor obtained by restricting the defining local equations to V.)
If 
 
 
 
 , then it is the Weil divisor class of a Cartier divisor C on V such that 
 
 
 
 .

By linearity, for any closed subscheme Y of X, the operation extends to the group homomorphism


 
  The image of a cycle x is denoted by 
 
 
 
  and is called the intersection class of D and x. One can show that 
 
 
 
 ; that is, the map induces 
 
 
 
 . As a special case, if D is an effective Cartier divisor on X (i.e., a closed subscheme of X), then there is:


 
  which is called the Gysin homomorphism. One can show the associativity 
 
 
 
  and thus the degree of 
 
 
 
  is an unambiguously determined integer called the intersection number, written as


 
  If x is the fundamental class of X, then x is often dropped from the expression.
Cycle map
If X is (of finite type) over the field of complex numbers, there is a homomorphism


 
 .
The Chow group of a normal cone
Let 
 
 
 
  be a closed immersion and C the associated normal cone
 
 
 
 , which is the normal bundle to X if i is a regular embedding.
The Chow group of a toric variety
The bottom line: the smooth case is easy, the singular case is more difficult.
Relation to higher K-theory
The next theorem was introduced by Bloch, who also verified some cases.
For example, 
 
 
 
 ,the last one being the divisor class group. (In particular, one expects some smoothness assumption is necessary for the truth of the theorem.)
The theorem suggests that one defines the Chow group of a singular variety X using the K-theory sheaf 
 
 
 
 . (In fact, this is exactly what Gillet did.)
The theorem was proved Quillen; in fact, he proved Gersten's conjeture which says
Bloch's higher Chow groups
Introduced in 
B. Totaro, "Chow groups, Chow cohomology, and linear varieties"
Notes
References

S. Bloch, "Algebraic cycles and higher K-theory," Adv. in Math. 61 No. 3 (1986) 267–304.
D. Eisenbud, J. Harris, 3264 & all that

http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0107/

Further reading



"



If X is affine with coordinate ring A, then the local ring at V is the localization of A at the prime ideal of height zero defining V, which is an Artinian A-module and thus of finite length. The general case reduced to the affine case.↩
↩
↩




