


Bernstein–Kushnirenko theorem




Bernstein–Kushnirenko theorem

Bernstein–Kushnirenko theorem (also known as BKK theorem or Bernstein–Khovanskii–Kushnirenko theorem 1), proven by David Bernstein 2 and Anatoli Kushnirenko 3 in 1975, is a theorem in algebra. It claims that the number of non-zero complex solutions of a system of Laurent polynomial equations f1 = 0, ..., fn = 0 is equal to the mixed volume of the Newton polytopes of f1, ..., fn, assuming that all non-zero coefficients of fn are generic. More precise statement is as follows:
Theorem statement
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite subset of 
 
 
 
 . Consider the subspace 
 
 
 
  of the Laurent polynomial algebra 
 
 
 
  consisting of Laurent polynomials whose exponents are in 
 
 
 
 . That is:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and for each 
 
 
 
  we have used the shorthand notation 
 
 
 
  to write the monomial 
 
 
 
 .
Now take 
 
 
 
  finite subsets 
 
 
 
  with the corresponding subspaces of Laurent polynomials 
 
 
 
 . Consider a generic system of equations from these subspaces, that is:



where each 
 
 
 
  is a generic element in the (finite dimensional vector space) 
 
 
 
 .
The Bernstein–Kushnirenko theorem states that the number of solutions 
 
 
 
  of such a system is equal to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Minkowski mixed volume and for each 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the convex hull of the finite set of points 
 
 
 
 . Clearly 
 
 
 
  is a convex lattice polytope. It can be interpreted as the Newton polytope of a generic element of generic element of the subspace 
 
 
 
 .
In particular, if all the sets 
 
 
 
  are the same 
 
 
 
 , then the number of solutions of a generic system of Laurent polynomials from 
 
 
 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the convex hull of 
 
 
 
  and vol is the usual 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean volume. Note that even though the volume of a lattice polytope is not necessarily an integer but it is an integer after multiplying by 
 
 
 
 .
Trivia
Kushnirenko's name is also spelt Kouchnirenko. David Bernstein is a brother of Joseph Bernstein. Askold Khovanskii has found about 15 different proofs of this theorem. 4
References
"
Category:Theorems in algebra Category:Theorems in geometry



*David A. Cox; J. Little; D. O'Shea Using algebraic geometry. Second edition. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 185. Springer, 2005. xii+572 pp. ISBN 0-387-20706-6↩
D. N. Bernstein, "The number of roots of a system of equations", Funct. Anal. Appl. 9 (1975), 183–185↩
A. G. Kouchnirenko, "Polyhedres de Newton et nombres de Milnor", Invent. Math. 32 (1976), 1–31↩
Moscow Mathematical Journal volume in honor of Askold Khovanskii (Mosc. Math. J., 7:2 (2007), 169–171)↩




