


G. Kogelen Govindasamy




G. Kogelen Govindasamy

G. Kogelen Govindasamy (born 6 May 1964) is a Malaysian DNA repair, anti-aging and organ rejuvenation scientist with Aaride J.A. International Inc, based in Etoile, Paris, France. He is best known for his works in enhancing natural DNA repair methods in attaining anti-aging affects in Aaride J.A. International Inc, where he holds the position of Chief DNA Repair Scientist. Dr. Kogelen is also the very first Asian to have been appointed as the Deputy Chairman of the AIHP Disease Prevention Programme Worldwide.12
Biography
Early life
 G. Kogelen was born on 6 May 1964 to Govindasamy Perumal and Parvathy Munusamy in Sungai Petani, Kedah in northern Peninsular Malaysia.3 His father was a plant tissue culture scientist, and was born in Trichy, Tamil Nadu in South India, whereas Madam Parvathy was a homemaker.4 G. Kogelen has three siblings, and he is the second son in his family. At a young age, he showed interest in science. G. Kogelen spent much of his childhood in his father's latex rubber plantation, where he was exposed to the then contemporary cellular tissue culture methods.5
Education
G. Kogelen spent a significant portion of his youth in Malacca, where he completed his primary, secondary and post-secondary education. G. Kogelen completed his primary education in Bukit Baru Primary English School, pursued his secondary education in St. David's High School, and finally achieved his STPM in Gajah Berang English School and the prestigious Malacca High School.6
In 1981, G. Kogelen was offered membership of International Mensa by British Mensa, which is based in Wolverhampton, England.78 He was certified to have an IQ of 180 based on the Cattell scale, which was higher than the IQ of 99% of the then human population.9 The British Mensa was headed by Victor Serebriakoff and Harold Gale in 1981.
G. Kogelen was awarded a Tun Tan Cheng Lock Scholarship in 1984 and a Citibank North America Merit Scholarship in 1985. When G. Kogelen turned 21 years of age in 1985, he wished to continue his tertiary education by specialising in mirror isomers in chemical molecular structures, but he decided to proceed with DNA repair studies instead.10 G. Kogelen pursued his Bachelors in Science (BSc.) at Universiti Putra Malaysia between 1984 and 1988, where he conducted a scientific study on the efficiency of surface pre-treatments on the gluability of Dryobalanops Aromatica plywood.1112 Upon his graduation, G. Kogelen furthered his post-graduate studies in the United Kingdom. He pursued a Masters in Medical Science (MMSc.) between 1989 and 1991, where he conducted a study on the effects of Eurycomma longifolia hot water extracts oral consumption to blood testosterone levels in human beings, blood erythrocyte sedimentation rates, blood glucose levels and other physical parameters including body weight changes.13 G. Kogelen also pursued a Doctorate in Philosophy (DPhil.) between 1997 and 2000 at Johns Alwyn Gifted University, an exclusive university for high IQ individuals evolved from U.K. Biomedical Research Centre specializing in various medical professions to further their human safety research projects and post-graduate programs.14 He focused his research into the changes to plasma containing a HIV viral load of 210,000 in plasma exposed to surfaces coated with Phytoserum Anti-Aging and Anti-Wrinkle compound incorporated into the Aaride AGT-1 Dermatological Coating Agent by way of Polymerase Chain Reaction confirmation which is a repetitive process including denaturation of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), annealing of primers and extension of bound primers.15 He also pursued the History of Medicine and Using Mathematics to Cure Disease Continued Educations (Conted) in the University of Oxford.16
In 1989, G. Kogelen invented a mathematical formula to quantify the surface area over volume ratio for any bio-degradable, naturally occurring substances or structural materials which are industrially manufactured with a wide variety of applications.17 The formula is as follows;
Career
 G. Kogelen joined Aaride J.A. International Inc, a multinational corporation specialising in Plant Based Peptides and Regenerative Healthcare in September 1990.1819 He has since furthered his career with the company and currently holds the position of Chief DNA Repair Scientist.
In 1995, G. Kogelen was appointed as the advisor of a non-profit research organisation called the European Aerospace Research Centre in London where he was tasked with the design of an anti-explosive aircraft fuel tank.20 Later in 1997, he was appointed as the Vice-President of the UK Biomedical Research Centre, where he contributed his knowledge on the importance of cyclic peptides in the human DNA and the mitigation of DNA damage.21
Currently, G. Kogelen is actively conducting his own research under the AIHP Disease Prevention Programme Worldwide, a programme which is largely focused on the prevention of HIV and AIDS in Africa. G. Kogelen assumed the role of Deputy Chairman of the AIHP Disease Prevention Programme Worldwide in 2011, where he became the very first Asian to claim that position. The AIHP programme is a non-profit organisation sponsored by Aaride J.A. International Inc, a company in which G. Kogelen has been holding the position of Chief DNA Repair Scientist since 1997.222324 The programme also aims to raise awareness on other diseases such as Hepatitis C, MRSA and the various STDs.25 G. Kogelen has personally donated and funded the supply of AGT-1 disease prevention products as part of the AIHP programme to several countries in Africa, most notably Namibia.26 Additionally, G. Kogelen has also launched and funded an effort which aims to curb the spread and impact of HIV and AIDS in south India, including the sponsorship of education and living costs for children whose parents have been affected by the pandemic.
As of late 2013, G. Kogelen has plans to open a regional, ASEAN clinical centre in the field of DNA repair, anti-aging, early detection and disease prevention with a strong emphasis on evidence-based molecular medicine.2728 G. Kogelen has also been featured in the 2013 issue of the Top 10 of Malaysia magazine.2930
References
External links



"
Category:1964 births Category:Malaysian scientists Category:Living people





































