


Local pixel grouping




Local pixel grouping

In image Noise reduction, local pixel grouping is the algorithm to remove noise from images using principal component analysis (PCA).
Image denoising
Sensors such as CCD, CMOS or ultrasonic probe may encapsulate noise signal. Noise reduction is commonly used to improve quality of the image. However, techniques such as smoothing filters and many other algorithms may lose local structure of image while denoising the image.1 More over, efficiency is also taken into consideration.
Principal component analysis
PCA was invented in 1901 by Karl Pearson,2 to transform original dataset into linearly uncorrelated PCA domain. PCA works in the way that principal components with larger possible variance are preserved while discarding low variance components.
Image denoising by principal component analysis with local pixel grouping(LPG-PCA) was developed by Lei et. in 2010.3 It is based on the assumption that the energy of a signal will concentrate on a small subset of the PCA transformed dataset, while the energy of noise will evenly spread over the whole dataset. Assume original image is denoted by 
 
 
 
  and noise is denoted by 
 
 
 
 , then the measured image will be 
 
 
 
 . In order to denoising 
 
 
 
 , first a train dataset 
 
 
 
  must be constructed using local pixel group. Using this 
 
 
 
  and apply PCA the noise in the image can be reduced.
Construct local pixel group
For each pixel 
 
 
 
  in the image, select a 
 
 
 
  window centered at 
 
 
 
  denoted by


 
  and a training window centered at 
 
 
 
 . The training window is 
 
 
 
 . Take the pixels in each possible 
 
 
 
  block within the 
 
 
 
  training block yields 
 
 
 
  samples 
 
 
 
 . If the distance between a sample and the center window 
 
 
 
  is smaller than some threshold, then accept the sample. So the train dataset 
 
 
 
  is acquired by put all the accepted sample together as column vectors into a matrix.
Denoising using local pixel group
First step of this part is centralize 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is obtained. By computing the covariance matrix of 
 
 
 
  denoted by 
 
 
 
 , the PCA transformation matrix 
 
 
 
  can be obtained. Apply 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  The covariance matrix of 
 
 
 
  can also be calculated by


 
  Shrink the coefficient of 
 
 
 
  by





 
  and transform back to 
 
 
 
 , the noise in that pixel is reduced. Apply this to all the pixels in the image and the denoised image can be obtained. Experiments by Lei show that LGP-PCA can effectively preserve the image fine structures while smoothing noise. The solution is competitive compared with other algorithms such as Block-matching algorithm.
References
External links

Lei's homepage and matlab code of LPG-PCA

"
Category:2010 introductions Category:Image noise reduction techniques










