


Draft:Finite field




Draft:Finite field

== Classification == This section gives proofs of some of the basic facts but it will assume a familiarity with ring theory.
Let F be a finite field. For any element x in F and any integer n, let us denote by n⋅x the sum of n copies of x. There is an integer n such that n⋅1; otherwise, the subset 
 
 
 
  is infinite. Since n is a product of prime numbers and F is an integral domain (there is no zero divisor), this n must be a prime number p; called the characteristic of the field F.
The identity





is true (for every 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) in a field of characteristic 
 
 
 
 . (This follows from the fact that all, except the first and the last, binomial coefficients of the expansion of 
 
 
 
  are multiples of 
 
 
 
 ).
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of all roots of the polynomials 
 
 
 
  in F. Then one can see 
 
 
 
  is a subfield of F of order 
 
 
 
 . (Proof: it contains 0, 1, -1 and is closed under multiplication. It is closed under addition since 
 
 
 
 . Finally, 
 
 
 
  and its derivative are relatively prime; i.e., the roots are distinct.)
In particular, 
 
 
 
  is the smallest subfield that F contains. The ring homomorphism 
 
 
 
  induces the isomorphism (first isomorphism theorem)


 
 .
F is a vector space over 
 
 
 
  of dimension n. It follows that F has order q = pn (and so 
 
 
 
 .)
To get all finite fields of the characteristic p in a systematic way, we can repeat the above argument with an algebraically field 
 
 
 
  of characteristic p (which exists; take for example the algebraic closure of the field 
 
 
 
 .) Then 
 
 
 
  are all subfields of 
 
 
 
  and, conversely, 
 
 
 
  is the union of 
 
 
 
  for all n.
Galois group of finite fields
The Galois theory provides a systematic way of classifying and constructing finite fields.
Let F be a finite field. One can show F is a finite Galois extension (normal and separable) over 
 
 
 
 , for example, from the explicit construction as above. Let G be the Galois group 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., it consists of all automorphisms from F to F that is the identity when restricted to 

. Then one can show G is generated by the Frobenius endomorphism 
 
 
 
 , again for example from the previous explicit construction. In other words, there is a "canonical" group isomorphism:


 
  when pn is the order of F.
Now the fundamental theorem of Galois theory says: there is an order-reversing bijection:


 
  from the subfields K of F to the subgroups of G.
Let the order of F be . It follows: For each integer m dividing n, there is exactly one"


