


Draft:Signed particle formulation of quantum mechanics




Draft:Signed particle formulation of quantum mechanics


The signed particle formulation of quantum mechanics is a relatively recent theory which was suggested by Jean Michel Sellier and which describes quantum mechanical systems by means of field-less classical particles provided with a sign:1. The way they interact with an external potential is only in terms of creation of signed particles which can, eventually, annihilate. This formulation has proved to be very intuitive, simple to implement and computationally convenient. Although it is practically a phase-space formulation of quantum mechanics, it provides exactly the same predictions of any other formulation of quantum mechanics (it is, indeed, equivalent to the Wigner formulation which is, in turn, equivalent to the Schrödinger formulation).
The signed particle formulation allows time-dependent simulations of both single- and many-body quantum problems using first principle Physics 2, 3. It has also been applied to technology relevant situations such as solotronic devices 4, single-dopant devices 5, CMOS transistors 6, quantum computing candidate devices 7, and quantum chemistry 8.
An implementation is available (under GPL) at Nano-Archimedes 9.
The Formulation
The Signed Particle Formulation (or Sellier Formulation) consists of three main postulates, which can be described as follows:
Postulate I
Physical systems can be described by means of (virtual) Newtonian particles, i.e. provided with a position x and a momentum p simultaneously, which carry a sign which can be positive or negative.
Postulate II
A signed particle, evolving in a potential 
 
 
 
 , behaves as a field-less classical point-particle which, during the time interval 
 
 
 
 , creates a new pair of signed particles with a probability 
 
 
 
  where


 
  ≡ 
 
 

and 
 
 
 
  is the positive part of the quantity



known as the Wigner kernel (in a d-dimensional space). If, at the moment of creation, the parent particle has sign s, position x and momentum p, the new particles are both located in x, have signs +s and -s, and momenta 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively, with p' chosen randomly according to the (normalized) probability 
 
 

Postulate III
Two particles with opposite sign and same phase-space coordinates (x, p) annihilate.
Physical Picture
The picture offered by the signed particle formulation is rather peculiar and very different than any other mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. Quantum systems are now described by means of ensembles of classical field-less particles which carry a sign and interact with an external potential by means of creation and (eventually) annihilation events only. When a pair of particles is created, one is in an experimentally reachable state (positive sign), and the other is in a non-reachable state (negative sign, see below). This allows the inclusion of quite complex effects in a natural way (dissipative/inelastic effects, general boundary conditions, energy bands, etc.).
Sign of a Particle
When an experiment is prepared in specific initial conditions and repeated a large amount of times, it provides two projections of its quasi-distribution function, one on the spatial coordinate axis and one on the momentum axis. By applying the inverse Radon transformation one can reconstruct a higher dimensional function which is the Wigner function of the system (including both positive and negative values). It is interesting to notice that this creates a grid in the phase-space given by the two experimental grids on the space and momentum axis. When the dimensions of the cell 
 
 
 
  of the higher dimensional grid are bigger than 
 
 
 
  the Wigner function shows positive values only. When, instead, the dimensions are smaller than 
 
 
 
  then negative peaks appear. Therefore, a possible interpretation is that particles with a negative sign represent particle in a state which is experimentally unreachable10
Classical Limit
The transition from quantum to classical systems is natural in the signed particle formulation. As a matter of fact, it is possible to show (mathematically) that in the limit for 
 
 
 
 →0 one recovers the following important points11

The only allowed sign for a particle is positive
Particles are not field-less anymore but they obey to Newton's second law
Creation of particles is prohibited in the classical limit

Momentum integral
It is interesting to notice that the integral reported in Postulate II is not a Riemann integral:


 
  ≡ 
 
 

The author of the formulation suggest to call a momentum integral in analogy to the path integral. In fact, in the spirit, they are very similar integrals: the first one is exploring the space of momenta while the second one is exploring the space of paths. It is still not clear under which conditions the series which defines the momentum integral converges.
References
External links

Nanoarchimedes
A new formulation of quantum mechanics

:Category:Concepts in physics :Category:Quantum mechanics :Category:Quantum field theory
Signed Particle Formulation
"


















