


Draft:Self-healing Materials




Draft:Self-healing Materials

Self-healing Materials are a class of smart materials that have the structurally incorporated ability to repair damage caused by mechanical usage over time. The inspiration comes from biological systems, which have the ability to heal after being wounded. Cracks and other types of damage on a microscopic level have been shown to alter the thermal, electrical, and acoustical properties of a material, and eventually their propagation leads to whole scale failure of the material. In general, cracks are hard to detect at an early stage, and repair is performed by manual intervention. A material that can intrinsically correct damage caused by normal usage could lower costs of a number of different industrial processes through longer part lifetime, reduction of inefficiency over time caused by degradation, as well as prevent costs incurred by material failure. For a material to be strictly defined as autonomous self-healing, it is necessary that the healing process occurs without human intervention. Some examples shown below, however, include healing materials that require an external intervention (light, humidity, temperature...) to initiate the healing process. Self-healing materials can be dated back to Roman times when some mortars were already self-healing, however, their development took place mostly since around the end of the 1990's. Although most cases are found with polymers or elastomers, self-healing cover all classes of materials, including metals, ceramics, cementitious materials, and the healing mechanisms vary from an instrinsic repair of the material to the addition of a repair agent contained in a microscopic vessel.
Self-Healing Polymers & Elastomers
In the last century, polymers became a base material in everyday life for products like plastics, rubbers, films, fibres or paints. This huge demand has forced to extend their reliability and maximum lifetime, and a new design class of polymeric materials that are able to restore their functionality after damage or fatigue was envisaged. These polymer materials can be divided into two different groups based on the approach to the self-healing mechanism: intrinsic or extrinsic.1.
Intrinsic Systems
In intrinsic systems, the material is inherently able to restore its integrity. While extrinsic approaches are generally autonomous, intrinsic systems often require an external trigger for the healing to take place (such as thermo-mechanical, electrical, photo-stimuli, etc.). It is possible to distinguish among 5 main intrinsic self-healing strategies. The first one is based on reversible reactions, and the most widely used reaction scheme is based on Diels-Alder (DA) and retro-Diels-Alder (rDA) reactions2. Another strategy achieves the self-healing in thermoset matrices by incorporating meltable thermoplastic additives. A temperature trigger allows the redispertion of thermoplastic additives into cracks, giving rise to mechanical interlocking3. Polymer interlockings based on dynamic supramolecular bonds or ionomers represent a third and fourth scheme. The involved supramolecular interactions and ionomeric clusters are generally reversible and act as reversible cross-links, thus can equip polymers with self-healing ability45. Finally, an alternative method for achieving intrinsic self-healing is based on molecular diffusion6.
Extrinsic Systems
In extrinsic systems, the healing chemistries are separated from the surrounding polymer in microcapsules or vascular networks, which after material damage/cracking release their content into the crack plane, reacting and allowing the restoration of material functionalities7. Capsule-based systems can be divided in four groups. In the capsule-catalyst system, the encapsulated healing agent is released into the polymer matrix and reacts with the catalyst, already present in the matrix8. In contrast, in multicapsule systems both the catalyst and the healing agent are encapsulated in different capsules9. In a third system, called latent functionality, a healing agent is encapsulated, that can react with the polymerizer component that is present in the matrix in the form of residual reactive functionalities10. In the last approach (phase separation), either the healing agent or the polymerizer is phase-separated in the matrix material11. The same strategies can be applied in 1D, 2D and 3D vascular based systems121314.
Self-Healing Coatings
Coatings allow the retention and improvement of bulk properties of a material. They can provide protection for a substrate from environmental exposure. Thus, when damage occurs (often in the form of microcracks), environmental elements like water and oxygen can diffuse through the coating and may cause material damage or failure. Microcracking in coatings can result in mechanical degradation or delamination of the coating, or in electrical failure in fibre-reinforced composites and microelectronics, respectively. As the damage is on such a small scale, repair, if possible, is often difficult and costly. Therefore, a coating that can automatically heal itself (“self-healing coating”) could prove beneficial by automatic recovering properties (such as mechanical, electrical and aesthetic properties), and thus extending the lifetime of the coating. The majority of the approaches that are described in literature regarding self-healing materials can be applied to make “self-healing” coatings, including microencapsulation1516and the introduction of reversible physical bonds such as hydrogen bonding17,ionomers1819 and chemical bonds (Diels-Alder chemistry)20.Microencapsulation is the most common method to develop self-healing coatings. The capsule approach originally described by White et al., using microencapsulated dicyclopentadiene (DCPD) monomer and Grubbs’ catalyst to self-heal epoxy polymer21was later adapted to epoxy adhesive films that are commonly used in the aerospace and automotive industries for bonding metallic and composite substrates22. Recently, microencapsulated liquid suspensions of metal or carbon black were used to restore electrical conductivity in a multilayer microelectronic device and battery electrodes respectively2324; however the use of microencapsulation for restoration of electrical properties in coatings is limited. The most common application of this technique is proven in polymer coatings for corrosion protection. Corrosion protection of metallic materials is of significant importance on an economical and ecological scale. To prove the effectiveness of microcapsules in polymer coatings for corrosion protection, researchers have encapsulated a number of materials. These materials include isocyanates2526 monomers such as DCPD2728GMA29epoxy resin30 , linseed oil3132 and tung oil33 .By using the aforementioned materials for self healing in coatings, it was proven that microencapsulation effectively protects the metal against corrosion and extends the lifetime of a coating.
Self-Healing Fibre Reinforced Polymers
Methods for the implementation of self-healing functionality into fibre reinforced polymers (FRPs) can be broadly classified into two approaches; discrete capsule-based systems and continuous vascular systems. A third approach, the intrinsic approach, has been successfully demonstrated in bulk polymeric materials but has yet to be demonstrated in FRPs. To date, self-healing of FRPs has mostly been applied to simple structures such as flat plates and panels. There is however a somewhat limited application of self-healing in flat panels, as access to the panel surface is relatively simple and repair methods are very well established in industry. Instead, there has been a strong focus has been on implementing self-healing in more complex and industrially relevant structures such as T-Joints3435 and Aircraft Fuselages36.
Capsule-Based Systems
Capsule-based systems were first proposed by White et al. in 200137, and since adapted by a number of authors for introduction into fibre reinforced materials383940. This method relies on the release of an encapsulated healing agent into the damage zone, and is generally a once off process as the functionality of the encapsulated healing agent cannot be restored. Even so, implemented systems are able to restore material integrity to almost 100% and remain stable over the material lifetime.
Vascular Systems
Vascular self-healing of FRPs is another liquid-based healing strategy. In this method, a network of hollow channels known as vascules, similar to the blood vessels within human tissue, are placed within the structure and used for the introduction of a healing agent. During a damage event cracks propagate through the material and into the vascules causing them to be cleaved open. A liquid resin is then passed through the vascules and into the damage plane, allowing the cracks to be repaired. Vascular systems have a number of advantages over microcapsule based systems, such as the ability to continuously deliver large volumes of repair agents and the potential to be used for repeated healing. The hollow channels themselves can also be used for additional functionality, such as thermal management and structural health monitoring41. A number of methods have been proposed for the introduction of these vascules, including the use of hollow glass fibres (HGFs)4243, 3D printing44, a ‘lost wax’ process 4546and a solid preform route47.
Self-Healing Cementitious Materials
Cementitious materials have existed since the Roman era. These materials have a natural ability to self-heal, which was first reported by the French Academy of Science in 183648. This ability can be improved by the integration of chemical and biochemical strategies.
Autogenous Healing
Autogenous healing is the natural ability of cementitious materials to repair cracks. This ability is principally attributed to further hydration of unhydrated cement particles and carbonation of dissolved calcium hydroxide49. Cementitious materials in fresh-water systems can autogenously heal cracks up to 0.2 mm over a period of 7 weeks50.
Chemical-Based Healing
Self-healing of cementitious materials can be achieved through the reaction of certain chemical agents. Two main strategies exist for housing these agents, namely capsules and vascular tubes. These capsules and vascular tubes, once ruptured, release these agents and heal the crack damage.
Bio-Based Healing
The self-healing ability of concrete has been improved by the incorporation of bacteria, which can induce calcium carbonate precipitation through their metabolic activity51. These precipitates can build up and form an effective seal against crack related water ingress. Jonkers et al. first incorporated bacteria within cement paste for the development of self-healing concrete52. It was found that the bacteria directly added to the paste only remained viable for 4 months. Later studies saw Jonkers use expanded clay particles53 and Van Tittlelboom use glass tubes54, to protect the bacteria inside the concrete. Other strategies to protect the bacteria have also since been reported55.
Self-Healing Ceramics
Generally, ceramics are superior in strength to metals at high temperatures, however, they are brittle and sensitive to flaws, and this brings into question their integrity and reliability as structural materials56.
Mn+1AXn phase ceramics, also known as MAX Phases, can autonomously heal crack damage by an intrinsic healing mechanism. Micro cracks caused by wear or thermal stress are filled with oxides formed from the MAX phase constituents, commonly the A-element, during high temperature exposure to air 57.
Crack gap filling was first demonstrated for Ti3AlC2 by oxidation at 1200 °C in air 58. Ti2AlC and Cr2AlC have also demonstrated said ability, and more ternary carbides and nitrides are expected to be able to autonomously self-heal 59. The process is repeatable up to the point of element depletion, distinguishing MAX phases from other self-healing materials that require external healing agents (extrinsic healing) for single crack gap filling. Depending on the filling-oxide, improvement of the initial properties such as local strength can be achieved 60.
On the other hand, mullite, alumina and zirconia do not have the ability to heal intrinsically, but could be endowed with self-healing capabilities by embedding second phase components into the matrix. Upon cracking, these particles are exposed to oxygen, and in the presence of heat, they react to form new materials which fill the crack gap under volume expansion 61.
This concept has been proven using SiC to heal cracks in an Alumina matrix 62, and further studies have investigated the high temperature strength 63, and the static and cyclic fatigue strength of the healed part 64. The strength and bonding between the matrix and the healing agent is of prime importance and thus govern the selection of the healing particles.
Self-Healing Metals
When exposed for long times to high temperatures and moderate stresses, metals exhibit premature and low-ductility creep fracture, arising from the formation and growth of cavities. Those defects coalesce into cracks which ultimately cause macroscopic failure. Self-healing of early stage damage is thus a promising new approach to extend the lifetime of the metallic components. In metals, self-healing is intrinsically more difficult to achieve than in most other material classes, due to their high melting point and, as a result, low atom mobility. Generally, defects in the metals are healed by the formation of precipitates at the defects sites that immobilize further crack growth.
Improved creep and fatigue properties have been reported for underaged aluminium alloys compared to the peak hardening Al alloys, which is due to the heterogeneous precipitation at the crack tip and its plastic zone65. The first attempts to heal creep damage in steels were focused on the dynamic precipitation of either Cu or BN at the creep-cavity surface6667. Cu precipitation has only a weak preference for deformation-induced defects as a large fraction of spherical Cu precipitates is simultaneously formed with the matrix6869.
Recently, gold atoms were recognized as a highly efficient healing agents in Fe-based alloys. A defect-induced mechanism is indicated for the Au precipitation, i.e. the Au solute remains dissolved until defects are formed70. Autonomous repair of high-temperature creep damage was reported by alloying with a small amount of Au. Healing agents selectively precipitate at the free surface of a creep cavity, resulting in pore filling. For the lower stress levels up to 80% filling of the creep cavities with Au precipitates is achieved71 resulting in a substantial increase in creep life time. Work to translate the concept of creep damage healing in simple binary or ternary model systems to real multicomponent creep steels is ongoing.
Bio-Inspired Self-Repairing Materials
In the course of 3.8 billion years plants and animals have evolved the amazing capacity to seal and heal wounds. In all plants and animals examined, firstly a self-sealing phase and secondly a self-healing phase can be identified. In plants, the rapid self-sealing prevents the plants from desiccation and from infection by pathogenic germs. This gives time for the subsequent self-healing of the injury which in addition to wound closure also results in the (partly) restoration of mechanical properties of the plant organ. Based on a variety of self-sealing and self-healing processes in plants different functional principles were successfully transferred into bio-inspired self-repairing materials727374. The connecting link between the biological model and the technical application is an abstraction describing the underlying functional principle of the biological model which can be for example an analytical model75 or a numerical model. In cases where mainly physical-chemical processes are involved a transfer is especially promising.
Inspired by rapid self-sealing processes in the twining liana Aristolochia macrophylla and related species (pipevines) a biomimetic PU-foam coating for pneumatic structures was developed7677. With respect to low coating weight and thickness of the foam layer maximum repair efficiencies of 99.9 % and more have been obtained787980. Other role models are latex bearing plants as the weeping fig (Ficus benjamina), the rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis) and spurges (Euphorbia spp.), in which the coagulation of latex is involved in the sealing of lesions818283. Different self-sealing strategies for elastomeric materials were developed showing significant mechanical restoration after a macroscopic lesion8485.
Assessment of Self-Healing Efficacy
Numerous methodologies for the assessment of self-healing capabilities have been developed for each material class (Table 1).
Table 1. Damaging methods for self-healing assessment of different classes of material.




Material class

Damage mechanism

Healing





Polymers

Razor blade/scalpel cut; Tensile test with rupture; Ballistic impact

Autonomic healing supramolecular networks



Polymers

Razor blade/scalpel cut

Temperature triggered supramolecular networks



Fibre Reinforced Composite

Delamination BVID (Barely Visible Impact Damage)

Vascular self-healing; Microcapsule self-healing



Coatings

Microcutting with corrosion; Corrosion/erosion; Pull-out tests (adhesion); Microscratching

Molecular inter-diffusion (solvent); Encapsulated agent



Concrete

Crack initiation by bending compression

Activation of microencapsulated agent



Ceramic

Crack initiation by indentation

Temperature triggered oxidation reaction



Ceramic coating

Crack initiation by indentation

Temperature triggered oxidation reaction



Polyurethane foam coating

Puncturing with a spike

Reduction of the effective leakage area by negative strains pushing the walls of the fissure in the foam coatings to one another86.



Hence, when self-healing is assessed, different parameters need to be considered: type of stimulus (if any), healing time, maximum amount of healing cycles the material can tolerate, and degree of recovery, all whilst considering the materials virgin properties878889. This typically takes account of relevant physical parameters such as tensile modulus, elongation at break, fatigue-resistance, barrier properties, colour and transparency. The self-healing ability of a given material generally refers to the recovery of a specific property relative to the virgin material, designated as the self-healing efficiency. The self-healing efficiency can be quantified by comparing the respective experimental value obtained for the undamaged virgin sample (fvirgin) with the healed sample (fhealed) (eq. 1)90
EQUATION 1

η = 


In a variation of this definition that is relevant to extrinsic self-healing materials, the healing efficiency takes into consideration the modification of properties caused by introducing the healing agent. Accordingly, the healed sample property is compared to that of a undamaged control equipped with self-healing agent fnon-healed (equation 2).
EQUATION 2

η = 


For a certain property Pi of a specific material, an optimal self-healing mechanism and process is characterized by the full restauration of the respective material property after a suitable, normalized damaging process. For a material where 3 different properties are assessed, it should be determined 3 efficiencies given as ƞ1(P1), ƞ2(P2) and ƞ3(P3). The final average efficiency based on a number n of properties for a self-healing material is accordingly determined as the harmonic mean given by equation 3. The harmonic mean is more appropriate than the traditional arithmetic mean, as it is less sensitive to large outliers.
EQUATION 3



References
"

















Aissa, B., Therriault, D., Haddad, E., Jamroz, W. (2011) 'Self-Healing Materials Systems: Overview of Major Approaches and Recent Developed Technologies', Advances in Materials Science and Engineering, 2012, pp. 1-17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2012/854203


















Yang, T., Zhang, J., Mouritz, A. P., and Wang, C. H., “Healing of carbon fibre–epoxy composite T-joints using mendable polymer fibre stitching,” Composites Part B: Engineering, vol. 45, Feb. 2013, pp. 1499–1507.
Cullinan, J. F., Wisnom, M., and Bond, I., “A Novel Method for the Manipulation of Damage and In-Situ Repair of Composite T-Joints,” 56th AIAA/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, Reston, Virginia: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2015, pp. 1–10
Minakuchi, S., Sun, D., and Takeda, N., “Hierarchical system for autonomous sensing-healing of delamination in large-scale composite structures,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 23, Oct. 2014, p. 115014.
White, S.R., et al., Autonomic healing of polymer composites. Nature, 2000. 409: p. 794-797.
M. Kessler, S. White. Self-activated healing of delamination damage in woven composites. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 32:683–99,2001.
M. Kessler, N Sottos, S.White. Self-healing structural composite materials. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 34:743–53,2003.
A. J. Patel, N.R. Sottos. E.D. Wetzel, S.R. White. Autonomic healing of low-velocity impact damage in fibre-reinforced composites. Composites Part A. 41:360-368, 2010.
Norris, C. J., White, J. A. P., McCombe, G., Chatterjee, P., Bond, I. P., and Trask, R. S., “Autonomous stimulus triggered self-healing in smart structural composites,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 21, Sep. 2012, p. 094027.
S.Bleay, C.Loader, V.Hawyes, L.Humberstone, P.Curtis A smart repair system for polymer matrix composites. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 32:1767–76, 2001.
R.S. Trask, I.P.Bond, Biomimetic self-healing of advanced composite structures using hollow glass fibres. Smart Materials and Structures,15:704–10, 2006.
K.S. Toohey, N.R. Sottos, J. Lewis, J.S. Moore, S.R. White. Self-healing materials with microvascular networks. Nature Materials,6:581–5, 2007.
Trask, R. S., and Bond, I. P., “Bioinspired engineering study of Plantae vascules for self-healing composite structures.,” Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / the Royal Society, vol. 7, Jun. 2010, pp. 921–31.
A.P. Esser-Kahn, P.R. Thakre, H. Dong, J.F. Patrick, V.K. Vlasko-Vlasov, N.R. Sottos, et al. Three-dimensional microvascular fiber-reinforced composites. Advanced Materials, 23:3654–8, 2011.
C-Y. Huang, R.S. Trask, I.P. Bond. Characterization and analysis of carbon fibre-reinforced polymer composite laminates with embedded circular vasculature. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / the Royal Society,7:1229–41,2010.















































