


Bhargava cube




Bhargava cube

(Figure)
Bhargava cube with the integers a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h at the corners

In mathematics, in number theory, Bhargava cube (also called Bhargava's cube) is a configuration consisting of eight integers placed at the eight corners of a cube.1 This configuration was extensively used by Manjul Bhargava, an Indian-American Fields Medal winning mathematician, to study the composition laws of binary quadratic forms and other such forms. To each pair of opposite faces of a Bhargava cube one can associate an integer binary quadratic form thus getting three binary quadratic forms corresponding to the three pairs of opposite faces of the Bhargava cube.2 These three quadratic forms all have the same discriminant and Manjul Bhargava proved that their composition in the sense of Gauss3 is the identity element in the associated group of equivalence classes of primitive binary quadratic forms. Using this property as the starting point for a theory of composition of binary quadratic forms Manjul Bhargava went on to define fourteen different composition laws using a cube.
Integer binary quadratic forms
An expression of the form 
 
 
 
 , where a, b and c are fixed integers and x and y are variable integers, is called an integer binary quadratic form. The discriminant of the form is defined as



The form is said to be primitive if the coefficients a, b, c are relatively prime. Two forms



are said to be equivalent if there exists a transformation



with integer coefficients satisfying 
 
 
 
  which transforms 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . This relation is indeed an equivalence relation in the set of integer binary quadratic forms and it preserves discriminants and primitivity.
Gauss composition of integer binary quadratic forms
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two primitive binary quadratic forms having the same discriminant and let the corresponding equivalence classes of forms be 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . One can find integers 
 
 
 
  such that












The class 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined by the classes [Q(x, y)] and [Q′(x, y)] and is called the composite of the classes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .4 This is indicated by writing



The set of equivalence classes of primitive binary quadratic forms having a given discriminant D is a group under the composition law described above. The identity element of the group is the class determined by the following form:


 
  The inverse of the class 
 
 
 
  is the class 
 
 
 
 .
Quadratic forms associated with the Bhargava cube
Let (M, N) be the pair of 2 × 2 matrices associated with a pair of opposite sides of a Bhargava cube; the matrices are formed in such a way that their rows and columns correspond to the edges of the corresponding faces. The integer binary quadratic form associated with this pair of faces is defined as


 
  The quadratic form is also defined as


 
  However, the former definition will be assumed in the sequel.
The three forms
Let the cube be formed by the integers a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h. The pairs of matrices assoiated with opposite edges are denoted by (M1, N1), (M2, M2), and (M3, N3). The first rows of M1, M2 and M3 are respectively [a b], [a c] and [a e]. The opposite edges in the same face are the second rows. The corresponding edges in the opposite faces form the rows of the matrices N1, N2, N3 (see figure).



(Figure)
Bhargava cube showing the pair of opposite faces M1 and N1.

(Figure)
Bhargava cube showing the pair of opposite faces M2 and N2.

(Figure)
Bhargava cube showing the pair of opposite faces M3 and N3.




The quadratic form associated with the faces defined by the matrices 
 
 
 
  (see figure) is


 
  The discriminant of a quadratic form Q1 is



The quadratic form associated with the faces defined by the matrices 
 
 
 
  (see figure) is


 
  The discriminant of a quadratic form Q2 is



The quadratic form associated with the faces defined by the matrices 
 
 
 
  (see figure) is


 
  The discriminant of a quadratic form Q3 is



Manjul Bhargava's surprising discovery can be summarised thus:5

If a cube A gives rise to three primitive binary quadratic forms Q1, Q2, Q3, then Q1, Q2, Q3 have the same discriminant, and the product of these three forms is the identity in the group defined by Gauss composition. Conversely, if Q1, Q2, Q3 are any three primitive binary quadratic forms of the same discriminant whose product is the identity under Gauss composition, then there exists a cube A yielding Q1, Q2, Q3.
 

Example
(Figure)
An example of Bhargava cube

The three quadratic forms associated with the numerical Bhargava cube shown in the figure are computed as follows.



The composition 
 
 
 
  is the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  because of the following:









Also 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
 
  is the identity element in the group defined by the Gauss composition.
Further composition laws on forms
Composition of cubes
The fact that the composition of the three binary quadratic forms associated with the Bhargava cube is the identity element in the group of such forms has been used by Manjul Bhargava to define a composition law for the cubes themselves.6



(Figure)
The Bhargava cube corresponding to the binary cubic form 
 
 
 
 .

(Figure)
The Bhargava cube corresponding to the pair of binary quadratic forms 
 
 

 
 .




Composition of cubic forms
An integer binary cubic in the form 
 
 
 
  can be represented by a triply-symmetric Bhargava cube as in the figure. The law of composition of cubes can be used to define a law of composition for the binary cubic forms.7
Composition of pairs of binary quadratic forms
The pair of binary quadratic forms 
 
 
 
 
  can be represented by a doubly symmetric Bhargava cube as in the figure. The law of composition of cubes is now used to define a composition law on pairs of binary quadratic forms.8
References
"
Category:Quadratic forms Category:Carl Friedrich Gauss Category:Number theory















