


Gigliola Staffilani




Gigliola Staffilani
'''Gigliola Staffilani''' is an Italian-American mathematician who works as the Abby Rockefeller Mauze Professor of Mathematics at the [[Massach
 usetts Institute of Technology]].123 Her research concerns harmonic analysis and partial differential equations, including the Korteweg–de Vries equation and Schrödinger equation.
Education and career
Staffilani grew up on a farm in Martinsicuro in central Italy, speaking only the local dialect, and with no books until her older brother brought some back from his school. Her father died when she was 10, and her mother decided that she did not need to continue on to high school, but her brother helped her change her mother's mind. She came to love mathematics at her school, and was encouraged by her teachers and brother to continue her studies, with the idea that she could return to Martinsicuro as a mathematics teacher. She earned a fellowship to study at the University of Bologna, where she earned a laurea in mathematics in 1989 with an undergraduate thesis on Green's functions for elliptic partial differential equations.456
At the suggestion of one of her professors at Bologna, she moved to the University of Chicago for her graduate studies, to study with Carlos Kenig. This was a big change in her previous plans, because it would mean that she could not return to Martinsicuro. When she arrived at Chicago, still knowing very little English and not having taken the Test of English as a Foreign Language, she had the wrong type of visa to obtain the teaching fellowship she had been promised. She almost returned home, but remained after Paul Sally intervened and loaned her enough money to get by until the issue could be resolved.78 At Chicago, she studied dispersive partial differential equations with Kenig,9 earning a master's degree in 1991 and a Ph.D. in 1995.1011
After postdoctoral studies at the Institute for Advanced Study, Stanford University, and Princeton University, Staffilani took a tenure-track faculty position at Stanford in 1999, and earned tenure there in 2001. While at Stanford, she met her husband, Tomasz Mrowka, a mathematics professor at MIT, and after a year and a half found a faculty position closer to him at Brown University. She moved to MIT in 2002,1213 where, in 2006 she became the second female full professor of mathematics.14
Collaboration
Staffilani is a frequent collaborator with James Colliander, Markus Keel, Hideo Takaoka, and Terence Tao, forming a group known as the "I-team".1516 The name of this group has been said to come from the notation for a mollification operator used in the team's method of almost conserved quantities,17 or as an abbreviation for "interaction", referring both to the teamwork of the group and to the interactions of light waves with each other.18 The group's work was featured prominently in the 2006 Fields Medal citations for group member Tao.1920
Awards and honors
Staffilani was a Sloan Fellow from 2000 to 2002.21 In 2009-2010 she was a member of the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study. In 2012 she became one of the inaugural fellows of the American Mathematical Society.22 In 2014 she was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.23
Selected publications


.

.

.

.

.

.

References
External links

Home page

"
Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Living people Category:20th-century American mathematicians Category:21st-century American mathematicians Category:Italian mathematicians Category:Women mathematicians Category:University of Bologna alumni Category:University of Chicago alumni Category:Stanford University faculty Category:Princeton University faculty Category:Brown University faculty Category:Massachusetts Institute of Technology faculty Category:Fellows of the American Mathematical Society



Curriculum vitae, retrieved 2015-01-01.↩
. An autobiographical retrospective of Staffilani's life and career.↩
. Archived by the Indian Academy of Sciences, Women in Science initiative.↩







↩




.↩
I-method, Dispersive Wiki, retrieved 2015-01-02.↩
Fields Medal announcement for Terry Tao, International Congress of Mathematicians, 2006, retrieved 2015-01-02.↩



List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society, retrieved 2015-01-01.↩
Member listing, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, retrieved 2015-06-13.↩




