


Briggs–Bers criterion




Briggs–Bers criterion

In stability theory, the Briggs–Bers criterion is a criterion for determining whether the trivial solution to a linear partial differential equation with constant coefficients is stable, convectively unstable or absolutely unstable. This is often useful in applied mathematics, especially in fluid dynamics, because linear PDEs often govern small perturbations to a system, and we are interested in whether such perturbations grow or decay. The Briggs–Bers criterion is named after R. J. Briggs and A. Bers.1
Suppose that the PDE is of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a function of space 
 
 
 
  and time 
 
 
 
 . The partial differential operator 
 
 
 
  has constant coefficients, which do not depend on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then a suitable ansatz for 
 
 
 
  is the normal mode solution


 
  Making this ansatz is equivalent to considering the problem in Fourier space – the solution may be decomposed into its Fourier components in space and time. Making this ansatz, the equation becomes


 
  or, more simply,


 
  This is a dispersion relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and tells us how each Fourier component evolves in time. In general, the dispersion relation may be very complicated, and there may be multiple 
 
 
 
  which satisfy the relation for a given value of 
 
 
 
 , or vice-versa. The solutions to the dispersion relation may be complex-valued.2
Now, an initial condition 
 
 
 
  can be written as a superposition of Fourier modes of the form 
 
 
 
 . In practice, the initial condition will have components of all frequencies. Each of these components evolves according to the dispersion relation, and therefore the solution at a later time 
 
 
 
  may be obtained by Fourier inversion. In the simple case where 
 
 
 
  is first-order in time, the dispersion relation determines a unique value of 
 
 
 
  for each given value of 
 
 
 
 , and so


 
  where


 
  is the Fourier transform of the initial condition. In the more general case, the Fourier inversion must be performed by contour integration in the complex 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  planes.3
While it may not be possible to evaluate the integrals explicitly, asymptotic properties of 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  may be obtained from the integral expression, using methods such as the method of stationary phase or the method of steepest descent. In particular, we can determine whether 
 
 
 
  decays or grows exponentially in time, by considering the largest value that 
 
 
 
  may take. If the dispersion relation is such that 
 
 
 
  always, then any solution will decay as 
 
 
 
 , and the trivial solution 
 
 
 
  is stable. If there is some mode with 
 
 
 
 , then that mode grows exponentially in time. By considering modes with zero group velocity and determining whether they grow or decay, we can determine whether an initial condition which is localised around 
 
 
 
  moves away from 
 
 
 
  as it grows, with 
 
 
 
  (convective instability); or whether 
 
 
 
  (absolute instability).
Transient growth
Suppose the PDE is of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a linear differential operator in 
 
 
 
 . In general, 
 
 
 
  is not a normal operator. While the large-time behaviour of 
 
 
 
  is still determined by the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
 , the behaviour which takes place before this large-time behaviour may be dramatically different.4
In particular, while the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  may all have negative real part, which would predict that 
 
 
 
  decays exponentially at large times and that the trivial state 
 
 
 
  is stable, it is possible for 
 
 
 
  to grow transiently and become large before decaying.5 In practice, the linear equations that we work with are linearisations of more complicated governing equations such as the Navier–Stokes equations about some base state, with the linearisations carried out under the assumption that the perturbation quantity 
 
 
 
  is small. Transient growth may violate this assumption. When nonlinear effects are considered, then a system may be unstable even if the linearised system is stable.
Generalisation
When the coefficients of 
 
 
 
  vary with 
 
 
 
 , then this criterion is no longer applicable. However, if the variation is very slow, then the WKBJ approximation may be used to derive a leading-order approximation to the solution. This gives rise to the theory of global modes, which was first developed by Philip Drazin in 1974.6
References
"
Category:Stability theory













