


Construction Irreducible Markov Chain in Ising Model




Construction Irreducible Markov Chain in Ising Model

Ising model was used to study magnetic phase transitions at the very beginning, and now it is one of the most famous models of interacting systems.
when we use the normal MCMC(Markov Chain Monte Carlo) method to get an exact goodness-of-fit test for the finite lattice Ising model, we will find that MCMC method has its own computational obstruction in hypothesis test of the Ising model. Thus we will use developed Monte Carlo method for the test, which has a faster convergence. And the fist step of the method is to Creating Construction Irreducible Markov Chain in Ising Model.
Markov bases
For every integer vector 
 
 
 
 , we can uniquely write it as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are nonnegative vectors. Then the Markov basis in Ising model can be degined as:
A Markov bases for the Ising model is a set 
 
 
 
  os integer vector such that:
(i) For all 
 
 
 
  there must be 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
(ii) For any 
 
 
 
  and any 
 
 
 
  there always exist 
 
 
 
  satisfy



 
  and 
 
 


for all l = 1,...,k
The element of 
 
 
 
  is move. Then using Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, we can get an aperiodic, reversible and irreducible Markov Chain.
The paper published by P.DIACONIS AND B.STURMFELS in 1998 ‘Algebraic algorithms for sampling from conditional distributions’ shows that a Markov basis can be defined algebraically as in Ising model
Then by the paper published by P.DIACONIS AND B.STURMFELS in 1998,1 any generating set for the ideal 
 
 
 
  is a Markov basis for the Ising model.
Construction an irreducible Markov Chain
We cannot get a uniform samples from 
 
 
 
  and lead to inaccurate p-value.2 Thus in the following we will show how to modify the algorithm mentioned in the paper to get the irreducible Markov Chain in Ising Model.
A simple swap is defined as 
 
 
 
  of the form math>z=e_i-e_j
, where the 
 
 
 
  is the canonical basis vector of 
 
 
 
  Simple swaps changes the states of two lattice points in y.
Z denotes the set of sample swaps. Then two configurations 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 -connected by Z, if there is a path between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  consisting of simple swaps 
 
 
 
 , which means there exist 
 
 
 
  such that



 
  with 
 
 


for all l = 1,...,k
The algorithm can be describe as: (i) Start with the Markov Chain in a configuration 
 
 
 
  (ii) Select 
 
 
 
  uniformly at random and let
 
 
 
 . (iii) Accept 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 ; otherwise remain in y.
Although the resulting Markov Chain is possible cannot leave initial states, the problem does not arise for the 1 dimensional Ising model which we will introduce in the following. In high dimension we can overcome this problem by using Metropolis-Hastings algorithm in the smallest expanded sample space 
 
 

Irreducibility in the 1-dimensional Ising model
Before prove of the irreducibility in 1-dimensional Ising model, we present two lemma below:
Lemma 1:The max-singleton configuration of 
 
 

for the 1-dimension Ising model is unique(up to location of its connected components) and consists of b/2-1 singletons and one connected components of size a-b/2+1.
Lemma 2:For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  denote the unique max-singleton configuration. There exists a sequence 
 
 
 
  such that:



 
  and 
 
 


for all l = 1,...,k
Since 
 
 
 
  is the smallest expanded sample space, which contains 
 
 
 
 . And any two configurations in 
 
 
 
  can be connected by simple swaps Z without leaving 
 
 
 
 . This can be prove by the lemma we present above. So we an get the irreducibility of the Markov Chain based on simple swaps for the 1-dimension Ising Model.
Conclusion
Even though we just show the irreducibility of the Markov Chain based on simple swaps for the 1-dimension Ising Model, we can get the same conclusion of 2-dimension or higher dimension Ising Model.
References
"



↩
↩




