


Continuous-time random walk




Continuous-time random walk
In mathematics, a '''continuous-time random walk''' ('''CTRW''') is a generalization of a [[random walk]] where the wandering particle waits for a random time between
 jumps. It is a stochastic jump process with arbitrary distributions of jump lengths and waiting times.123 More generally it can be seen to be a special case of a Markov renewal process.
Motivation
CTRW was introduced by Montroll and Weiss 4 as a generalization of physical diffusion process to effectively describe anomalous diffusion, i.e., the super- and sub-diffusive cases. An equivalent formulation of the CTRW is given by generalized master equations. 5 A connection between CTRWs and diffusion equations with fractional time derivatives has been established. 6 Similarly, time-space fractional diffusion equations can be considered as CTRWs with continuously distributed jumps or continuum approximations of CTRWs on lattices. 7
Formulation
A simple formulation of a CTRW is to consider the stochastic process 
 
 
 
  defined by



whose increments 
 
 
 
  are iid random variables taking values in a domain 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the number of jumps in the interval 
 
 
 
 . The probability for the process taking the value 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  is then given by



Here 
 
 
 
  is the probability for the process taking the value 
 
 
 
  after 
 
 
 
  jumps, and 
 
 
 
  is the probability of having 
 
 
 
 
  jumps after time 
 
 
 
 .
Montroll-Weiss formula
Denoting the waiting time distribution in between two jumps of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , its Laplace transform is defined by



Similarly, for the jump distribution 
 
 
 
 
  of the increments, the Fourier transform is given by



One can show that the Laplace-Fourier transform of the probability 
 
 
 
  is given by



The above is called Montroll-Weiss formula.
Examples
The Wiener process is the standard example of a continuous time random walk in which the waiting times are exponential and the jumps are continuous and normally distributed.
References
"
Category:Stochastic processes



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




