


Tempotron




Tempotron

The Tempotron is a supervised synaptic learning algorithm which is applied when the information is encoded in spatiotemporal spiking patterns. This is an advancement of the perceptron which does not incorporate a spike timing framework.
It is general consensus that spike timing (STDP) plays a crucial role in the development of synaptic efficacy for many different kinds of neurons 1 Therefore a large variety of STDP-rules has been developed one of which is the tempotron.
Algorithm
Assuming a leaky integrate-and-fire-model the potential 
 
 
 
  of the synapse can be described by



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the spike time of the i-th afferent synapse with synaptic efficacy 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the resting potential. 
 
 
 
  describes the postsynaptic potential (PSP) elicited by each incoming spike:



with parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denoting decay time constants of the membrane integration and synaptic currents. The factor 
 
 
 
  is used for the normalization of the PSP kernels. When the potential crosses the firing threshold 
 
 
 
  the potential is reset to its resting value by shunting all incoming spikes.
Next a binary classification of the input patterns is needed(
 
 
 
  refers to a pattern which should elicit at least one post synaptic action potential and 
 
 
 
  refers to a pattern which should have no response accordingly). In the beginning the neuron does not know which pattern belongs to which classification and has to learn it iteratively, similar to the perceptron . The tempotron learns its tasks by adapting the synaptic effifacy 
 
 
 
 . If a 
 
 
 
  pattern is presented and the postsynaptic neuron did not spike, all synaptic efficacies are increased by 
 
 
 
  whereas a 
 
 
 
  pattern followed by a postsynaptic response leads to a decrease of the synaptic efficacies by 
 
 
 
  with 2

 
  denotes the time at which the postsynaptic potential $V(t)$ reaches its maximal value.
Sources
"
Category:Neurology



Caporale, N., & Dan, Y. (2008). Spike timing-dependent plasticity: a Hebbian learning rule. Annu Rev Neurosci, 31, 25-46.
Rober Gütig, Haim Sompolinsky (2006): The tempotron: a neuron that learns spike timing-based decisions, Nature Neuroscience vol. 9, no.3, 420-428




