


Furstenberg boundary




Furstenberg boundary

In potential theory, a discipline within applied mathematics, the Furstenberg boundary is a notion of boundary associated with a group. It is named for Harry Furstenberg, who introduced it in a series of papers beginning in 1963 (in the case of semisimple Lie groups). The Furstenberg boundary, roughly speaking, is a universal moduli space for the Poisson integral, expressing a harmonic function on a group in terms of its boundary values.
Motivation
A model for the Furstenberg boundary is the hyperbolic disc

 
 . The classical Poisson formula for a bounded harmonic function on the disc has the form


 
  where m is the Haar measure on the boundary and P is the Poisson kernel. Any function f on the disc determines a function on the group of Möbius transformations of the disc by setting 
 
 
 
 . Then the Poisson formula has the form



This function is then harmonic in the sense that it satisfies the mean-value property with respect to a measure on the Möbius group induced from the usual Lebesgue measure of the disc, suitably normalized. The association of a bounded harmonic function to an (essentially) bounded function on the boundary is one-to-one.
Construction for semi-simple groups
In general, let G be a semi-simple Lie group and μ a probability measure on G that is absolutely continuous. A function f on G is μ-harmonic if it satisfies the mean value property with respect to the measure μ:



There is then a compact space Π, with a G action and measure ν, such that any bounded harmonic function on G is given by



for some bounded function 
 
 
 
  on Π.
The space Π and measure ν depend on the measure μ (and so, what precisely constitutes a harmonic function). However, it turns out that although there are many possibilities for the measure ν (which always depends genuinely on μ), there are only a finite number of spaces Π (up to isomorphism): these are homogeneous spaces of G that are quotients of G by some parabolic subgroup, which can be described completely in terms of root data and a given Iwasawa decomposition. Moreover, there is a maximal such space, with quotient maps going down to all of the other spaces, that is called the Furstenberg boundary.
References





"
Category:Potential theory


