


Isentropic expansion waves




Isentropic expansion waves

Isentropic expansion waves are created when a supersonic flow is redirected along a curved surface. These waves are studied to obtain a relation between deflection angle and Mach number. Each wave in this case is a Mach wave, so it is at an angle 
 
 
 
  , where M is the Mach number immediately before the wave. Expansion waves are divergent because as the flow expands the value of Mach number increases, thereby decreasing the Mach angle.
In an isentropic wave, the speed changes from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , with deflection 
 
 
 
 . We have oriented the coordinate system orthogonal to the wave. We write the basic (continuity, momentum and 1st, 2nd law of thermodynamics) equations for this infinitesimal control volume. 
(Figure)
Control Volume Analysis

Assumptions:

Steady flow.
Negligible body forces.
Adiabatic flow.
No work terms.
Negligible gravitational effect.

Relation between θ,M and v
The continuity equation is,


 
  .......(1.1)
First term is zero by assumption(1).
Now,   


or    

......  (1.2)
Now we consider the momentum equation for normal and tangential to shock.
For 
 
 
 
 - component,


......(1.3)
Second term of L.H.S and first term of R.H.S are zero due to assumption (2) and (1) respectively.
Then,



Or using continuity,



Expanding and simplifying [Using the facts that , to the first order, in the limit as 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ], we obtain



But,  

,
so, 

,
and       


  ......(1.4)
Derivation of Prandtl-Meyer supersonic expansion function
We skip the analysis of the 
 
 
 
 -component of the momentum and move on to the first law of thermodynamics, which is


 .........(1.5)
First term of L.H.S,next three terms of L.H.S and first term of R.H.S are zero due to assumption (3),(4) and (1) respectively.
where,



For our control volume we obtain



This may be simplified as



Expanding and simplifying in the limit to first order, we get



If we confine to ideal gases, 
 
 
 
  , so


 ......(1.6)
Above equation relates the differential changes in velocity and temperature. We can derive a relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  using 
 
 
 
 . Differentiating (and dividing the left hand side by 
 
 
 
  and the right by 
 
 
 
  ),



Using equation 1.6






Hence,


 .....(1.7)
Combining (1.4) and (1.7)


 .....(1.8)
We generally apply the above equation to negative 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
 . We can integrate this between the initial and final Mach numbers of given flow, but it will be more convenient to integrate from a reference state, the critical speed (
 
 
 
 ) to Mach number 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  arbitrarily set to zero at 
 
 
 
 ,



Leading to Prandtl-Meyer supersonic expansion function,



References
1  "
Category:Thermodynamic processes



'Introduction to Fluid Mechanics' by Robert W. Fox, Philip J. Pritchard and Alan T. McDonald↩




