


Whitney inequality




Whitney inequality

In mathematics, the Whitney inequality gives an upper bound for the error of best approximation of a function by polynomials in terms of the moduli of smoothness. It was first proved by Hassler Whitney in 1957,1 and is an important tool in the field of approximation theory for obtaining upper estimates on the errors of best approximation.
Statement of the theorem
Denote the value of the best uniform approximation of a function

 
  by algebraic polynomials

 
  of degree 
 
 
 
  by



The moduli of smoothness of order 
 
 
 
  of a function

 
  are defined as:






where 
 
 
 
  is the finite difference of order 
 
 
 
 .
Theorem: 2 [Whitney, 1957] If 
 
 
 
 , then



where 
 
 
 
  is a constant depending only on 
 
 
 
 . The Whitney constant 
 
 
 
  is the smallest value of 
 
 
 
  for which the above inequality holds. The theorem is particularly useful when applied on intervals of small length, leading to good estimates on the error of spline approximation.
Proof
The original proof given by Whitney follows an analytic argument which utilizes the properties of moduli of smoothness. However, it can also be proved in a much shorter way using Peetre's K-functionals.3
Let:









where 
 
 
 
  is the Lagrange polynomial for 
 
 
 
  at the nodes 
 
 
 
 .
Now fix some 
 
 
 
  and choose 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
 . Then:






Therefore:



And since we have 
 
 
 
 , (a property of moduli of smoothness)



Since 
 
 
 
  can always be chosen in such a way that 
 
 
 
 , this completes the proof.
Whitney constants and Sendov's conjecture
It is important to have sharp estimates of the Whitney constants. It is easily shown that 
 
 
 
 , and it was first proved by Burkill (1952) that 
 
 
 
 , who conjectured that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Whitney was also able to prove that 4



and



In 1964, Brudnyi was able to obtain the estimate 
 
 
 
 , and in 1982, Sendov proved that 
 
 
 
 . Then, in 1985, Ivanov and Takev proved that 
 
 
 
 , and Binev proved that 
 
 
 
 . Sendov conjectured that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , and in 1985 was able to prove that the Whitney constants are bounded above by an absolute constant, that is, 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Kryakin, Gilewicz, and Shevchuk (2002)5 were able to show that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , and that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
References
"
Category:Approximation theory Category:Numerical analysis Category:Articles containing proofs












