


Jaimovich–Rebelo preferences




Jaimovich–Rebelo preferences

Jaimovich-Rebelo preferences refer to a utility function that allows to parameterize the strength of short-run wealth effects on the labor supply, originally developed by Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo in their 2009 article Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?1
Let 
 
 
 
  denote consumption and let 
 
 
 
  denote hours worked at period 
 
 
 
 . The instantaneous utility has the form



where



It is assumed that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
The agents in the model economy maximize their lifetime utility, 
 
 
 
 , defined over sequences of consumption and hours worked,



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the expectation conditional on the information available at time zero, and the agents internalize the dynamics of 
 
 
 
  in their maximization problem.
Relationship to other common macroeconomic preference types
Jaimovich-Rebelo preferences nest the KPR preferences and the GHH preferences.
KPR preferences
When 
 
 
 
 , the scaling variable 
 
 
 
  reduces to 
 
 
 
  and the instantaneous utility simplifies to



corresponding to the KPR preferences.
GHH preferences and balanced growth path
When 
 
 
 
 , and if the economy does not present exogenous growth, then the scaling variable 
 
 
 
  reduces to a constant 
 
 
 
  and the instantaneous utility simplifies to



corresponding to the original GHH preferences, in which the wealth effect on the labor supply is completely shut off.
Note however that the original GHH preferences are not compatible with a balanced growth path, while the Jaimovich-Rebelo preferences are compatible with a balanced growth path for 
 
 
 
 . To reconcile these facts, first note that the Jaimovich-Rebelo preferences are compatible with a balanced growth path for 
 
 
 
  because the scaling variable, 
 
 
 
 , grows at the same rate as the labor augmenting technology.
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the level of labor augmenting technology. Then, in a balanced growth path, consumption 
 
 
 
  and the scaling variable 
 
 
 
  grow at the same rate as 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
 , the stationary variable 
 
 
 
  satisfies the relation



which implies that



for some constant 
 
 
 
 .
Then, the instantaneous utility simplifies to



consistent with the shortcut of introducing a scaling factor containing the level of labor augmenting technology before the hours worked term.
References
"
Category:Macroeconomics








