


Draft:Hedge behavior




Draft:Hedge behavior

Hedge behavior describes a type of model existent in a resource allocation system. The name comes from the act of “hedging” in which one disburses resources in multiple — often opposite — endeavors in an attempt to minimize risk.1 Hedge behavior arises when opposing strategies compete for a finite amount of resources — often food or capital — and propels a system to a stable state. This critical point can be altered based on the number of agents exhibiting either of the two strategies.
Complex adaptive systems
A complex adaptive system is a system composed of agents that exhibit behavior that changes in response to various conditions. In such a system, hedge behavior acts as a mechanism of self-organization. Hedge behavior is introduced to the system by combining  herd and contrarian behaviors which compete for resources. Herd agents are defined as those who always follow the majority strategy, while contrarian agents compete with the majority by always opposing the herd strategy.
Applications
Hedge behavior has applications in most adaptive systems, including stock markets, economic networks, and social communities.
Finance
In a financial market, a  contrarian investor is one who opposes the investing strategies of the majority. This position is assumed by agents in a system that believe herd behavior will overstate the value of an asset while inflating the risk associated with it. This process is amplified by the clustering illusion showing an increase in price over a short period of time that draws in herd investors.
A study conducted at the National Institute of Science and Technology for Complex Systems examined the dynamics of a stock market composed of agents who were able to assume one of three distinct behavioral profiles — herd, contrarian, or indifferent.2 The introduction of herd and contrarian agents produces hedge behavior in the network. Over a period of time, the evolution of the total  market index becomes increasingly volatile. Four independent simulations of varying randomness produced an average Hurst exponent of 0.533. A Hurst exponent 
 
 
 
  indicates that the fluctuations in the index are random and uncorrelated, exhibiting Brownian motion.
Community behavior
If a community is modeled as a resource allocation system, in which a finite amount of resources are divided among a population, hedge behavior can be used to define its stability. In a study conducted at Fudan University, the critical point was determined to be related to the amount of resources allotted to the community.3 In the simulation, a population is given the choice to enter two separate rooms — one of which contains more resources than the other. Each agent is given the choice to enter one of the two rooms, and the resources are allocated evenly amongst the agents after the population is exhausted. The room whose agents are allocated the most resources per capita are claimed to be "winners." This constitutes a single round, at which point agents who belong to neither the herd nor the contrarians — known as "normal" — are given the results in order to make the best decision in the next round. In following rounds, herd agents are more likely to enter rooms that the normal agents choose, while contrarians are more likely to oppose this behavior. Eventually, the system will reach an equilibrium state, where the resource allocation is equivalent in both rooms.4
See also

Behavioral economics
Allocative efficiency

References
"



http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/hedging.html
Stefan, F., & Atman, A. (2015). Is there any connection between the network morphology and the fluctuations of the stock market index? Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 419, 630-641.
Yuan, L., Ji-Ping, H. (2014). Statistical physics of human beings in games: Controlled experiments. Chinese Phys. B, 23(7), 1-33.
Liang, Y., & Huang, J. (n.d.). Robustness of critical points in a complex adaptive system: Effects of hedge behavior. Frontiers of Physics, 461-466.




