


Draft:Functorial point




Draft:Functorial point

(What is the best article title?)
By definition, if X and Y are schemes, a Y-point of X is a morphism of schemes X →Y. If Y = Spec(R), then a Y-point is also called an R-point. The set of R-points of X is denoted by X(R). If R →R' is a ring homorphism, then it induces the "function" X(R) →X(R') that is compatible with compositions. Thus, one has the functor 
 
 
 
  from the category of rings to the category of sets.
Yoneda's lemma says that a scheme X determines and is determined by its (functorial) points.1
The above definitions and remark extend to a relative setting: that is, if there is a fixed base ring B (e.g., a field or Z), then one considers schemes and morphisms over Spec(B) and the same statements continue to hold.
The important special case is when R is a topological ring; in this case X(R) inherits the topology of R (cf. Proposition 2.1. of 1)
Motivation: systems of polynomial equations
The notion of functorial points, among others, generalizes the notion of the solutions of a system of polynomial equations in classical algebraic geometry. Indeed, let fi's be finitely many polynomials over a ring B in several variables and X their zero-locus in an affine space over B. So, we have X = Spec(A) with 
 
 
 
 . For a B-algebra R, to give an R-point of X is to give an algebra homomorphism A →R, which in turn amounts to giving a homomorphism


 
  that kills fi's. Thus, there is a natural identification:


 
 .
The projective case is slightly more complicated. As before,
(discuss M. Artin's approach to systems of algebraic equations.)
Points as characters
Let X be a scheme over the base ring B. If x is a set-theoretic point of X, then the residue field of x is the residue field of the local ring

 
  (i.e., the quotient by the maximal ideal). For example, if X is an affine scheme Spec(A) and x is a prime ideal 
 
 
 
 , then the residue field of x is the function field of the closed subscheme 
 
 
 
 .
For simplicity, suppose 
 
 
 
 . Then the inclusion of a set-theoretic point x into X corresponds to the ring homomorphism:


 
  (which is 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 .) This homomorphism is the "evaluation" of f at x in the following sense:
See also: Berkovich spectrum.
Points as sections
By the universal property of fiber product, each R-point of a scheme X determines a morphism of R-schemes


 
 ; i.e., a section of the projection 
 
 
 
 . If S is a subset of X(R), then one writes 
 
 
 
  for the set of the images of the sections determined by elements in S.2
(Mention Lang's theorem and a rational point of an elliptic curve.)
See also: level structure (algebraic geometry).
Spec of the ring of dual numbers
The identity map as a point
If X is a scheme, by definition, one can consider an X-point of X; in particular,
Rational points
Points of a proper scheme
The valuation criterion says that, if X is a proper scheme (over some fixed base ring B), and R is a valuation ring of a field K that is an algebra over the base ring, then any K-point of X extends to an R-point of X.
Points of a projective space
Galois action
Any ring homorphism R →R' induces the function X(R) →X(R'). In particular, this applies to automorphisms of a field and so the Galois group G of a field extension K of F acts on the set X(F).
(mention Frobenius endomorphism)
Points with symmetries
The natural thing to do is to replace a set of points by a category of points: the result is known as "stack".
See for example moduli stack of principal bundles
See also: descent along torsors.
See also

Weil restriction

Notes
References


http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/282ynotes/LectureXIV-Borel.pdf

External links

http://www.math.washington.edu/~zhang/Shanghai2011/Slides/ardakov.pdf

"



In fact, X is determined by its R-points with various rings R: in the precise terms, given schemes X, Y, any natural transformation from the functor 
 
 
 
  to the functor 
 
 
 
  determines a morphism of schemes X →Y in a natural way.↩
This seems like a standard notation; see for example http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/282ynotes/LectureIX-NPD.pdf↩




