


Draft:Contributions on developping measuring tools on surfaces




Draft:Contributions on developping measuring tools on surfaces

 

Contributions on developping measuring tools on surfaces
For a surface S⊂ℝ3 there is a natural way of measuring lengths of vectors tangent to the surface. That is, the inner product  of two vectors tangent to S at a point p of S is simply the inner product of these vectors in ℝ3. The definition of  permits us to measure not only the lengths of curves, but also area of domains in S, as well as the angle between two curves, and all the other ideas of 'metric' used in geometry. In a more general sense, these ideas lead to defining on S some special curves, called geodesics. They have the property that for any two points p and qon a geodesic, sufficiently close, the length of such a curve is less than or equal to the length of any other curve joining p and q. Such curves behave in many situations as if they were 'straight lines' of S and play an important role in the development of geometry.
One can easily notice that the definition of the inner product at each point p ∈ S, yields, equivalently, a quadratic form Ip. This is the first fundamental form of S at p, defined in the tangent plane TpS by Ip=,v∈TpS. The developement of these ideas had a crucial point in 1827, when Gauss made an important observation in his famous work 1. There, Gauss defined a notion of curvature for surfaces, which measures the amount that a surface deviates, at a point p ∈ S, from its tangent plane at p. The facts that Gauss alluded to were the following: first, the curvature depends only on the manner of measuring in S, that is, only on the first fundamental form I. Secondly, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle formed by geodesics differ from 180° by an expression that depends on the curvature and on the area of the triangle.
Everything indicates that Gauss understood very profound implications of his discovery. In fact, one of the fundamental problems during Gauss' time was to decide if the fifth postulate of Euclid (that is 'Given a straight line and a point not on the line, there is a straight line through the point which does not meet the given line') was independent of the other postulates of geometry. Although without immediate applications, the question leads to philosophical implications of primary importance.
Earlier, it had been established that Euclid's fifth postulate is equivalent to the fact that the sum of the interior angles of a triangle equals 180°. The discovery of Gauss implied, among other things, that it would be possible to imagine another geometry (at least in dimension two) that depended on a fundamental quadratic form, given in an arbitrary manner (without regard to the ambient space). In such a geometry, defining straight lines as geodesics, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle would depend on the curvature and, as Gauss actually verified, its difference from 180° would be equal to the integral of the curvature over the triangle. Gauss, however, did not have the necessary tools to develop his ideas (what he lacked was essentially the idea of a differentialble manifold) and he preffered not to discuss this topic openly. The actual appearence of a non-euclidean geometry was due, independently, to Lobatchevski (1829) and Bolyai(1831).
The ideas of Gauss were taken up by Riemann in 1854 but still he didn't have the adequate definition of a manifold. Using intuitive language and without proof, he introduced what we call today a differentiable manifold of dimension n.
One should notice that the concept of differentiable manifold, so necessary for the formalization of the work of Riemann, only appeared in 1913, in the work of H. Weyl, which made precise another of Riemann’s audacious concepts, namely, Riemann surface. Given the lack of adequate tools, Riemannian geometry developed very slowly. An important source of stimulation was the application of these ideas in the theory of relativity, in 1916. Another important step was then the introduction of the Levi-Civita parallelism.
For surfaces in R^3, parallelism can be introduced in the following way. Consider a family of planes tangent to S along the curve c. This family determines a surface E, envelopping these tangent planes, which possesses the property that it will be tangent to S along the curve c and whose Gaussian curvature is zero, K=0. It is not difficult to show that the parallelism along c, defined through the vanishing of the covariant derivative is the same whether considered relative to S or relative to E, the ambient Euclidean space. On the other hand, surfaces of zero curvature can be shown to be isometric to planes. Since parallelism is invariant by isometry, we can perform it ‘euclideanly’ in the isometric image of E and then bring it back to S. This was the construction used classically to define parallelism, but it will turn out that it is preferable, technically, to work with the covariant derivative in order to define (equivalently)the notion of parallelism.
The notion of covariant derivative has many important consequences. It makes it clear that the two basic ideas of geodesic and curvature can be defined in more general situations than that of Riemannian manifolds. To this end, it suffices that we define a notion of derivation of vector fields with certain properties (which nowadays we call an affine connection). This has stimulated the creation of many different geometric structures.
Given a differentiable manifold, there is a way of measuring the length of tangent vectors at each point. This measurement should change differentiably from point to point.
One may see that a choice of a Riemannian metric on a manifold M uniquely determines a certain affine connection on M and then, we are able to differentiate vector fields on M.
The Problem of Differentiating Vector Fields
In order to see why we need to introduce another differentiating operator, the affine connection, we will consider a submanifold M ⊂ Rn with the induced Riemannian metric and take a curve γ lying entirely in M.
One should understand a geodesic in M as a curve in M which is "as straight as possible". An intuitively plausible way to measure straightness is to compute the Euclidean acceleration γ‘‘ as usual and orthogonally project it on the tangent space Tγ‘‘M. This yields a vector γ‘‘⊤ tangent to M, the tangential acceleration of γ. Thus, it would be possible to define a geodesic as a curve in M whose tangential acceleration is zero. It is easy to see that the definition is invariant under rigid motions in R^n, although at this point there is little reason to believe that it is intrinsic invariant of M (one that depends only on the Riemannian geometry of M with its induced metric).
On an abstract Riemannian manifold, for which there is no 'ambient Euclidean space' in which to differentiate, this technique is not available. Thus, we have to find some way to make sense of the acceleration of a curve in an abstract manifold. Let $\,\!\gamma : (a,b) \rightarrow M$ be such a curve. As one might know from the study of smooth manifold theory, the velocity vector γ‘(t) has a coordinate independent meaning for each ''t ∈ M '', and its expression in any coordinate system matches the usual notion of velocity of a curve in Rn. However, unlike the velocity, the acceleration vector has no such coordinate-invariant interpretation. For example, consider the parametrised circle in the plane given in Euclidean coordinates by (x (t),y (t) )=(cos t, sin t). Its acceleration at time t is the unit vector (x" (t),y" (t) )=(-cos(t),-sin(t)). But in polar coordinates, the same curve is described by (r(t),θ(t))=(1,t). In these coordinates, the acceleration vector is (r(t),θ(t))=(0,0)!
 The problem is the following: if we wanted to make sense of γ"(t0) by differentiating γ'(t) with repect to t, we would have to write a difference quotient involving the vectors γ'(t) and γ'(t0); but these two live in different vector spaces ( Tγ(t) M and Tγ(t0)'' M'', respectively), so it doesn't make sense to substract them. A similar problem, but in dimension 3 is explained here.
The velocity vector γ'(t) is an example of a "vector field along a curve".To interpret the acceleration of a curve in a manifold, what we need is some coordinate-invariant way to differentiate vector fields along curves. To do so, we need a way to compare values of the vector fields at different points, or, intuitively, to "connect" nearby tangent spaces. This is where a connection comes in: it will be an additional piece of data on a manifold, a rule for computing derivatives of vector fields.
Riemannian Connections
Let π:E→M be a vector bundle over a manifold M and let ε(M) denote the space of smooth sections of E. A connection in E is a map ∇:T(M)×ε(M)→ε(M) written (X,Y)↦∇XY, satisfying the following properties:

∇XY is linear over C∝(M) in X:


∇fX1+gX2Y=f∇X1Y+g∇X2Y, for f,g ∈ C∝(M).
 


∇XY is linear over ℝ in Y


∇X(aY1+bY2)=a∇XY1+b∇XY2, for a,b ∈ ℝ



∇ satisfies the following product rule:


''∇X(fY)=f∇XY+(Xf)Y, for ''f∈ C∝(M).
 

The symbol ∇ is read "del" and ∇XY is called the covariant derivative of Y in the direction of X. Although a connection is defined by its action on global sections, it follows from the definitions that it is actually a local operator. One can read more on the subject of Riemannian connections here.
Notes
References

John M. Lee, Riemannian Manifolds: An Introduction to Curvature.
Manfredo P. DoCarmo, '' Riemannian Geometry''

:Category: Geometry :Category:Differential geometry
From metrics to connections
"



GAUSS,K.F., General Investigations of Curved Surfaces, Raven Press, New York, 1965




