


Prime avoidance lemma




Prime avoidance lemma

In algebra, the prime avoidance lemma says that if an ideal I in a commutative ring R is contained in a union of finitely many prime ideals Pi's, then it is contained in Pi for some i.
There are many variations of the lemma (cf. Hochster); for example, if the ring R contains an infinite field or a finite field of sufficiently large cardinality, then the statement follows from a fact in linear algebra that a vector space over an infinite field or a finite field of large cardinality is not a finite union of its proper vector subspaces.1
Statement and proof
The following statement and argument are perhaps the most standard.
Statement: Let E be a subset of R that is an additive subgroup of R and is multiplicatively closed. Let 
 
 
 
  be ideals such that 
 
 
 
  are prime ideals for 
 
 
 
 . If E is not contained in any of 
 
 
 
 's, then E is not contained in the union 
 
 
 
 .
Proof by induction on n: The idea is to find an element that is in E and not in any of 
 
 
 
 's. The basic case n = 1 is trivial. Next suppose n ≥ 2. For each i choose


 
  where the set on the right is nonempty by inductive hypothesis. We can assume 
 
 
 
  for all i; otherwise, some 
 
 
 
  avoids all the 
 
 
 
 's and we are done. Put


 
 . Then z is in E but not in any of 
 
 
 
 's. Indeed, if z is in 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 , a contradiction. Suppose z is in 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 . If n is 2, we are done. If n > 2, then, since 
 
 
 
  is a prime ideal, some 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 , a contradiction.
Notes
References

Mel Hochster, Dimension theory and systems of parameters, a supplementary note

"
Category:Algebra



Proof of the fact: suppose the vector space is a finite union of proper subspaces. Consider a finite product of linear functionals, each of which vanishes on a proper subspace that appears in the union; then it is a nonzero polynomial vanishing identically, a contradiction.




