


Imprecise Dirichlet process




Imprecise Dirichlet process

In probability theory and statistics, the Dirichlet process (DP) is one of the most popular Bayesian nonparametric models. It was introduced by Ferguson1 as a prior over probability distributions.
A Dirichlet process

 
  is completely defined by its parameters
 
 
 
  (the base distribution or base measure) is an arbitrary distribution and 
 
 
 
  (the concentration parameter) is a positive real number (it is often denoted as 
 
 
 
 ). According to the Bayesian paradigma these parameters should be chosen based on the available prior information on the domain.
The question is: how should we choose the prior parameters 
 
 
 
  of the DP, in particular the infinite dimensional one 
 
 
 
 , in case of lack of prior information?
To address this issue, the only prior that has been proposed so far is the limiting DP obtained for 
 
 
 
 , which has been introduced under the name of Bayesian bootstrap by Rubin;2 in fact it can be proven that the Bayesian bootstrap is asymptotically equivalent to the frequentist bootstrap introduced by Bradley Efron.3 The limiting Dirichlet process 
 
 
 
  has been criticized on diverse grounds. From an a-priori point of view, the main criticism is that taking 
 
 
 
  is far from leading to a noninformative prior.4 Moreover, a-posteriori, it assigns zero probability to any set that does not include the observations.5
The imprecise Dirichlet6 process has been proposed to overcome these issues. The basic idea is to fix 
 
 
 
  but do not choose any precise base measure 
 
 
 
 .
More precisely, the imprecise Dirichlet process (IDP) is defined as follows:



where 
 
 
 
  is the set of all probability measures. In other words, the IDP is the set of all Dirichlet processes (with a fixed 
 
 
 
 ) obtained by letting the base measure 
 
 
 
  to span the set of all probability measures.
Inferences with the Imprecise Dirichlet Process
Let 
 
 
 
  a probability distribution on 
 
 
 
  (here 
 
 
 
  is a standard Borel space with Borel 

 
 -field

 
 ) and assume that 
 
 
 
 . Then consider a real-valued bounded function 
 
 
 
  defined on 
 
 
 
 . It is well known that the expectation of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the Dirichlet process is



One of the most remarkable properties of the DP priors is that the posterior distribution of 
 
 
 
  is again a DP. Let 
 
 
 
  be an independent and identically distributed sample from 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then the posterior distribution of 
 
 
 
  given the observations is



where 
 
 
 
  is an atomic probability measure (Dirac's delta) centered at 
 
 
 
 . Hence, it follows that 
 
 
 
  Therefore, for any fixed 
 
 
 
 , we can exploit the previous equations to derive prior and posterior expectations.
In the IDP

 
  can span the set of all distributions 
 
 
 
 . This implies that we will get a different prior and posterior expectation of 
 
 
 
  for any choice of 
 
 
 
 . A way to characterize inferences for the IDP is by computing lower and upper bounds for the expectation of 
 
 
 
  w.r.t. 
 
 
 
 . A-priori these bounds are:



the lower (upper) bound is obtained by a probability measure that puts all the mass on the infimum (supremum) of 
 
 
 
 , i.e., 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  (or respectively with 
 
 
 
 ). From the above expressions of the lower and upper bounds, it can be observed that the range of 
 
 
 
  under the IDP is the same as the original range of 
 
 
 
 . In other words, by specifying the IDP, we are not giving any prior information on the value of the expectation of 
 
 
 
 . A-priori, IDP is therefore a model of prior (near)-ignorance for 
 
 
 
 .
A-posteriori, IDP can learn from data. The posterior lower and upper bounds for the expectation of 
 
 
 
  are in fact given by:



It can be observed that the posterior inferences do not depend on 
 
 
 
 . To define the IDP, the modeler has only to choose 
 
 
 
  (the concentration parameter). This explains the meaning of the adjective near in prior near-ignorance, because the IDP requires by the modeller the elicitation of a parameter. However, this is a simple elicitation problem for a nonparametric prior, since we only have to choose the value of a positive scalar (there are not infinitely many parameters left in the IDP model).
Finally, observe that for 
 
 
 
 , IDP satisfies



where 
 
 
 
 . In other words, the IDP is consistent.
(Figure)
Lower (red) and Upper (blue) cumulative distribution function|thumbnail|right|Lower (red) and Upper (blue) cumulative distribution for the observations {−1.17, 0.44, 1.17, 3.28, 1.44, 1.98}

Choice of the prior strength 
 
 

The IDP is completely specified by 
 
 
 
 , which is the only parameter left in the prior model. Since the value of 
 
 
 
  determines how quickly lower and upper posterior expectations converge at the increase of the number of observations, 
 
 
 
  can be chosen so to match a certain convergence rate.7 The parameter 
 
 
 
  can also be chosen to have some desirable frequentist properties (e.g., credible intervals to be calibrated frequentist intervals, hypothesis tests to be calibrated for the Type I error, etc.), see Example: median test
Example: estimate of the cumulative distribution
Let 
 
 
 
  be i.i.d. real random variables with cumulative distribution function

 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function, we can use IDP to derive inferences about 
 
 
 
  The lower and upper posterior mean of 
 
 
 
  are



where 
 
 
 
  is the empirical distribution function. Here, to obtain the lower we have exploited the fact that 
 
 
 
  and for the upper that 
 
 
 
 .
(Figure)
Beta distributions for the lower (red) and upper (blue) probability corresponding to the observations {-1.17, 0.44, 1.17, 3.28, 1.44, 1.98}. The area in [0,0.5] gives the lower (0.891) and the upper (0.9375) probability of the hypothesis "the median is greater than zero".

Note that, for any precise choice of 
 
 
 
  (e.g., normal distribution 
 
 
 
 ), the posterior expectation of 
 
 
 
  will be included between the lower and upper bound.
Example: median test
IDP can also be used for hypothesis testing, for instance to test the hypothesis 
 
 
 
  , i.e., the median of 
 
 
 
  is greater than zero. By considering the partition 
 
 
 
  and the property of the Dirichlet process, it can be shown that the posterior distribution of 
 
 
 
  is



where 
 
 
 
  is the number of observations that are less than zero,


 
  and 
 
 

By exploiting this property, it follows that






where 
 
 
 
  is the regularized incomplete beta function. We can thus perform the hypothesis test



(with 
 
 
 
  for instance) and then

if both the inequalities are satisfied we can declare that 
 
 
 
  with probability larger than 
 
 
 
 ;
if only one of the inequality is satisfied (which has necessarily to be the one for the upper), we are in an indeterminate situation, i.e., we cannot decide;
if both are not satisfied, we can declare that the probability that 
 
 
 
  is lower than the desired probability of 
 
 
 
 .

IDP returns an indeterminate decision when the decision is prior dependent (that is when it would depend on the choice of 
 
 
 
 ).
By exploting the relationship between the cumulative distribution function of the Beta distribution, and the cumulative distribution function of a random variable Z from a binomial distribution, where the "probability of success" is p and the sample size is n:



we can show that the median test derived with th IDP for any choice of 
 
 
 
  encompasses the one-sided frequentist sign test as a test for the median. It can in fact be verified that for 
 
 
 
  the 
 
 
 
 -value of the sign test is equal to 
 
 
 
 . Thus, if 
 
 
 
  then the 
 
 
 
 -value is less than 
 
 
 
  and, thus, they two tests have the same power.
Applications of the Imprecise Dirichlet Process
Dirichlet processes are frequently used in Bayesian nonparametric statistics. The Imprecise Dirichlet Process can be employed instead of the Dirichlet processes in any application in which prior information is lacking (it is therefore important to model this state of prior ignorance).
In this respect, the Imprecise Dirichlet Process has been used for nonparametric hypothesis testing, see the Imprecise Dirichlet Process statistical package. Based on the Imprecise Dirichlet Process, Bayesian nonparametric near-ignorance versions of the following classical nonparametric estimators have been derived: the Wilcoxon rank sum test8 and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test.9
A Bayesian nonparametric near-ignorance model presents several advantages with respect to a traditional approach to hypothesis testing.

The Bayesian approach allows us to formulate the hypothesis test as a decision problem. This means that we can verify the evidence in favor of the null hypothesis and not only rejecting it and take decisions which minimize the expected loss.
Because of the nonparametric prior near-ignorance, IDP based tests allows us to start the hypothesis test with very weak prior assumptions, much in the direction of letting data speak for themselves.
Although the IDP test shares several similarities with a standard Bayesian approach, at the same time it embodies a significant change of paradigm when it comes to take decisions. In fact the IDP based tests have the advantage of producing an indeterminate outcome when the decision is prior-dependent. In other words, the IDP test suspends the judgment when the option which minimizes the expected loss changes depending on the Dirichlet Process base measure we focus on.
It has been empirically verified that when the IDP test is indeterminate, the frequentist tests are virtually behaving as random guessers. This surprising result has practical consequences in hypothesis testing. Assume that we are trying to compare the effects of two medical treatments (Y is better than X) and that, given the available data, the IDP test is indeterminate. In such a situation the frequentist test always issues a determinate response (for instance I can tell that Y is better than X), but it turns out that its response is completely random, like if we were tossing of a coin. On the other side, the IDP test acknowledges the impossibility of making a decision in these cases. Thus, by saying "I do not know", the IDP test provides a richer information to the analyst. The analyst could for instance use this information to collect more data.

Categorical variables
For categorical variables, i.e., when 
 
 
 
  has a finite number of elements, it is known that the Dirichlet process reduces to a Dirichlet distribution. In this case, the Imprecise Dirichlet Process reduces to the Imprecise Dirichlet model proposed by Walley10 as a model for prior (near)-ignorance for chances.
See also
Imprecise probability
Robust Bayesian analysis
References
External links

Open source implementation of hypothesis tests based on the IDP
The imprecise probability group at IDSIA

"
Category:Statistics Category:Probability Category:Imprecise Probability



↩
Rubin D (1981). The Bayesian bootstrap. Ann Statist 9 130–134↩
Efron B (1979). Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife. Ann. Statist. 7 1–26↩
↩
Rubin D (1981). The Bayesian bootstrap. Ann Statist 9 130–134↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




