   Draft:Asymmetric Simple Inclusion Process      Draft:Asymmetric Simple Inclusion Process   Many complex and fundamental processes in nature incorporate a high level of intrinsic randomness. Stochastic events stand at the very bedrock of their micro level description, and the cumulative effect of these events is manifested in their dynamics and functionality. Complex processes may sometimes be viewed as an interconnected network, whose basic building blocks are processes of diminished complexity. In many cases, even when the isolated behavior of each building block is understood in great detail, the behavior of the aggregate is extremely hard to predict.  One class of stochastic networks, collectively known as Tandem Stochastic Systems (TSS), is particularly prevalent throughout the sciences. TSS are linear stochastic arrays formed by the sequential concatenation of individual modules. In a TSS, a stochastic input flow (of jobs, messages, particles, molecules, etc...) progresses through a serial array of processing units. The progress from one processing unit to the consecutive one is governed by a set of rules characterizing the system’s law of motion. This relatively simple structure of TSS renders them a focal point of scientific interest.  The Asymmetric Simple Inclusion Process (ASIP) is a TSS which was introduced 1 , and studied 2 3 4 , as an `inclusion' counterpart of the Asymmetric simple exclusion process (ASEP)---a distinct, yet strongly related, TSS which has been referred to as the "default stochastic model for transport phenomena" 5 . In both processes, random events cause particles to hop uni-directionally, from one site to the next, along a one-dimensional lattice. In the ASEP, particles are subject to exclusion interactions that keep them singled apart, whereas in the ASIP particles are subject to inclusion interactions that coalesce them into inseparable particle clusters. The ASIP links together the ASEP with the tandem Jackson network (TJN) 6 7 ---yet another TSS and a fundamental service model in queueing theory. From a queueing perspective, the ASIP's `gluing' of particles into inseparable particle-clusters manifests unlimited `batch service' and the model can thus be understood as a TJN with this additional property.  The ASIP, ASEP and TJN are unique in being the only limiting cases of a generalized model for unidirectional transport 8 . Joined together, they portray a panoramic view which spans the broad spectrum of extremities displayed by this phenomena.  Mathematical Formulation  The ASIP is briefly described as follows. Particles enter a one dimensional lattice at its leftmost site, and hop from one site to the next in clusters. In each hopping event the entire particle content of a site translocates as one to the next site and immediately coalesces with the particle content therein. The clusters continue to hop and coalesce with other clusters until they finally exit the lattice from its rightmost site.  More precisely, consider a one-dimensional lattice of   n   n   n   sites indexed    k  =   1  ,  …  ,  n       k   1  normal-…  n     k=1,...,n   . Each site is followed by a gate---labeled by the site's index---which controls the site's outflow. Particles arrive at the first site (    k  =  1      k  1    k=1   ) following a Poisson process with rate   λ   λ   \lambda   , the openings of gate   k   k   k   are timed according to a Poisson process with rate    μ  k     subscript  μ  k    \mu_{k}   , and all    n  +  1      n  1    n+1   Poisson processes are assumed to be mutually independent. Note that from this definition it follows that the times between particle arrivals are independent and exponentially distributed with mean    1  /  λ      1  λ    1/\lambda   , and that the times between the openings of gate   k   k   k   are independent and exponentially distributed with mean    1  /   μ  k       1   subscript  μ  k     1/\mu_{k}   . A key feature of the ASIP is its `batch service' property: at an opening of gate   k   k   k   all particles present at site   k   k   k   transit simultaneously, and in one batch (one cluster), to site    k  +  1      k  1    k+1   ---thus joining particles that may already be present there. At an opening of the last gate (    k  =  n      k  n    k=n   ) all particles present at site   n   n   n   exit the lattice simultaneously.  References      "      ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩      