


Draft:Blackbody limit for solar energy conversion




Draft:Blackbody limit for solar energy conversion


The thermodynamic limit of solar energy conversion quantifies the amount of thermodynamic work that may be extracted from a beam of solar radiation. It is often stated that this limit should be simply the Carnot limit taking Th as the Sun's blackbody temperature (~5777 K) and the Tc to be the Earth's Blackbody temperature (300 K). In this article, the converter is assumed to be illuminated by full solar concentration (i.e. radiative energy and entropy is only exchanged between the Sun and the Earth).

Introduction
The Sun is the ultimate heat source of the Earth. From thermodynamics, it is well understood that work may be extracted in a process through a temperature difference between a heat source and a heat sink. Thus, humans have created converters that use incident solar radiation to supply power in order to try to meet growing energy demand. For each efficiency limit considered in this article, the following are assumed:



1) Radiative exchange with the Sun occurs with a unity view factor. This implies that full solar concentration is achieved and thus the only exchange occurs between the converter and the Sun.
 
2) The Sun is a blackbody with a thermodynamic temperature of (5777 K).1

3) All non-radiative heat transfer occurs through a negligibly small temperature gradient.
 



Carnot Efficiency Limit
First consider an exchange between a beam of Blackbody radiation at the Sun’s temperature and a black box converter that sits on Earth. A basic picture is that energy and entropy comes from the Sun as it would from any other heat source at temperature 
 
 
 
 . Heat and entropy are rejected to the cold reservoir at temperature 
 
 
 
  through no temperature gradient. The first and second laws of thermodynamics can be stated for this situation:
First Law:




Second Law:




  These expressions can be combined using 
 
 
 
  in order to retrieve:








  The efficiency of the conversion is the ratio of the work that can be extracted from the converter normalized by the beam of solar radiation that is incident on the converter. In other words:




  For the situation described above, the efficiency can be stated more specifically:




  In the case where no entropy is generated in this conversion process, this result reduces to the well-known Carnot efficiency for a heat engine. Plugging in appropriate values for the Sun and converter temperature, the conversion efficiency is calculated to be 94.75%.
  This result is not the upper limit for converting sunlight into work since it does not take into account the physics of the radiative transport between the Sun and the Earth.
Entropy Flux of Blackbody Radiation
While the Carnot limit is an important starting point, the picture so far is incomplete. The treatment of the entropy flux from the Sun, 
 
 
 
 , is inaccurate since it is delivered to the Earth in the form of electromagnetic radiation. Instead of treating the energy as heat, and therefore the entropy as the quotient of the heat and the source temperature, consider the collection of photons from a blackbody source as a gas. The entropy flux of Blackbody radiation may be determined from the thermodynamic definition of energy:




  Rearranging to describe the entropy and integrating over the arbitrary volume:




  Where 
 
 
 
  is the volumetric energy density, and 
 
 
 
 
  is the thermodynamic pressure of the photon gas.
 === Volumetric Energy Density of Blackbody Radiation ===
The volumetric energy density of the photon gas can be determined using Planck’s law which encapsulates the photon density of states, the photon energy, and the statistical mechanics associated with finding the photon at a particular frequency based on its thermodynamic temperature:




  Where 
 
 
 
  is Planck constant, 
 
 
 
  is the Boltzmann constant,
 
 
 
  is the speed of light in vacuum, 
 
 
 
 
  is the photon frequency and 
 
 
 
  is the intensity, or power flux of the photon gas after integrating over all solid angles. It is seen that the volumetric energy density as well as the power flux are proportional to the fourth power of the thermodynamic temperature. This is consistent with our understanding of the Stefan-Boltzmann law for thermal radiation:




  where 
 
 
 
  represents the Stefan-Boltzmann constant.

Photon Pressure of Blackbody Radiation
The force of a photon due to its momentum 
 
 
 
  is described by:




  Where 
 
 
 
  is the zenith angle of incidence and dA is a differential area element. The photon pressure could be found by integrating over all solid angles:








  where the result of the integral is simply one third of the volumetric energy density, 
 
 
 
 . Thus, we may return to our definition of spatial entropy density of a photon gas, plugging in the fact that the photon pressure is 1/3 of the volumetric energy density for a Blackbody radiation beam.

Entropy Density and Entropy Flux of Blackbody Radiation
Returning to the definition of spatial entropy density of a photon gas, and plugging in our expressions for the internal energy and pressure, the entropy is described by:




  Thus,the volumetric entropy density of the photon gas from Blackbody radiation is given by:




  Alternatively, this may be expressed in terms of an entropy flux. This is the quantity that concerns the limits of of Solar energy conversion:




  where, curiously, a factor of 4/3 appears apparently owing itself to the mechanical properties of blackbody radiation2.

Landsberg Efficiency Limit
The entropy flux associated with Blackbody radiation will now be included in the formulation of the 1st and 2nd laws including radiative exchange between the Sun and the converter, which sits at the same temperature as the Earth, 
 
 
 
 .
First Law:




Second Law:




  Where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent the energy and entropy flux associated with the Blackbody radiation from the converter. As before, these expressions may be combined:




  Dividing by 
 
 
 
  defines the conversion efficiency limit:




  Plugging in our more accurate definition of entropy flux (for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ):








  This expression can be re-written to formulate the Landsberg limit:


  In this limit, the efficiency for a reversible process ( 
 
 
 
  = 0 ) is 92.9%. This minor degradation in performance comes from the fact that about 33% more entropy comes into the system from the Sun when the power is delivered radiatively, and while we also are able to dump 33% more entropy out of the system, the converter temperature is lower than the Sun’s. Thus, the efficiency is ultimately degraded from the Carnot limit.

Entropy Generation due to Absorption and Emission
Consider the absorption and emission processes in isolation. The entropy flux associated with a beam of blackbody radiation carries around an extra factor of 1/3. If a beam of energy in the form of Blackbody radiation is eventually converted within a lattice at a temperature 
 
 
 
  then we see the difference in entropy associated with this energy, 
 
 
3



  Where the entropy gain comes primarily from the fact that the energy exists at a colder temperature than before – a lost opportunity to do work. Similarly, for the entropy generated due to thermal emission:




  Where, again, an extra factor of 1/3 is picked up since the energy now exists as blackbody radiation. Note that if a cold body is in radiative contact with a hot body, and a photon happens to be emitted by the cold body and absorbed by the hot body, which is by no means a forbidden process, entropy is not destroyed. The above expression not valid since a single photon does not correspond to a thermodynamic temperature and the analysis from this chapter is not applicable since it only refers to a complete set of photons that represent a temperature.

Blackbody Efficiency Limit
While the Landsberg limit is the highest achievable efficiency, it is not theoretically possible for a Blackbody, which absorbs and emits a Blackbody spectrum at the highest possible rate. In order to derive the Blackbody efficiency limit, the intrinsic entropy generation corresponding to absorption and emission of Blackbody radiation must be considered.
  From the formulation that led to the Landsberg limit, the second law may be written as:




  Divide through by the ratio of 
 
 
 
 :




  Note that in this formulation, the temperature of the converter is decoupled from the ambient temperature, 
 
 
 
 . This intermediate temperature is required to extract power from absorbed solar power. If the proper entropy generation terms associated with the absorption and emission of Blackbody radiation are included in the previously derived Landsberg limit, the second law states:








  The efficiency, as before, is simply defined as:


  Therefore, the ratio 
 
 
 
  may be inserted to yield:






  This is known as the Blackbody limit for solar energy conversion. By maximizing this function, the highest efficiency it reaches at a converter temperature of about 2400 K is 85.4%.

Physical Interpretation of the Result
The Blackbody limit for solar energy conversion can be intuitively understood as a solar-powered Carnot engine. An inspection of the limit reveals a few interesting facts:
 ::1) The expression goes to 0 when either the temperature of the converter is at the ambient temperature or at the Sun's temperature. At the ambient temperature, there is not potential to do work. At the Sun's temperature, there is no net radiative exchange with the Sun.


2) The first term represents a radiative exchange between two Blackbody surfaces with a unity view factor.
 
3) The second term is the Carnot efficiency.
 



Reaching the Blackbody Limit
There are many conversion strategies that theoretically are capable of achieving the Blackbody Radiation limit. Some of them include 4:
 * Thermophotovoltaics

Thermoelectrics
Thermionics
Up- & Down- converters


References
"











