


Lie group–Lie algebra correspondence




Lie group–Lie algebra correspondence

In mathematics, Lie group–Lie algebra correspondence allows one to study Lie groups, which are geometric objects, in terms of Lie algebras, which are linear objects. In this article, a Lie group refers to a real Lie group. For the complex and p-adic cases, see complex Lie group and p-adic Lie group.
In this article, manifolds (in particular Lie groups) are assumed to be second countable; in particular, they have at most countably many connected components.
Basics
Given a Lie group G, let 
 
 
 
  be its associated Lie algebra—the Lie subalgebra of the Lie algebra of vector fields on G that consists of vector fields X that are invariant under left translations; that is, for any g, h in G,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the differential of 
 
 
 
  between tangent spaces.1 The left-invariance amounts to the fact that the vector bundle map over G


 
  given by 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism (note φ makes 
 
 
 
  a Lie group). It follows that the canonical map


 
  is an isomorphism of vector spaces and one usually identifies 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . (There is also a third incarnation of 
 
 
 
 ; see "related constructions" below.) In particular, the dimension of G as a real manifold is the dimension of the vector space 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the connected component of the identity element.
If


 
  is a Lie group homomorphism, then its differential at the identity element


 
  is a Lie algebra homomorphism (brackets go to brackets), which has the following properties:



 
 .2
If the image of f is closed,3 then 
 
 
4 and the first isomorphism theorem holds: f induces the isomorphism of Lie groups:





 
 .
 




The product rule holds: if 
 
 
 
  are Lie group homomorphisms, then 
 
 

The chain rule holds: if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are Lie group homomorphisms, then 
 
 

The differential of the (multiplicative) inverse is the additive inverse
 
 


In particular, if H is a Lie subgroup (i.e., a closed subgroup5) of a Lie group G, then 
 
 
 
  is a Lie subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 . Also, if f is injective, then f is an immersion and so G is said to be an immersed (Lie) subgroup of H. For example, 
 
 
 
  is an immersed subgroup of H. If f is surjective, then f is a submersion and if, in addition, G is compact, then f is a principal bundle with the structure group its kernel. (Ehresmann's lemma)
Let 
 
 
 
  be a direct product of Lie groups and 
 
 
 
  projections. Then the differentials 
 
 
 
  give the canonical identification:


 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  are Lie subgroups of a Lie group, then 
 
 

Let G be a connected Lie group. If H is a Lie group, then any Lie group homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined by its differential 
 
 
 
 . Precisely, there is the exponential map

 
  (and one for H) such that 
 
 
 
  and, since G is connected, this determines f uniquely.6 For example, if G is the Lie group of invertible real square matrices of size n (general linear group), then 
 
 
 
  is the Lie algebra of real square matrices of size n and 
 
 
 
 .
The next criterion is frequently used to compute the Lie algebra of a given Lie group. Let G be a Lie group and H an immersed subgroup. Then


7 For example, one can use the criterion to establish the correspondence for classical compact groups (cf. the table in "compact Lie groups" below.)


 
  defines a functor from the category of Lie groups to the category of finite-dimensional real Lie algebras. Lie's third theorem states that 
 
 
 
  defines an equivalence from the subcategory of simply connected Lie groups to the category of finite-dimensional real Lie algebras. Explicitly, the theorem contains the following two statements:

Every finite-dimensional real Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of some simply connected Lie group.
If 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra homomorphism and if G is simply connected, then there exists a (unique) Lie group homomorphism 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .

Of two, the first one is fundamental since the second follows from the first applied to the graph of a Lie algebra homomorphism.
Perhaps, the most elegant proof of the theorem uses Ado's theorem, which says any finite-dimensional Lie algebra (over a field of any characteristic) is a Lie subalgebra of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of square matrices. The proof goes as follows: by Ado's theorem, we assume 
 
 
 
  is a Lie subalgebra. Let G be the subgroup of 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be a simply connected covering of G; it is not hard to show that 
 
 
 
  is a Lie group and that the covering map is a Lie group homomorphism. Since 
 
 
 
 , this completes the proof.
Example: Each element X in the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  gives rise to the Lie algebra homomorphism


 
  By Lie's third theorem, as 
 
 
 
  and exp for it is the identity, this homomorphism is the differential of the Lie group homomorphism 
 
 
 
  for some immersed subgroup H of G. This Lie group homomorphism, called the one-parameter subgroup generated by X, is precisely the exponential map 
 
 
 
  and H its image. The preceding can be summarized to saying that there is a canonical bijective correspondence between 
 
 
 
  and the set of one-parameter subgroups of G.
Lie group representations
A special case of Lie correspondence is a correspondence between finite-dimensional representations of a Lie group and representations of the associated Lie algebra.
The general linear group 
 
 
 
  is a Lie group and a Lie group homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is called a representation of a Lie group G. The differential 
 
 
 
 , denoted often simply by 
 
 
 
 , is then a Lie algebra homomorphism called a Lie algebra representation.
Since the exponential map for the general linear group is 
 
 
 
 , for any Lie group representation π we have



An important special case of a Lie group representation is the adjoint representation of a Lie group G; each element g in a Lie group G defines an automorphism of G by conjugation
 
 
 
 ; the differential 
 
 
 
  is then an automorphism of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . This way, we get a representation 
 
 
 
 , called the adjoint representation. The corresponding Lie algebra homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is called the adjoint representation of 
 
 
 
  and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . One can show 
 
 
 
 , which in particular implies that the Lie bracket of 
 
 
 
  is determined by the group law on G.
By Lie's third theorem, there exists a subgroup 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  whose Lie algebra is 
 
 
 
 . (
 
 
 
  is in general not a closed subgroup; only an immersed subgroup.) It is called the adjoint group of 
 
 
 
 .8 If G is connected, it fits into the exact sequence:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the center of G. If the center of G is discrete, then Ad here is a covering map.
Let G be a connected Lie group. Then G is unimodular if and only if 
 
 
 
  for all g in G.9
Let G be a Lie group acting on a manifold X and Gx the stabilizer of a point x in X. Let 
 
 
 
 . Then



 
 .
If the orbit 
 
 
 
  is locally closed, then the orbit is a submanifold of X and 
 
 
 
 .10

For a subset A of 
 
 
 
  or G, let





 
  be the Lie algebra centralizer and the Lie group centralizer of A. Then 
 
 
 
 .
If H is a closed connected subgroup of G, then H is normal if and only if 
 
 
 
  is an ideal and in such a case 
 
 
 
 .
Abelian Lie groups
Let G be a connected Lie group. Since the Lie algebra of the center of G is the center of the Lie algebra of G (cf. the previous §), G is abelian if and only its Lie algebra is abelian.
If G is abelian, then the exponential map 
 
 
 
  is a surjective group homomorphism.11 The kernel of it is a discrete group (since the dimension is zero) called the integer lattice of G and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . By the first isomorphism theorem, 
 
 
 
  induces the isomorphism 
 
 
 
 .
By the rigidity argument, the fundamental group

 
  of a connected Lie group G is a central subgroup of a simply connected covering 
 
 
 
  of G; in other words, G fits into the central extension


 
  Equivalently, given a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  and a simply connected Lie group 
 
 
 
  whose Lie algebra is 
 
 
 
 , there is a one-to-one correspondence between quotients of 
 
 
 
  by discrete central subgroups and connected Lie groups having Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 .
For the complex case, complex tori are important; see complex Lie group for this topic.
Compact Lie groups
Let G be a connected Lie group with finite center. Then the following are equivalent.

G is compact.
(Weyl) The simply connected covering 
 
 
 
  of G is compact.
The adjoint group 
 
 
 
  is compact.
There exists an embedding 
 
 
 
  as a closed subgroup.
The Killing form on 
 
 
 
  is negative definite.
For each X in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is diagonalizable and has zero or purely imaginary eigenvalues.
There exists an invariant inner product on 
 
 
 
 .





Compact Lie group

Complexification of associated Lie algebra

Root system



SU(n+1)









An



SO(2n+1)









Bn



Sp(n)









Cn



SO(2n)









Dn





If G is a compact Lie group, then


 
  where the left-hand side is the Lie algebra cohomology of 
 
 
 
  and the right-hand side is the de Rham cohomology of G. (Roughly, this is a consequence of the fact that any differential form on G can be made left invariant by the averaging argument.)
Related constructions
Let G be a Lie group. The associated Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of G may be alternatively defined as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  be the algebra of distributions on G with support at the identity element with the multiplication given by convolution. 
 
 
 
  is in fact a Hopf algebra. The Lie algebra of G is then 
 
 
 
 , the Lie algebra of primitive elements in 
 
 
 
 .12 By the Milnor–Moore theorem, there is the canonical isomorphism 
 
 
 
  between the universal enveloping algebra of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
See also

compact Lie algebra
Milnor–Moore theorem
Formal Lie group

Notes
References





External links

Notes for Math 261A Lie groups and Lie algebras

Formal Lie theory in characteristic zero, a blog post by Akhil Mathew

"
Category:Lie algebras Category:Lie groups



In other words, a vector field on G is left-invariant if it is 

 
 -related to itself for any g in G.↩
More generally, if H' is a closed subgroup of H, then 
 
 
↩
This requirement cannot be omitted; see also http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/329753/image-of-homomorphism-of-lie-groups↩
↩
↩
In general, if U is a neighborhood of the identity element in a connected topological group G, then 
 
 
 
  coincides with G, since the former is an open (hence closed) subgroup. Now, 
 
 
 
  defines a local homeomorphism from a neighborhood of the zero vector to the neighborhood of the identity element.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
It's surjective because 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  is abelian.↩
↩




