


Thickness (graph theory)




Thickness (graph theory)

In graph theory, the thickness of a graph 
 
 
 
  is the minimum number of planar graphs into which the edges of 
 
 
 
  can be partitioned. That is, if there exists a collection of 
 
 
 
  planar graphs, all having the same set of vertices, such that the union of these planar graphs is 
 
 
 
 , then the thickness of 
 
 
 
  is at most 
 
 
 
 .12 In other words, the thickness of a graph is the minimal number of planar subgraphs whose union equals to graph 
 
 
 
 .3
Thus, a planar graph has thickness 1. Graphs of thickness 2 are called biplanar graphs. The concept of thickness originates in the 1962 conjecture of Frank Harary: For any graph on 9 points, either itself or its complementary graph is non-planar. The problem is equivalent to determining whether the complete graph  is biplanar (it is not, and the conjecture is true).4 A comprehensive5 survey on the state of the arts of the topic as of 1998 was written by Petra Mutzel, Thomas Odenthal and Mark Scharbrodt.6
Specific graphs
The thickness of the complete graph on 
 
 
 
  vertices, , is



except when 
 
 
 
  for which the thickness is three.78
With some exceptions, the thickness of a complete bipartite graph  is generally:


910
Related problems
Every forest is planar, and every planar graph can be partitioned into at most three forests. Therefore, the thickness of any graph 
 
 
 
  is at most equal to the arboricity of the same graph (the minimum number of forests into which it can be partitioned) and at least equal to the arboricity divided by three.1112 The thickness of 
 
 
 
  is also within constant factors of another standard graph invariant, the degeneracy, defined as the maximum, over subgraphs of 
 
 
 
 , of the minimum degree within the subgraph. If an 
 
 
 
 -vertex graph has thickness t then it necessarily has at most 
 
 
 
  edges, from which it follows that its degeneracy is at most 
 
 
 
 . In the other direction, if a graph has degeneracy 
 
 
 
  then it has arboricity, and thickness, at most 
 
 
 
 .
Thickness is closely related to the problem of simultaneous embedding.13 If two or more planar graphs all share the same vertex set, then it is possible to embed all these graphs in the plane, with the edges drawn as curves, so that each vertex has the same position in all the different drawings. However, it may not be possible to construct such a drawing while keeping the edges drawn as straight line segments.
A different graph invariant, the rectilinear thickness or geometric thickness of a graph 
 
 
 
 , counts the smallest number of planar graphs into which 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed subject to the restriction that all of these graphs can be drawn simultaneously with straight edges. The book thickness adds an additional restriction, that all of the vertices be drawn in convex position, forming a circular layout of the graph. However, in contrast to the situation for arboricity and degeneracy, no two of these three thickness parameters are always within a constant factor of each other.14
Computational complexity
It is NP-hard to compute the thickness of a given graph, and NP-complete to test whether the thickness is at most two.15 However, the connection to arboricity allows the thickness to be approximated to within an approximation ratio of 3 in polynomial time.
References
"
Category:Graph invariants Category:Planar graphs



.
.
Christian A. Duncan, On Graph Thickness, Geometric Thickness, and Separator Theorems, CCCG 2009, Vancouver, BC, August 17–19, 2009


Petra Mutzel, Thomas Odenthal and Mark Scharbrodt, The Thickness of Graphs: A Survey
, Theorem 3.2.
.
, Theorem 3.4.
.

.
.
.
.




