


Icosahedron




Icosahedron

 In geometry, an icosahedron ( or ) is a polyhedron with 20 faces. The name comes . The plural can be either "icosahedra" (-) or "icosahedrons".
There are many kinds of icosahedron, with some being more symmetrical than others. The most well known is the regular convex or Platonic icosahedron.
Regular icosahedra
The most symmetrical are the two kinds of regular icosahedron. Each has 20 equilateral triangle faces with five meeting at each of its twelve vertices.
Convex regular icosahedron
The convex regular icosahedron is one of the five regular Platonic solids and is represented by its Schläfli symbol {3, 5}.
The dual polyhedron is the regular dodecahedron {5, 3} having three regular pentagonal faces around each vertex.
Great icosahedron
The great icosahedron is one of the four regular star Kepler-Poinsot polyhedra. Its Schläfli symbol is {3, 5/2}.
The dual polyhedron is the great stellated dodecahedron {5/2, 3}, having three regular star pentagonal faces around each vertex.
Stellated icosahedra
Stellation is the process of extending the faces or edges of a polyhedron until they meet to form a new polyhedron. It is done symmetrically so that the resulting figure retains the overall symmetry of the parent figure.
In their book The fifty nine icosahedra, Coxeter et al. enumerated 58 such stellations of the regular icosahedron.
Of these, many have a single face in each of the 20 face planes and so are also icosahedra. The great icosahedron is among them.
Other stellations have more than one face in each plane or form compounds of simpler polyhedra. These are not strictly icosahedra, although they are often referred to as such.
Pyritohedral symmetry




Pyritohedral and tetrahedral symmetries







 Four views of an icosahedron with tetrahedral symmetry, with eight equilateral triangles (red and yellow), and 12 blue isosceles triangles. Yellow and red triangles are the same color in pyritohedral symmetry.



Coxeter diagrams



Schläfli symbol



Faces



Edges



Vertices



Symmetry group



Rotation group



Dual polyhedron



Properties




Net



(Figure)
Construction from the vertices of a truncated octahedron, showing internal rectangles with edge length ratios of 2:1.

A regular icosahedron can be constructed with pyritohedral symmetry, and is called a snub octahedron or snub tetratetrahedron or snub tetrahedron. this can be seen as an alternated truncated octahedron. If all the triangles are equilateral, the symmetry can also be distinguished by colouring the 8 and 12 triangle sets differently.
Pyritohedral symmetry has the symbol (3*2), [4,3+], with order 24. Tetrahedral symmetry has the symbol (332), [3,3]+, with order 12. These lower symmetries allow geometric distortions from 20 equilateral triangular faces, instead having 8 equilateral triangles and 12 congruent isosceles triangles.
Cartesian coordinates
The coordinates of the 12 vertices can be defined by the vectors defined by all the possible cyclic permutations and sign-flips of coordinates of the form (2, 1, 0). These coordinates represent the truncated octahedron with alternated vertices deleted.
This construction is called a snub tetrahedron in its regular icosahedron form, generated by the same operations carried out starting with the vector (φ, 1, 0), where φ is the golden ratio.1
Jessen's icosahedron
In Jessen's icosahedron, sometimes called Jessen's orthogonal icosahedron, the 12 isosceles faces are arranged differently such that the figure is non-convex. It has right dihedral angles.
It is scissors congruent to a cube, meaning that it can be sliced into smaller polyhedral pieces that can be rearranged to form a solid cube.
Other symmetries
Rhombic icosahedron
The rhombic icosahedron is a zonohedron made up of 20 congruent rhombs. It can be derived from the rhombic triacontahedron by removing 10 middle faces. Even though all the faces are congruent, the rhombic icosahedron is not face-transitive.
Tetrahedral colouring
20 triangles can also be arranged with tetrahedral symmetry (332), [3,3]+, seen as the 8 triangles marked (colored) in alternating pairs of four, with order 12. These symmetries offer Coxeter diagrams:  and  respectfully, each representing the lower symmetry to the regular icosahedron , (*532), [5,3] icosahedral symmetry of order 120.
Pyramid and prism symmetries
Common icosahedra with pyramid and prism symmetries include:

19-sided pyramid (plus 1 base = 20).
18-sided prism (plus 2 ends = 20).
9-sided antiprism (2 sets of 9 sides + 2 ends = 20).
10-sided bipyramid (2 sets of 10 sides = 20).
10-sided trapezohedron (2 sets of 10 sides = 20).

Johnson solids
Several Johnson solids are icosahedra:2




J22

J35

J36

J59

J60

J92






Gyroelongated triangular cupola


Elongated triangular orthobicupola


Elongated triangular gyrobicupola


Parabiaugmented dodecahedron


Metabiaugmented dodecahedron


Triangular hebesphenorotunda


(Figure)
Johnson solid 22 net.png

(Figure)
Johnson solid 35 net.png

(Figure)
Johnson solid 36 net.png

(Figure)
Johnson solid 59 net.png

(Figure)
Johnson solid 60 net.png

(Figure)
Johnson solid 92 net.png




16 triangles
 3 squares
  
 1 hexagon

8 triangles
 12 squares

8 triangles
 12 squares

10 triangles
  
 10 pentagons

10 triangles
  
 10 pentagons

13 triangles
 3 squares
 3 pentagons
 1 hexagon



References
"
Category:Polyhedra Category:Individual graphs




Icosahedron on Mathworld.




