


Farley–Buneman instability




Farley–Buneman instability

The Farley–Buneman instability, or FB instability, is a microscopic plasma instability named after Donald T. Farley1 and Oscar Buneman.2 It is similar to the ionospheric Rayleigh-Taylor instability.
It occurs in collisional plasma with neutral component, and is driven by drift currents. It can be thought of as a modified two-stream instability arising from the difference in drifts of electrons and ions exceeding the ion acoustic speed.
It is present in the equatorial and polar ionospheric E-regions. Since the FB fluctuations can scatter the electromagnetic waves, the instability can be used to diagnose the state of ionosphere by the use of electromagnetic pulses.
Conditions
To derive the dispersion relation below, we must make the following assumptions. We consider the plasma to be quasi-neutral (ni~ne), which is appropriate since the wavelengths of interest are much larger than the Debye length. Additionally, we take the ions to be unmagnetized due to the high collisions frequency with neutrals compared to the ion gyro-frequency. So the ions, in the equilibrium state, are assumed to be at rest. Additionally we must neglect refraction and propagation effects. We take the electric field to be electrostatic since the plasma pressure is much smaller than the ambient magnetic energy density. We ignore gravity and assume the species are isothermal.
Dispersion relation
We use linearized fluid equations (equation of motion, equation of continuity) for electrons and ions with Lorenz force and collisional term. This additional term describes the collisions of charged particles with neutral particles in the plasma by frequency of collisions. We denote 
 
 
 
  as the frequency of collisions between electrons and neutrals, and 
 
 
 
  as the frequency of collisions between ions and neutrals. We also assume exponential type of behaviour, meaning that all physical quantities 
 
 
 
  will behave as an exponential function of time 
 
 
 
  and position 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is the wave number) :


 
 . This can lead to oscillations if the frequency

 
  is a real number, or to either exponential growth or exponential decay if 
 
 
 
  is complex. Dispersion relation takes the form of:


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
drift and 
 
 
 
  is the acoustic speed of ions. The coefficient 
 
 
 
  described the combined effect of electron and ion collisions as well as their cyclotron frequencies

 
  and 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .
Growth rate
Solving the dispersion we arrive at frequency given as:


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  describes the growth rate of the instability. For FB we have the following:





 
 .
See also

Plasma stability
Plasma Instabilities
List of plasma (physics) articles

References









"
Category:Plasma physics



Farley, D. T., "Two-stream plasma instability as a source of irregularities in the ionosphere" (1963) Physical Review Letters, Vol. 10, Issue 7, pp. 279-282↩
Buneman, O., "Excitation of field aligned sound waves by electron streams" (1963) Physical Review Letters, Vol. 10, Issue 7, pp. 285-287↩




