   4-hydroxy-tetrahydrodipicolinate synthase      4-hydroxy-tetrahydrodipicolinate synthase   4-hydroxy-tetrahydrodipicolinate synthase (, dihydrodipicolinate synthase , dihydropicolinate synthetase , dihydrodipicolinic acid synthase , L-aspartate-4-semialdehyde hydro-lyase (adding pyruvate and cyclizing) , dapA (gene) ) is an enzyme with the systematic name L-aspartate-4-semialdehyde hydro-lyase (adding pyruvate and cyclizing; (4S)-4-hydroxy-2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-(2S)-dipicolinate-forming) . 1 2 3 4 This enzyme catalyses the following chemical reaction   pyruvate + L-aspartate-4-semialdehyde   ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons   (2S,4S)-4-hydroxy-2,3,4,5-tetrahydrodipicolinate + H 2 O   The reaction proceeds in three consecutive steps.  Function  This enzyme belongs to the family of lyases , specifically the amine-lyases, which cleave carbon-nitrogen bonds. 4-hydroxy-tetrahydrodipicolinate synthase is the key enzyme in lysine biosynthesis via the diaminopimelate pathway of prokaryotes , some phycomycetes , and higher plants . The enzyme catalyses the condensation of L-aspartate-beta-semialdehyde and pyruvate to 4-hydroxy-tetrahydropicolinic acid via a ping-pong mechanism in which pyruvate binds to the enzyme by forming a Schiff base with a lysine residue. 5  Related enzymes  Three other proteins are structurally related to this enzyme and probably also act via a similar catalytic mechanism. These are Escherichia coli  N-acetylneuraminate lyase () (protein NanA), which catalyses the condensation of N -acetyl-D-mannosamine and pyruvate to form N -acetylneuraminate ; Rhizobium meliloti ( Sinorhizobium meliloti ) protein MosA, 6 which is involved in the biosynthesis of the rhizopine 3- O -methyl-scyllo-inosamine; and E. coli hypothetical protein YjhH.  Structure  The sequences of 4-hydroxy-tetrahydrodipicolinate synthase from different sources are well-conserved. The structure takes the form of a homotetramer, in which 2 monomers are related by an approximate 2-fold symmetry . 7 Each monomer comprises 2 domains: an 8-fold alpha-/beta-barrel, and a C-terminal  alpha-helical domain. The fold resembles that of N -acetylneuraminate lyase. The active site lysine is located in the barrel domain, and has access via 2 channels on the C-terminal side of the barrel. {{-}}  References  Further reading     External links     "  Category:EC 4.3.3  Category:Enzymes of known structure  Category:Protein domains     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     