


Draft:Nonlinear wave groups on deep water




Draft:Nonlinear wave groups on deep water


Wave groups on deep water: nonlinear theory
Introduction
A nonlinear theory of deep-water waves is discussed below. The waves start to propagate away from an initially disturbed body of water. It is assumed that the horizontal dimensions of the initially disturbed body of the water are much larger than the magnitude of the free surface displacement in the wave origin. Then the water is acted on by no external force other than gravity.
The water is supposed to be a nonviscous and homogeneous liquid. The free surface of the water is infinite in extent. The external pressure on the free surface is constant. The liquid fills the space below the free surface.
Classical equations of the problem include:
(i) the Laplace's equation for velocity potential Φ,
(ii) nonlinear kinematic condition which means that a liquid particle in the free surface can have no velocity relative to the surface in the direction of the normal,
(iii) nonlinear condition of the pressure continuity across the free surface,
(iiii) conditions at infinity,
(iiiii) initial conditions.
Bellow the following terminology is used:
' wave group' is a system of waves in which the amplitude dies away on either side of the wave of maximum height;
' wave' is a wave-group's section which consists of one crest and the adjacent trough and is singled out by three successive zeros of the group;
' zeros of a wave group' are the points where the water surface intersects its equlibrium horizotal plane;
' waveheight' (or height of the wave) is the level difference between a crest and the trough of the wave;
' wave packet' is a wave group in which the amplitude dies away very quickly with distance from the wave of maximum height;
' wave train' is the term which means that the bulk energy of a system of waves is confined to a narrow interval around a dominant wave number.
Harmonic wave 
 
 
 
  on the free surface infinite in extent is a wave train and is not a wave group.
Relevant ideas
Linear analysis of deep water waves is based on the assumption that the departure of the water surface from its equilibrium position and the wave slope are very small (infinitesimal). Under this assumption, nonlinear terms in the coditions on the water surface are omitted and the linearized conditions are moved from the evolving free surface to the horizontal plane, the equilibrium position of the surface. Linear waves obey the principle of linear superposition which states, in particular, that when two waves overlap, the actual displacement of any point of the free surface, at any time, is obtained by adding two displacements. According to the linear theory, a wave group on the water surface is a linear combination of sinusoidal waves moving with different speeds, so the wave group gradually disintegrates (disperses) in its sinusoidal constituents.
Nonlinear analysis of deep water waves is based on Schrödinger equation for weakly nonlinear waves.
Assuming that the frequency, amplitude, and wave number of an evolving weakly nonlinear wave train are slowly varying functions of time, the classical equations for free surface gravity waves are reduced to equations governing the evolution of the frequency, amplitude, and wave number. These equations in turn were reduced to nonlinear Schrödinger equation for complex-valued wave envelope . , , 
Asymptotic behaviour of solutions of the Schrödinger equation was revealed by . Provided the initial free surface displacement (away from the equilibrium position of the surface) decays sufficiently rapidly with distance from the maximum of the displacement, it was found, in particular, that an initial wave packet of arbitrary envelope shape disintegrates with time into a number of final packets, each of specific envelope shape, and an oscillating 'tail'; the envelope of each final packet is a solution of the Schrödinger equation; the number of final wave packets depends on initial conditions for the equation; the envelope of a final packet travels at a constant velocity, keeps its shape, and retains its shape and velocity after interaction with other final packets (this is the reason to use the term 'envelope soliton'). That is, the solitons do not disperse.
Disintegration of a wave packet into final packets travelling at different velocities is also the dispersion. But the final packets don't disperse. Why? Supposedly due to a dynamic balance between nonlinear and dispersive effects.
In any case, existence of the envelope solitons for solutions of Schrödinger equation does not assure the balance of nonlinearity and dispersion for solutions of classical equations for deep-water gravity waves.
Equations in curvilinear coordinates
The water flow in a vertical 
 
 
 
 -plane is considered where the 
 
 
 
 -axis is oriented upward and the 
 
 
 
 -axis in horizontal direction. The water is thought as being contained between two vertical planes (parallel to the 
 
 
 
 -plane at a distance apart.
In the 
 
 
 
 -plane, the polar coordinate system is introduced. The pole of the polar system has coordinates 
 
 
 
 ; the polar angle 
 
 
 
  is measured from the positive 
 
 
 
 -axis in the counterclockwise direction, 
 
 
 
  is the time.
Equations of the free surface are taken in the parametric form 





The equilibrium position of the free surface is the horizontal plane $z=0$.
Formally, equations (1) for each specified function 
 
 
 
  describe a family of curves depending on 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  being considered as constant. The value of 
 
 
 
  determines the horizontal scale of the problem; 
 
 
 
  is the magnitude of the free surface displacement in the wave origin.
In the 
 
 
 
 -plane, curvilinear coordinates 
 
 
 
  are defined by the relations





, so the equation of the free surface takes the form 
 
 
 
  (the water ocupies the half-space 
 
 
 
 ).
To satisfy the Laplace's equation, the velocity potential 
 
 
 
  is sought in the form of a doublet distribution over the free surface.
Boundary conditions at infinity assure the energy supplied to the water by a source of disturbances is finite.
Equations (i) - (iiiii) are rewritten in the curvilinear coordinates 
 
 
 
  and the problem is formulated mathematically in terms of nonlinear integrodifferential equations in two unknown functions 
 
 
 
  and the density 
 
 
 
  of the doublets.
The problem is studed for small values of 
 
 
 
 . Formal solution to the problem is sought in the form of a power series of 
 
 
 
  similar to the following:





.
Specific wave packets
A set of specific solutions was obtained from the leading-order equations. The solutions represent a set of dispersive wave packets which are described by equations 




















where




















Each of the subscripts is referred to as the packet number.
The equations of the free surface are obtained in parametric form as follows















The constants 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  determine the initial displacement to the free surface, the initial velocity field is determined by the constants 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . The constants are independent of 
 
 
 
 .
Though the function 
 
 
 
  is a linear combination of functions (2) - (5), the waves (6) are still nonlinear since they do not obey the principle of linear superposition: the implicit form of the free surface is





By equations (2)-(6), any wave group on the free surface is a mixture of finite or infinite (it depends on initial conditions) set of the specific wave packets of different numbers, and evolution of each packet in the mixture is not influenced by evolution of the others.
The greater the packet number, the shorter the wavelength of the packet's carrier wave component, the slower the packet travels, the slower the packet disperses.
Though any specific packet disperses, it tends to keep its shape within a finite time interval which depends on the packet number. So, on a finite time interval, behaviour of the specific packets of short carrier wave length (large packet number) seems to be similar to that of the "envelope soliton" solutions of the Schrödinger equation for weakly nonlinear waves. On the other hand, in case of infinitesimal wave amplitude (
 
 
 
 ) the present theory is in agreement with linear wave theory.
References


Zakharov, V.E, 1968 "Stability of periodic waves of finite amplitude on the surface of a deep fluid", J. App. Mech. Tech. Phys. 9, 190-194.

. Hasimoto, H., Ono, H., 1972 "Nonlinear modulation of gravity waves", J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 33, 805-811.

Davey, A., 1972 "The propagation of a weak nonlinear wave", J. Fluid Mech. 53, 769-781.

Yuen, H.C., Lake, B.M., 1975 "Nonlinear Deep Water Waves: Theory and Experiment", ''Phys. Fluids.// 18, 956-960.

Zakharov, V.E., Shabat, A.B., 1972 "Exact theory of two-dimensional self-focusing and one-dimensional self-modulating waves in nonlinear media", Soviet Phys. JETF. 65, 997-1011.

Mindlin, I.M., 2004 "Nonlinear waves in two-dimensions generated by variable pressure acting on the free surface of a heavy liquid", '' J. Appl. Math. Phys. (ZAMP)'' 55, 781-799.

Mindlin I.M. (2014). [http://arxiv.org/pdf/1406.1681v1.pdf, "Deep-water gravity waves: nonlinear theory of wave groups."]

:Category: Nonlinear Water-Wave Theory
"


