


Ky Fan lemma




Ky Fan lemma

In mathematics, Ky Fan's lemma (KFL) is a combinatorial lemma about labellings of triangulations. It is a generalization of Tucker's lemma. It was proved by Ky Fan in 1952.1
(Figure)
In this example, where n = 2, there is no 2-dimensional alternating simplex (since the labels are only 1,2). Hence, there must exist a complementary edge (marked with red).

Definitions
KFL uses the following concepts.



 
 : the closed n-dimensional ball.
 


 
 : its boundary sphere.

T: a triangulation of 
 
 
 
 .
 
T is called boundary antipodally symmetric if the subset of simplices of T which are in 
 
 
 
 
  provides a triangulation of 
 
 
 
  where if σ is a simplex then so is −σ.

L: a labeling of the vertices of T, which assigns to each vertex a non-zero integer
 
 
 
 .
 
L is called boundary odd if for every vertex 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .

An edge of T is called a complementary edge of L if the labels of its two endpoints have the same size and opposite signs, e.g. {−2, +2}.
An n-dimensional simplex of T is called an alternating simplex of L if its labels have different sizes with alternating signs, e.g.{−1, +2, −3} or {+3, −5, +7}.

Statement
Let T be a boundary-antipodally-symmetric triangulation of 
 
 
 
 
  and L a boundary-odd labeling of T.
If L has no complementary edge, then L has an odd number of n-dimensional alternating simplexes.
Corollary: Tucker's lemma
By definition, an n-dimensional alternating simplex must have labels with n + 1 different sizes.
This means that, if the labeling L uses only n different sizes (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ), it cannot have an n-dimensional alternating simplex.
Hence, by KFL, L must have a complementary edge.
Proof
KFL can be proved constructively based on a path-based algorithm. The algorithm it starts at a certain point or edge of the triangulation, then goes from simplex to simplex according to prescribed rules, until it is not possible to proceed any more. It can be proved that the path must end in an alternating simplex.
The proof is by induction on n.
The basis is 
 
 
 
 . In this case, 
 
 
 
  is the interval 
 
 
 
  and its boundary is the set 
 
 
 
 
 . The labeling L is boundary-odd, so 
 
 
 
 . Without loss of generality, assume that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Start at −1 and go right. At some edge e, the labeling must change from negative to positive. Since L has no complementary edges, e must have a negative label and a positive label with a different size (e.g. −1 and +2); this means that e is a 1-dimensional alternating simplex. Moreover, if at any point the labeling changes again from positive to negative, then this change makes a second alternating simplex, and by the same reasoning as before there must be a third alternating simplex later. Hence, the number of alternating simplexes is odd.
The following description illustrates the induction step for 
 
 
 
 .2 In this case 
 
 
 
 
  is a disc and its boundary is a circle. The labeling L is boundary-odd, so in particular 
 
 
 
  for some point v on the boundary. Split the boundary circle to two semi-circles and treat each semi-circle as an interval. By the induction basis, this interval must have an alternating simplex, e.g. an edge with labels (+1,−2). Moreover, the number of such edges on the boundary must be odd.
Select an (+1,-2) edge, go through it and look at the labeling of the third vertex in the simplex you are in. There are two cases:

The new vertex has a label with a different size, e.g. +3. You are at a 2-dimensional alternating simplex. Done.
The new vertex has a label with an existing size– either 1 or 2. Since L has no complementary edges, this new vertex cannot be labeled −1 or +2, so it must be labeled +1 or −2. This means that the current simplex with another (+1,−2) edge. Go through it and repeat.

The last case can take you outside the ball. However, since the number of (+1,−2) edges on the boundary must be odd, there must be a new, unvisited (+1,−2) edge on the boundary. Go through it and repeat.
This walk must end inside the ball in an alternating 2-dimensional simplex. Done.
By induction, this proof can be extended to any dimension.
References
"
Category:Combinatorics Category:Lemmas Category:Fixed points (mathematics)









