


Sample entropy




Sample entropy

Sample entropy (SampEn) is a modification of approximate entropy (ApEn), used extensively for assessing the complexity of a physiological time-series signal, thereby diagnosing diseased state.1 Unlike ApEn, SampEn shows good traits such as data length independence and trouble-free implementation. Also, there is a small computational difference: In ApEn, the comparison between the template vector (see below) and the rest of the vectors also includes comparison with itself. This guarantees that probabilities 
 
 
 
  are never zero. Consequently, it is always possible to take a logarithm of probabilities. Because template comparisons with itself lower ApEn values, the signals are interpreted to be more regular than they actually are. These self-matches are not included in SampEn.
There is a multiscale version of SampEn as well, suggested by Costa and others.2
Definition
Like approximate entropy (ApEn), Sample entropy (SampEn) is a measure of complexity 1. But it does not include self-similar patterns as ApEn does. For a given embedding dimension

 
 , tolerance

 
  and number of data points

 
 , SampEn is the negative logarithm of the probability that if two sets of simultaneous data points of length 
 
 
 
  have distance 
 
 
 
  then two sets of simultaneous data points of length 
 
 
 
  also have distance 
 
 
 
 . And we represent it by 
 
 
 
  (or by 
 
 
 
  including sampling time 
 
 
 
 ).
Now assume we have a time-series data set of length 
 
 
 
  with a constant time interval 
 
 
 
 . We define a template vector of length 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  and the distance function 
 
 
 
  (i≠j) is to be the Chebyshev distance (but it could be any distance function, including Euclidean distance). We count the number of vector pairs in template vectors of length 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  having 
 
 
 
  and denote it by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively. We define the sample entropy to be



Where,


 
  = no of template vector pairs having 
 
 
 
  of length 
 
 

 
  = no of template vector pairs having 
 
 
 
  of length 
 
 

It is clear from the definition that 
 
 
 
  will always have a value smaller or equal to 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, 
 
 
 
  will be always either be zero or positive value. A smaller value of 
 
 
 
  also indicates more self-similarity in data set or less noise.
Generally we take the value of 
 
 
 
  to be 
 
 
 
  and the value of 
 
 
 
  to be 
 
 
 
 . Where std stands for standard deviation which should be taken over a very large dataset. For instance, the r value of 6 ms is appropriate for sample entropy calculations of heart rate intervals, since this corresponds to 
 
 
 
  for a very large population.
Multiscale SampEn
The definition mentioned above is a special case of multi scale sampEn with 
 
 
 
 ,where 
 
 
 
  is called skipping parameter. In multiscale SampEn template vectors are defined with a certain interval between its each element specified by the value of 
 
 
 
 . And modified template vector is defined as 
 
 
 
  and sampEn can be written as 
 
 
 
  And we calculate 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  like before.
Implementation
Sample entropy can be implemented easily in many different programming languages. An example written in MatLab can be found here.
References
"
Category:Time series analysis Category:Entropy



↩
↩




