


Affine gauge theory




Affine gauge theory

Affine gauge theory is classical gauge theory where gauge fields are affine connections on the tangent bundle over a smooth manifold

 
 . For instance, these are gauge theory of dislocations in continuous media when 
 
 
 
 , the generalization of metric-affine gravitation theory when 
 
 
 
  is a world manifold and, in particular, gauge theory of the fifth force.
Affine tangent bundle
Being a vector bundle, the tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  of an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifold 
 
 
 
  admits a natural structure of an affine bundle

 
 , called the affine tangent bundle, possessing bundle atlases with affine transition functions. It is associated to a principal bundle

 
  of affine frames in tangent space over 
 
 
 
 , whose structure group is a general affine group

 
 .
The tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  is associated to a principal linear frame bundle

 
 , whose structure group is a general linear group

 
 . This is a subgroup of 
 
 
 
  so that the latter is a semidirect product of 
 
 
 
  and a group 
 
 
 
  of translations.
There is the canonical imbedding of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  onto a reduced principal subbundle which corresponds to the canonical structure of a vector bundle 
 
 
 
  as the affine one.
Given linear bundle coordinates



on the tangent bundle 
 
 
 
 , the affine tangent bundle can be provided with affine bundle coordinates



and, in particular, with the linear coordinates (1).
Affine gauge fields
The affine tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  admits an affine connection

 
  which is associated to a principal connection on an affine frame bundle 
 
 
 
 . In affine gauge theory, it is treated as an affine gauge field.
Given the linear bundle coordinates (1) on 
 
 
 
 , an affine connection 
 
 
 
  is represented by a connection tangent-valued form



This affine connection defines a unique linear connection



on 
 
 
 
 , which is associated to a principal connection on 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, every linear connection 
 
 
 
  (4) on 
 
 
 
  is extended to the affine one 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  which is given by the same expression (4) as 
 
 
 
  with respect to the bundle coordinates (1) on 
 
 
 
 , but it takes a form



relative to the affine coordinates (2).
Then any affine connection 
 
 
 
  (3) on 
 
 
 
  is represented by a sum



of the extended linear connection 
 
 
 
  and a basic soldering form



on 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  due to the canonical isomorphism 
 
 
 
  of the vertical tangent bundle

 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
Relative to the linear coordinates (1), the sum (5) is brought into a sum 
 
 
 
  of a linear connection 
 
 
 
  and the soldering form 
 
 
 
  (6). In this case, the soldering form 
 
 
 
  (6) often is treated as a translation gauge field, though it is not a connection.
Let us note that a true translation gauge field (i.e., an affine connection which yields a flat linear connection on 
 
 
 
 ) is well defined only on a parallelizable manifold

 
 .
Gauge theory of dislocations
In field theory, one meets a problem of physical interpretation of translation gauge fields because there are no fields subject to gauge translations 
 
 
 
 . At the same time, one observes such a field in gauge theory of dislocations in continuous media because, in the presence of dislocations, displacement vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , of small deformations are determined only with accuracy to gauge translations 
 
 
 
 .
In this case, let 
 
 
 
 , and let an affine connection take a form



with respect to the affine bundle coordinates (2). This is a translation gauge field whose coefficients 
 
 
 
  describe plastic distortion, covariant derivatives 
 
 
 
  coincide with elastic distortion, and a strength 
 
 
 
  is a dislocation density.
Equations of gauge theory of dislocations are derived from a gauge invariant Lagrangian density



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Lamé parameters of isotropic media. These equations however are not independent since a displacement field 
 
 
 
  can be removed by gauge translations and, thereby, it fails to be a dynamic variable.
Gauge theory of the fifth force
In gauge gravitation theory on a world manifold 
 
 
 
 , one can consider an affine, but not linear connection on the tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Given bundle coordinates (1) on 
 
 
 
 , it takes the form (3) where the linear connection 
 
 
 
  (4) and the basic soldering form 
 
 
 
  (6) are considered as independent variables.
As was mentioned above, the soldering form 
 
 
 
  (6) often is treated as a translation gauge field, though it is not a connection. On another side, one mistakenly identifies 
 
 
 
  with a tetrad field. However, these are different mathematical object because a soldering form is a section of the tensor bundle 
 
 
 
 , whereas a tetrad field is a local section of a Lorentz reduced subbundle of a frame bundle 
 
 
 
 .
In the spirit of the above-mentioned gauge theory of dislocations, it has been suggested that a soldering field 
 
 
 
  can describe sui generi deformations of a world manifold 
 
 
 
  which are given by a bundle morphism



where 
 
 
 
  is a tautological one-form.
Then one considers metric-affine gravitation theory

 
  on a deformed world manifold as that with a deformed pseudo-Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  when a Lagrangian of a soldering field 
 
 
 
  takes a form


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the Levi-Civita symbol, and



is the torsion of a linear connection 
 
 
 
  with respect to a soldering form 
 
 
 
 .
In particular, let us consider this gauge model in the case of small gravitational and soldering fields whose matter source is a point mass. Then one comes to a modified Newtonian potential of the fifth force type.
References

A. Kadic, D. Edelen, A Gauge Theory of Dislocations and Disclinations, Lecture Notes in Physics 174 (Springer, New York, 1983), ISBN 3-540-11977-9
G. Sardanashvily, O. Zakharov, Gauge Gravitation Theory (World Scientific, Singapore, 1992), ISBN 981-02-0799-9
C. Malyshev, The dislocation stress functions from the double curl T(3)-gauge equations: Linearity and look beyond, Annals of Physics 286 (2000) 249.

External links

G. Sardanashvily, Gravity as a Higgs field. III. Nongravitational deviations of gravitational field, arXiv: gr-qc/9411013.

See also

Gauge gravitation theory
Metric-affine gravitation theory
Connection (affine bundle)
Dislocations
Fifth force

"
Category:Gauge theories Category:Theories of gravitation


