


Uniformly smooth space




Uniformly smooth space

In mathematics, a uniformly smooth space is a normed vector space

 
  satisfying the property that for every 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  such that if 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then



The modulus of smoothness of a normed space X is the function ρX defined for every  by the formula1



The triangle inequality yields that . The normed space X is uniformly smooth if and only if  tends to 0 as t tends to 0.
Properties

Every uniformly smooth Banach space is reflexive.2
A Banach space 
 
 
 
  is uniformly smooth if and only if its continuous dual

 
  is uniformly convex (and vice versa, via reflexivity).3 The moduli of convexity and smoothness are linked by








and the maximal convex function majorated by the modulus of convexity δX is given by4




Furthermore,5






A Banach space is uniformly smooth if and only if the limit










exists uniformly for all 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  denotes the unit sphere of 
 
 
 
 ).
 


When , the Lp-spaces are uniformly smooth (and uniformly convex).

Enflo proved6 that the class of Banach spaces that admit an equivalent uniformly convex norm coincides with the class of super-reflexive Banach spaces, introduced by Robert C. James.7 As a space is super-reflexive if and only if its dual is super-reflexive, it follows that the class of Banach spaces that admit an equivalent uniformly convex norm coincides with the class of spaces that admit an equivalent uniformly smooth norm. The Pisier renorming theorem8 states that a super-reflexive space X admits an equivalent uniformly smooth norm for which the modulus of smoothness ρX satisfies, for some constant C and some 



It follows that every super-reflexive space Y admits an equivalent uniformly convex norm for which the modulus of convexity satisfies, for some constant  and some positive real q



If a normed space admits two equivalent norms, one uniformly convex and one uniformly smooth, the Asplund averaging technique9 produces another equivalent norm that is both uniformly convex and uniformly smooth.
See also

Uniformly convex space

Notes
References



1

.

"
Category:Convex analysis Category:Banach spaces



see Definition 1.e.1, p. 59 in .
Proposition 1.e.3, p. 61 in .
Proposition 1.e.2, p. 61 in .
Proposition 1.e.6, p. 65 in .
Lemma 1.e.7 and 1.e.8, p. 66 in .
Enflo, Per (1973), "Banach spaces which can be given an equivalent uniformly convex norm", Israel J. Math. 13:281–288.
James, Robert C. (1972), "Super-reflexive Banach spaces", Canad. J. Math. 24:896–904.
Pisier, Gilles (1975), "Martingales with values in uniformly convex spaces", Israel J. Math. 20:326–350.
Asplund, Edgar (1967), "Averaged norms", Israel J. Math. 5:227–233.




