


Negative hypergeometric distribution




Negative hypergeometric distribution

In probability theory and statistics, the negative hypergeometric distribution describes the probability of the number of elements taken without replacement from a finite population whose elements can be classified into two mutually exclusive categories like Pass/Fail, Male/Female or Employed/Unemployed that stops when a fixed number of elements of certain class have been taken. As random selections are made from the population, each subsequent draw decreases the population causing the probability of success to change with each draw.
Definition
There are 
 
 
 
  elements, of which 
 
 
 
  are defined as "successes" and the rest are "failures".
Elements are drawn one after the other, without replacements, until 
 
 
 
  failures are encountered. Then, the drawing stops and the number 
 
 
 
  of successes is counted. The negative hypergeometric distribution, 
 
 
 
  is the discrete distribution of this 
 
 
 
 .
1
Related distributions
If the drawing stops after a constant number 
 
 
 
  of draws (regardless of the number of failures), then the number of successes has the hypergeometric distribution, 
 
 
 
 . The two functions are related in the following way:2


Negative-hypergeometric distribution (like the hypergeometric distribution) deals with draws without replacement, so that the probability of success is different in each draw. In contrast, negative-binomial distribution (like the binomial distribution) deals with draws with replacement, so that the probability of success is the same and the trials are independent. The following table summarizes the four distributions related to drawing items:





With replacements

No replacements





Constant number of draws

binomial distribution

hypergeometric distribution



Constant number of failures

negative binomial distribution

negative hypergeometric distribution



References
"
Category:Discrete distributions Category:Factorial and binomial topics Category:Probability distributions



Negative hypergeometric distribution in Encyclopedia of Math.





