   Downside beta      Downside beta   In investing, downside beta is the element of beta that investors associate with risk in the sense of the uncertain potential for loss. It is defined to be the scaled amount by which an asset tends to move compared to a benchmark, calculated only on days when the benchmark’s return is negative. 1  Formula  Downside beta measures downside risk . The CAPM can be modified to use semi-variance instead of standard deviation to measure risk. 2  Where    r  i     subscript  r  i    r_{i}   and    r  m     subscript  r  m    r_{m}   are the excess returns to security   i   i   i   and market   m   m   m   , and    u  m     subscript  u  m    u_{m}   is the average market excess return, the CAPM can be modified to incorporate downside (or upside) beta as follows, 3      β  +     superscript  β     \beta^{+}   and   i   i   i   can be estimated with a regression of excess return of security $i$ on excess return of the market, conditional on excess market return being below the mean for downside beta (or above the mean for upside beta ). 4 Downside beta is calculated from data points of the asset or portfolio return using only those days when the benchmark return is negative. Downside beta and upside beta are also differentiated in the dual-beta model.  Downside beta vs. beta  Downside beta is an effective measure of the risk-return relationship in both developed and growing markets. When companies are grouped according to their two-digit SIC codes, average downside beta is different from standard beta even at the industry average level. Downside market risk can also explain the systematic relative differences in value stocks versus growth stocks, which the CAPM has failed to do, especially in international markets. 5  Downside beta has greater explanatory power than standard beta in bearish markets. 6 7 Portfolios that are constructed by minimizing downside beta may be able to maintain more of their value during times of market decline.  See also   Beta  Capital asset pricing model  Downside risk  Dual-beta  Financial risk  Upside beta   References  External links   An Investigation of Beta and Downside Beta Based CAPM - Case Study of Karachi Stock Exchange , SSRN. M. Tahir, Q. Abbas, S.M. Sargana, U. Ayub and S.K. Saeed; February 2013   "  Category:Jargon  Terminology, Financial     ↩  ↩  ↩   ↩   Estrada computed standard betas and downside betas for stocks across 23 developed markets and 27 emerging markets. This research showed that downside beta did a better job of explaining variations of cross-section returns in both types of market than did standard beta. In emerging markets, downside beta explained 55% of variations in mean returns. ↩     