   Riffle shuffle permutation      Riffle shuffle permutation   In the mathematics of permutations and the study of shuffling  playing cards , a riffle shuffle permutation is one of the permutations of a set of n items that can be obtained by a single riffle shuffle , in which a sorted deck of n cards is cut into two packets and then the two packets are interleaved (e.g. by moving cards one at a time from the bottom of one or the other of the packets to the top of the sorted deck).  As a special case of this, a ( p , q )- shuffle , for numbers p and q with p + q = n , is a riffle in which the first packet has p cards and the second packet has q cards. 1  Combinatorial enumeration  Since a ( p , q )-shuffle is completely determined by how its first p elements are mapped, the number of ( p , q )-shuffles is       (      p  +  q       p     )   .     binomial    p  q   p    {\left({{p+q}\atop{p}}\right)}.   The wedge product of a p -form and a q -form can be defined as a sum over ( p , q )-shuffles. 2  However, the number of distinct riffles is not quite the sum of this formula over all choices of p and q adding to n (which would be 2 n ), because the identity permutation can be represented in multiple ways as a ( p , q )-shuffle for different values of p and q . Instead, the number of distinct riffle shuffle permutations of a deck of n cards, for n = 1, 2, 3, ..., is   1, 2, 5, 12, 27, 58, 121, 248, 503, 1014, ...   More generally, the formula for this number is 2 n − n ; for instance, there are 4503599627370444 riffle shuffle permutations of a 52-card deck.  The number of permutations that are both a riffle shuffle permutation and the inverse permutation of a riffle shuffle is 3       (      n  +  1       3     )   +  1.       binomial    n  1   3   1.    {\left({{n+1}\atop{3}}\right)}+1.   For n = 1, 2, 3, ..., this is   1, 2, 5, 11, 21, 36, 57, 85, 121, 166, 221, ...   and for n = 52 there are exactly 23427 invertible shuffles.  Random distribution  The Gilbert–Shannon–Reeds model describes a random probability distribution on riffle shuffles that is a good match for observed human shuffles. 4 In this model, the identity permutation has probability ( n + 1)/2 n of being generated, and all other riffle permutations have equal probability 1/2 n of being generated. Based on their analysis of this model, mathematicians have recommended that a deck of 52 cards be given seven riffles in order to thoroughly randomize it. 5  Permutation patterns  A pattern in a permutation is a smaller permutation formed from a subsequence of some k values in the permutation by reducing these values to the range from 1 to k while preserving their order. Several important families of permutations can be characterized by a finite set of forbidden patterns, and this is true also of the riffle shuffle permutations: they are exactly the permutations that do not have 321, 2143, and 2413 as patterns. 6 Thus, for instance, they are a subclass of the vexillary permutations , which have 2143 as their only minimal forbidden pattern. 7  Perfect shuffles  A perfect shuffle is a riffle in which the deck is split into two equal-sized packets, and in which the interleaving between these two packets strictly alternates between the two. There are two types of perfect shuffle, an in shuffle and an out shuffle , both of which can be performed consistently by some well-trained people. When a deck is repeatedly shuffled using these permutations, it remains much less random than with typical riffle shuffles, and it will return to its initial state after only a small number of perfect shuffles. In particular, a deck of 52 playing cards will be returned to its original ordering after 52 in shuffles or 8 out shuffles. This fact forms the basis of several magic tricks. 8  See also   Gilbreath permutations , the permutations formed by reversing one of the two packets of cards before riffling them   References  "  Category:Card shuffling  Category:Permutation patterns     Weibel, Charles (1994). An Introduction to Homological Algebra , p. 181. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ↩   . ↩  . ↩  . ↩   . ↩  . ↩     