


Level (logarithmic quantity)




Level (logarithmic quantity)

In the International System of Quantities, the level of a quantity is the logarithm of the ratio of the value of that quantity to a reference value of the same quantity.12 Examples are sound power level (literally, the level of the sound power, abbreviated SWL), sound exposure level (SEL), sound pressure level (SPL) and particle velocity level (SVL).3
Mathematical definitions
Level
Level of a quantity Q, denoted LQ, is defined by


 
  where

r is the base of the logarithm;
Q is the root-power quantity;
Q0 is the reference value of Q.

Level of a field quantity
Level of a field quantity, denoted LF, is defined by


 
  where

F is the field quantity;
F0 is the reference value of F.

For the level of a field quantity, the base of the logarithm is r = e.
Level of a root-power quantity
A root-power quantity is a field quantity. The Level of a root-power quantity, denoted LF, is therefore


 
  where

F is the root-power quantity;
F0 is the reference value of F.

For the level of a root-power quantity, the base of the logarithm is r = e.
Level of a power quantity
Level of a power quantity, denoted LP, is defined by


 
  where

P is the power quantity;
P0 is the reference value of P.

For the level of a power quantity, the base of the logarithm is r = e2.4
Units of level
Power level
The neper, bel, and decibel (one tenth of a bel) are units of level that are often applied to such quantities as power, intensity, or gain. The neper, bel, and decibel are defined by


;

;

.

If F is a root-power quantity:



If P is a power quantity:



If the power quantity P is equal to F2, and if the reference value of the power quantity, P0, is equal to F02, the levels LF and LP are equal.
Frequency level
The octave is a unit of level (specifically "frequency level", for r = 2) though that concept is seldom seen outside of the standard.5 A semitone is one twelfth of an octave.
Standardization
The level and its units are defined in ISO 80000-3.
See also

Decibel#Definition
Field, power, and root-power quantities
Logarithmic scale
Sound level

References
"
Category:Mathematical terminology Category:Logarithmic scales of measurement



ISO 80000-3:2006, Quantities and units, Part 2: Space and Time
W. M. Carey, Sound Sources and Levels in the Ocean, IEEE J Oceanic Eng 31:61-75(2006)
ISO 80000-8:2007, Quantities and units, Part 8: Acoustics
Ainslie, M. A. A Century of Sonar: Planetary Oceanography, Underwater Noise Monitoring, and the Terminology of Underwater Sound. Acoustics Today, 23 February 2015
ANSI/ASA S1.1-2013, Acoustical Terminology




