


Stochastic portfolio theory




Stochastic portfolio theory

Stochastic portfolio theory (SPT) is a mathematical theory for analyzing stock market structure and portfolio behavior introduced by E. Robert Fernholz in 2002. It is descriptive as opposed to normative, and is consistent with the observed behavior of actual markets. Normative assumptions, which serve as a basis for earlier theories like modern portfolio theory (MPT) and the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), are absent from SPT.
SPT uses continuous-time random processes (in particular, continuous semi-martingales) to represent the prices of individual securities. Processes with discontinuities, such as jumps, have also been incorporated into the theory.
Stocks, portfolios and markets
SPT considers stocks and stock markets, but its methods can be applied to other classes of assets as well. A stock is represented by its price process, usually in the logarithmic representation. In the case the market is a collection of stock-price processes 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  each defined by a continuous semimartingale


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Brownian motion (Wiener) process with 
 
 
 
 , and the processes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are progressively measurable with respect to the Brownian filtration 
 
 
 
 . In this representation 
 
 
 
  is called the (compound) growth rate of 
 
 
 
  and the covariance between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  It is frequently assumed that, for all 
 
 
 
  the process 
 
 
 
  is positive, locally square-integrable, and does not grow too rapidly as 
 
 

The logarithmic representation is equivalent to the classical arithmetic representation which uses the rate of return

 
  however the growth rate can be a meaningful indicator of long-term performance of a financial asset, whereas the rate of return has an upward bias. The relation between the rate of return and the growth rate is


 
  The usual convention in SPT is to assume that each stock has a single share outstanding, so 
 
 
 
  represents the total capitalization of the 
 
 
 
 -th stock at time 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the total capitalization of the market. Dividends can be included in this representation, but are omitted here for simplicity.
An investment strategy

 
  is a vector of bounded, progressively measurable processes; the quantity 
 
 
 
  represents the proportion of total wealth invested in the 
 
 
 
 -th stock at time 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the proportion hoarded (invested in a money market with zero interest rate). Negative weights correspond to short positions. The cash strategy 
 
 
 
  keeps all wealth in the money market. A strategy 
 
 
 
  is called portfolio, if it is fully invested in the stock market, that is 
 
 
 
  holds, at all times.
The value process

 
  of a strategy 
 
 
 
  is always positive and satisfies



where the process 
 
 
 
  is called the excess growth rate process and is given by



This expression is non-negative for a portfolio with non-negative weights 
 
 
 
  and has been used in quadratic optimization of stock portfolios, a special case of which is optimization with respect to the logarithmic utility function.
The market weight processes,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  define the market portfolio

 
 . With the initial condition 
 
 
 
  the associated value process will satisfy 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

(Figure)
Figure 1 shows the entropy of the U.S. stock market over the period from 1980 to 2012, with the axis at the average value over the period. Although the entropy fluctuates over time, its behavior indicates that there is a certain stability to the stock market. Characterization of this stability is one of the goals of SPT.|page=1

A number of conditions can be imposed on a market, sometimes to model actual markets and sometimes to emphasize certain types of hypothetical market behavior. Some commonly invoked conditions are:

A market is nondegenerate if the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix

 
  are bounded away from zero. It has bounded variance if the eigenvalues are bounded.
A market is coherent if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

A market is diverse on 
 
 
 
  if there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 

A market is weakly diverse on 
 
 
 
  if there exists 
 
 
 
  such that




Diversity and weak diversity are rather weak conditions, and markets are generally far more diverse than would be tested by these extremes. A measure of market diversity is market entropy, defined by



Stochastic stability
  We consider the vector process 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  of ranked market weights


 
  where ties are resolved “lexicographically”, always in favor of the lowest index. The log-gaps


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are continuous, non-negative semimartingales; we denote by 
 
 
 
  their local times at the origin. These quantities measure the amount of turnover between ranks 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  during the time-interval 
 
 
 
 .
A market is called stochastically stable, if 
 
 
converges in distribution as 
 
 
 
  to a random vector 
 
 
 
  with values in the Weyl chamber

 
  of the unit simplex, and if the strong law of large numbers


 
  holds for suitable real constants 
 
 

Arbitrage and the numeraire property
Given any two investment strategies 
 
 
 
  and a real number 
 
 
 
 , we say that 
 
 
 
  is arbitrage relative to 
 
 
 
  over the time-horizon 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  both hold; this relative arbitrage is called “strong” if 
 
 
 
  When 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  we recover the usual definition of arbitrage relative to cash. We say that a given strategy 
 
 
 
  has the numeraire property, if for any strategy 
 
 
 
  the ratio 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 −supermartingale. In such a case, the process 
 
 
 
  is called a “deflator” for the market.
No arbitrage is possible, over any given time horizon, relative to a strategy 
 
 
 
  that has the numeraire property (either with respect to the underlying probability measure 
 
 
 
 , or with respect to any other probability measure which is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 ). A strategy 
 
 
 
  with the numeraire property maximizes the asymptotic growth rate from investment, in the sense that


 
  holds for any strategy 
 
 
 
 ; it also maximizes the expected log-utility from investment, in the sense that for any strategy 
 
 
 
  and real number 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  If the vector 
 
 
 
  of instantaneous rates of return, and the matrix 
 
 
 
  of instantaneous covariances, are known, then the strategy


 
  has the numeraire property whenever the indicated maximum is attained.
The study of the numeraire portfolio links SPT to the so-called Benchmark approach to Mathematical Finance, which takes such a numeraire portfolio as given and provides a way to price contingent claims, without any further assumptions.
A probability measure 
 
 
 
  is called equivalent martingale measure (EMM) on a given time-horizon 
 
 
 
 , if it has the same null sets as 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , and if the processes 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  are all 
 
 
 
 −martingales. Assuming that such an EMM exists, arbitrage is not possible on 
 
 
 
  relative to either cash 
 
 
 
  or to the market portfolio 
 
 
 
  (or more generally, relative to any strategy 
 
 
 
  whose wealth process 
 
 
 
  is a martingale under some EMM). Conversely, if 
 
 
 
  are portfolios and one of them is arbitrage relative to the other on 
 
 
 
  then no EMM can exist on this horizon.
Functionally-generated portfolios
Suppose we are given a smooth function 
 
 
 
  on some neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of the unit simplex in 
 
 
 
  . We call


 
  the portfolio generated by the function 
 
 
. It can be shown that all the weights of this portfolio are non-negative, if its generating function 
 
 
 
  is concave. Under mild conditions, the relative performance of this functionally-generated portfolio 
 
 
 
  with respect to the market portfolio 
 
 
 
 , is given by the F-G decomposition


 
  which involves no stochastic integrals. Here the expression


 
  is called the drift process of the portfolio (and it is a non-negative quantity if the generating function 
 
 
 
  is concave); and the quantities



with 
 
 
 
  are called the relative covariances between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with respect to the market.
Examples

The constant function 
 
 
 
  generates the market portfolio

 
 ,
The geometric mean function 
 
 
 
  generates the equal-weighted portfolio

 
  for all 
 
 
 
 ,
The modified entropy function 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
  generates the modified entropy-weighted portfolio,
The function 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  generates the diversity-weighted portfolio

 
  with drift process

 
 .

Arbitrage relative to the market
The excess growth rate of the market portfolio admits the representation 
 
 
 
  as a capitalization-weighted average relative stock variance. This quantity is nonnegative; if it happens to be bounded away from zero, namely


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  for some real constant 
 
 
 
 , then it can be shown using the F-G decomposition that, for every 
 
 
 
  there exists a constant 
 
 
 
  for which the modified entropic portfolio 
 
 
 
  is strict arbitrage relative to the market 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 ; see Fernholz and Karatzas (2005) for details. It is an open question, whether such arbitrage exists over arbitrary time horizons (for two special cases, in which the answer to this question turns out to be affirmative, please see the paragraph below and the next section).
If the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix 
 
 
 
  are bounded away from both zero and infinity, the condition 
 
 
 
  can be shown to be equivalent to diversity, namely 
 
 
 
  for a suitable 
 
 
 
  Then the diversity-weighted portfolio 
 
 
 
  leads to strict arbitrage relative to the market portfolio over sufficiently long time horizons; whereas, suitable modifications of this diversity-weighted portfolio realize such strict arbitrage over arbitrary time horizons.
An example: volatility-stabilized markets
We consider the example of a system of stochastic differential equations


 
  with 
 
 
 
  given real constants 
 
 
 
  and an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Brownian motion 
 
 
 
  It follows from the work of Bass and Perkins (2002) that this system has a weak solution, which is unique in distribution. Fernholz and Karatzas (2005) show how to construct this solution in terms of scaled and time-changed squared Bessel processes, and prove that the resulting system is coherent.
The total market capitalization 
 
 
 
  behaves here as geometric Brownian motion with drift, and has the same constant growth rate as the largest stock; whereas the excess growth rate of the market portfolio is a positive constant. On the other hand, the relative market weights 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  have the dynamics of multi-allele Wright-Fisher processes. This model is an example of a non-diverse market with unbounded variances, in which strong arbitrage opportunities with respect to the market portfolio 
 
 
 
  exist over arbitrary time horizons, as was shown by Banner and Fernholz (2008). Moreover, Pal (2012) derived the joint density of market weights at fixed times and at certain stopping times.
Rank-based portfolios
We fix an integer 
 
 
 
  and construct two capitalization-weighted portfolios: one consisting of the top 
 
 
 
  stocks, denoted 
 
 
 
 , and one consisting of the bottom 
 
 
 
  stocks, denoted 
 
 
 
 . More specifically,


 
  for 
 
 
 
 
  Fernholz (1999), (2002) showed that the relative performance of the large-stock portfolio with respect to the market is given as


 
  Indeed, if there is no turnover at the mth rank during the interval 
 
 
 
 , the fortunes of 
 
 
 
  relative to the market are determined solely on the basis of how the total capitalization of this sub-universe of the 
 
 
 
  largest stocks fares, at time 
 
 
 
  versus time 0; whenever there is turnover at the 
 
 
 
 -th rank, though, 
 
 
 
  has to sell at a loss a stock that gets “relegated” to the lower league, and buy a stock that has risen in value and been promoted. This accounts for the “leakage” that is evident in the last term, an integral with respect to the cumulative turnover process 
 
 
 
  of the relative weight in the large-cap portfolio 
 
 
 
  of the stock that occupies the mth rank.
The reverse situation prevails with the portfolio 
 
 
 
  of small stocks, which gets to sell at a profit stocks that are being promoted to the “upper capitalization” league, and buy relatively cheaply stocks that are being relegated:


 
  It is clear from these two expressions that, in a coherent and stochastically stable market, the small- stock cap-weighted portfolio 
 
 
 
  will tend to outperform its large-stock counterpart 
 
 
 
 , at least over large time horizons and; in particular, we have under those conditions


 
  This quantifies the so-called size effect. In Fernholz (1999, 2002), constructions such as these are generalized to include functionally generated portfolios based on ranked market weights.
First- and second-order models
First- and second-order models are hybrid Atlas models that reproduce some of the structure of real stock markets. First-order models have only rank-based parameters, and second-order models have both rank-based and name-based parameters.
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a coherent market, and that the limits



and



exist for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the rank of 
 
 
 
 . Then the Atlas model 
 
 
 
  defined by



where 
 
 
 
  is the rank of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Brownian motion process, is the first-order model for the original market, 
 
 
 
 
 .
Under reasonable conditions, the capital distribution curve for a first-order model will be close to that of the original market. However, a first-order model is ergodic in the sense that each stock asymptotically spends 
 
 
 
 -th of its time at each rank, a property that is not present in actual markets. In order to vary the proportion of time that a stock spends at each rank, it is necessary to use some form of hybrid Atlas model with parameters that depend on both rank and name. An effort in this direction was made by Fernholz, Ichiba, and Karatzas (2013), who introduced a second-order model for the market with rank- and name-based growth parameters, and variance parameters that depended on rank alone.
References

Fernholz, E.R. (2002). Stochastic Portfolio Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag.

"
Category:Mathematical theorems Category:Finance theories


