


Integral closure of an ideal




Integral closure of an ideal

In algebra, the integral closure of an ideal I of a commutative ring R, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is the set of all elements r in R that are integral over I: there exist 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  It is similar to the integral closure of a subring. For example, if R is a domain, an element r in R belongs to 
 
 
 
 
  if and only if there is a finitely generated R-module M, annihilated only by zero, such that 
 
 
 
 . It follows that 
 
 
 
  is an ideal of R (in fact, the integral closure of an ideal is always an ideal; see below.) I is said to be integrally closed if 
 
 
 
 .
The integral closure of an ideal appears in a theorem of Rees that characterizes an analytically unramified ring.
Examples

In 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  is integral over 
 
 
 
 .
Radical ideals (e.g., prime ideals) are integrally closed. The intersection of integrally closed ideals is integrally closed.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a polynomial ring over a field k. An ideal I in R is called monomial if it is generated by monomials; i.e., 
 
 
 
 . The integral closure of a monomial ideal is monomial.

Structure results
Let R be a ring. The Rees algebra

 
  can be used to compute the integral closure of an ideal. The structure result is the following: the integral closure of 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , which is graded, is 
 
 
 
 . In particular, 
 
 
 
  is an ideal and 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., the integral closure of an ideal is integrally closed. It also follows that the integral closure of a homogeneous ideal is homogeneous.
The following type of results is called the Briancon–Skoda theorem: let R be a regular ring and 
 
 
 
 
  an ideal generated by 
 
 
 
  elements. Then 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .
A theorem of Rees states: let (R, m) be a noetherian local ring. Assume it is formally equidimensional (i.e., the completion is equidimensional.). Then two m-primary ideals 
 
 
 
  have the same integral closure if and only if they have the same multiplicity.1
Notes
References

Eisenbud, David, Commutative Algebra with a View Toward Algebraic Geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 150, Springer-Verlag, 1995, ISBN 0-387-94268-8.


Further reading

Irena Swanson, Rees valuations.

"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Ring theory Category:Algebraic structures



↩




