


Oviaivo's polyhedra : annoviaivo




Oviaivo's polyhedra : annoviaivo

An annoviaivo is a model of polyhedron representing topological torus surfaces, it can be seen as a hollow antiprism with triangular pyramids augmented to each equatorial (vertical) faces and triangular pyramids between each themselves.
Toroidal Icosahedron
The first element of this series of polyhedra is an icosahedron which was removed an antiprism of order 3 (i.e. an octahedron).

A star polyhedron
Annoviaivo of order "n" can be seen as a star antiprism of order "n" with a hole in the middle (i.e. without antiprism itself). Each equatorial face of the antiprism is surmounted by a tetrahedron. Each vertex of this tetrahedron is connected to the other two vertices adjacent tetrahedra. These vertices are equidistant from the vertices of the triangular base (after the antiprism). All "outside" edges are equidistant. These vertices added to those of the antiprism are placed on each side of the horizontal plane of symmetry (equatorial) of the antiprism.
 As a result, there are two types of vertices :
 :- the 2*n vertices of the antiprism that we can name " polar vertices ", each of them is the intersection of seven edges

- the 2*n vertices surrounding the equator that we can name " tropical vertices", each of them is the intersection of five edges
 

(Figure)
13 rings annoviaivo from order 3 to order 15|center


13 rings annoviaivo from order 3 to order 15
(You can view this in 3D-model here.)

(Figure)
annoviaivo of order 5|center


annoviaivo 5 : annoviaivo of order 5

Formulae
This family of polyhedra has common criteria :
- The equatorial radius 
 
 
 
 , the distance between the orthogonnal axis of the base of the antiprism and one of the equatorial points (which is also the radius of the cylinder circumscribing these polyhedra) is solution to the equation of 4th degree : 
 
 

 - The height 
 
 
 
  of the right antiprism is solution of the equation :


 
        if order 
 
 
 
  is      
 
 



 
        if order 
 
 
 
  is      
 
 

Note : the product of the height 
 
 
 
  of the right antiprism and the height 
 
 
 
  of the crown is :   
 
 



annoviaivo 5 & 15 for annotations

- The Euler characteristic

 
  was defined according to the formula 
 
 

where V, E, and F are respectively the numbers of vertices (corners), edges and faces in the given polyhedron. Any toroidal polyhedron's surface with one hole has Euler characteristic 
 
 

 For annoviaivo's polyhedra, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  .
Orthogonal projections
Annoviaivo has three special orthogonal projections, centered, on a base, normal to the base and tropical vertex.




Orthogonal projections



Centered by



Image



Projective
 symmetry




 The following figure is the projection of annoviaivo 5 centered on the middle of equatorial edge.

See also

Toroidal polyhedron
Euler characteristic
Spherical polyhedron
Johnson solid – A set of convex polyhedra similar to the Stewart toroids

References

B. M. Stewart, Adventures Among the Toroids (1970) ISBN 978-0-686-11936-4

External links

A study with sagemath of these polyhedra is visible here
oviaivo : a vision of Universe
moroplogo's models

"
  Category:Polyhedra Category:Articles containing video clips


