


Trinomial triangle




Trinomial triangle

The trinomial triangle is a variation of Pascal's triangle. The difference between the two is that an entry in the trinomial triangle is the sum of the three (rather than the two in Pascal's triangle) entries above it:





The 
 
 
 
 -th entry of the 
 
 
 
 -th row is denoted by


 
 .
Rows are counted starting from 0. The entries of the 
 
 
 
 -th row are indexed starting with 
 
 
 
  from the left, and the middle entry has index 0. The symmetry of the entries of a row about the middle entry is expressed by the relationship



Properties
The 
 
 
 
 -th row corresponds to the coefficients in the polynomial expansion of the expansion of the trinomial

 
  raised to the 
 
 
 
 -th power:1



or, symmetrically,


 
 , hence the alternative name trinomial coefficients because of their relationship to the multinomial coefficients:



Furthermore, the diagonals have interesting properties, such as their relationship to the triangular numbers.
The sum of the elements of 
 
 
 
 -th row is 
 
 
 
 .
Recursion formula
The trinomial coefficients can be generated using the following recursion formula:2


 
 ,


 
  for 
 
 
 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The middle entries
The middle entries of the trinomial triangle 

1, 1, 3, 7, 19, 51, 141, 393, 1107, 3139, …
 

were studied by Euler. The middle entry for the 
 
 
 
 -th row is given by



The corresponding generating function is3



Euler also noted the following exemplum memorabile inductionis fallacis ("notable example of fallacious induction"):


 
  for 
 
 

where 
 
 
 
  stands for the Fibonacci sequence. For larger 
 
 
 
 , however, this relationship is incorrect. George Andrews explained this fallacy using the general identity4



Chess mathematics
(Figure)
Number of ways to reach a cell with the minimum number of moves

The triangle corresponds to the number of possible paths that can be taken by the king in a game of chess. The entry in a cell represents the number of different paths (using a minimum number of moves) the king can take to reach the cell.


Importance in combinatorics
The coefficient of 
 
 
 
  in the polynomial expansion of 
 
 
 
  specifies the number of different ways of randomly drawing 
 
 
 
  cards from two sets of 
 
 
 
  identical playing cards.5 For example, in such a card game with two sets of the three cards A, B, C, the choices look like this:




Number of selected cards

Number of options

Options





0

1




1

3

A, B, C



2

6

AA, AB, AC, BB, BC, CC



3

7

AAB, AAC, ABB, ABC, ACC, BBC, BCC



4

6

AABB, AABC, AACC, ABBC, ABCC, BBCC



5

3

AABBC, AABCC, ABBCC



6

1

AABBCC



In particular, this results in 
 
 
 
  as the number of different hands in a game of Doppelkopf.
Alternatively, it is also possible to arrive at this number by considering the number of ways of choosing 
 
 
 
  pairs of identical cards from the two sets, which is 
 
 
 
 . The remaining 
 
 
 
  cards can then be chosen in 
 
 
 
  ways,6 which can be written in terms of the binomial coefficients as


 
 .
For example,


 
 .
The example above corresponds to the three ways of selecting two cards without pairs of identical cards (AB, AC, BC) and the three ways of selecting a pair of identical cards (AA, BB, CC).
References
Further reading

Leonhard Euler, Observationes analyticae ("Analytical observations"). Novi Commentarii academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae 11 (1767) 124–143 PDF

"
Category:Discrete mathematics Category:Triangles of numbers Category:Factorial and binomial topics



↩

↩
George Andrews, Three Aspects for Partitions. Séminaire Lotharingien de Combinatoire, B25f (1990) Online copy↩
Andreas Stiller: Pärchenmathematik. Trinomiale und Doppelkopf. ("Pair mathematics. Trinomials and the game of Doppelkopf"). c't Issue 10/2005, p. 181ff↩





