


Hyperharmonic number




Hyperharmonic number

In mathematics, the n-th hyperharmonic number of order r, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is recursively defined by the relations:



and



In particular, 
 
 
 
  is the n-th harmonic number.
The hyperharmonic numbers were discussed by J. H. Conway and R. K. Guy in their 1995 book The Book of Numbers.1
Identities involving hyperharmonic numbers
By definition, the hyperharmonic numbers satisfy the recurrence relation



In place of the recurrences, there is a more effective formula to calculate these numbers:



The hyperharmonic numbers have a strong relation to combinatorics of permutations. The generalization of the identity



reads as



where 
 
 
 
  is an r-Stirling number of the first kind.2
Asymptotics
The above expression with binomial coefficients easily gives that for all fixed order r>=2 we have.3


 
  that is, the quotient of the left and right hand side tends to 1 as n tends to infinity.
An immediate consequence is that



when m>r.
Generating function and infinite series
The generating function of the hyperharmonic numbers is



The exponential generating function is much more harder to deduce. One has that for all r=1,2,...


 
  where 2F2 is a hypergeometric function. The r=1 case for the harmonic numbers is a classical result, the general one was proved in 2009 by I. Mező and A. Dil.4
The next relation connects the hyperharmonic numbers to the Hurwitz zeta function:5



An open conjecture
It is known, that the harmonic numbers are never integers except the case n=1. The same question can be posed with respect to the hyperharmonic numbers: are there integer hyperharmonic numbers? István Mező proved6 that if r=2 or r=3, these numbers are never integers except the trivial case when n=1. He conjectured that this is always the case, namely, the hyperharmonic numbers of order r are never integers except when n=1. This conjecture was justified for a class of parameters by R. Amrane and H. Belbachir.7 Especially, these authors proved that 
 
 
 
  is not integer for all n=2,3,...
External links

Wolfram MathWorld

Notes
"
Category:Number theory














