


Exponential integrator




Exponential integrator

Exponential integrators are a class of numerical methods for the solution of partial and ordinary differential equations. This large class of methods from numerical analysis is based on the exact integration of the linear part of the initial value problem described later in this article. Because the linear part is integrated exactly, this can help to mitigate the stiffness of a differential equation. Exponential integrators can be constructed to be explicit or implicit for numerical ordinary differential equations or serve as the time integrator for numerical partial differential equations.
Background
Dating back to at least the 1960s, these methods were recognized by Certain1 and Pope.2 As of late exponential integrators have become an active area of research. Originally developed for solving stiff differential equations, the methods have been used to solve partial differential equations including hyperbolic as well as parabolic problems3 such as the heat equation.
Introduction
We consider initial value problems of the form,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is composed of linear terms, and 
 
 
 
  is composed of the non-linear terms. These problems can come from a more typical initial value problem


 
  after linearizing locally about a fixed or local state 
 
 
 
 :


 
  Here, 
 
 
 
  refers to the partial derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
 .
Exact integration of this problem from time 0 to a later time 
 
 
 
  can be performed using matrix exponentials to define an integral equation for the exact solution:4


 
  This is similar to the exact integral used in the Picard–Lindelöf theorem. In the case of 
 
 
 
 , this formulation is the exact solution to the linear differential equation.
Numerical methods require a discretization of equation (2). They can be based on Runge-Kutta discretizations,56 linear multistep methods or a variety of other options.
Examples
See also: the first-order exponential integrator for more details.
First-order forward Euler exponential integrator
The simplest method is based on a forward Euler time discretization. It can be realized by holding the term 
 
 
 
  constant over the whole interval. Exact integration of 
 
 
 
  then results in the


 
  Of course, this process can be repeated over small intervals to serve as the basis of a single-step numerical method.
In general, one defines a sequence of functions,


 
  that show up in these methods. Usually, these linear operators are not computed exactly, but a Krylov subspace iterative method can be used to efficiently compute the multiplication of these operators times vectors.7 See references for further details of where these functions come from.89
Fourth-order ETDRK4 method of Cox and Mathews
Cox and Mathews10 describe a fourth-order method exponential time differencing (ETD) method that they used Maple to derive.
We use their notation, and assume that the unknown function is 
 
 
 
 , and that we have a known solution 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, we'll make explicit use of a possibly time dependent right hand side
 
 
 
 .
Three stage values are first constructed:








 
  The final update is given by,



If implemented naively, the above algorithm suffers from numerical instabilities due to floating point round-off errors.11 To see why, consider the first function,


 
  which is present in the first-order Euler method, as well as all three stages of ETDRK4. For small values of 
 
 
 
 , this function suffers from numerical cancellation errors. However, these numerical issues can be avoided by evaluating the 
 
 
 
  function via a contour integral approach 12 or by a Padé approximant.13
Applications
Exponential integrator are used for the simulation of stiff scenarios in computer graphics, visual and scientific computing14 as well as for VLSI circuit simulation.15 These methods show the advantage of large time stepping capability and high accuracy. For such complex applications, expontential integrators are often combined with Krylov subspace projection methods to accelerate the evaluation of matrix functions.
See also

General linear methods
Linear multistep methods
Numerical analysis
Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations
Runge-Kutta methods

Notes


References















External links

integrators on GPGPUs
code for a meshfree exponential integrator

"
  Category:Ordinary differential equations



Certain (1960)↩
Pope (1963)↩
Hochbruck and Ostermann, (2006)↩
Hochbruck and Ostermann, (2010)↩
Cox and Mathews (2002)↩
Tokman (2006, 2011)↩
Tokman (2006, 2010)↩

Hochbruck and Ostermann (2010)↩
Cox and Mathews 2002↩
Kassam and Trefethen (2005)↩

Berland et al. (2007)↩
Michels et al. (2014)↩
Zhuang et al. (2014)↩




