


Gauge vector–tensor gravity




Gauge vector–tensor gravity

Gauge vector–tensor gravity1 (GVT) is a relativistic generalization of Mordehai Milgrom's Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND) paradigm2 where gauge fields cause the MOND behavior. The former covariant realizations of MOND such as the Bekenestein's Tensor–vector–scalar gravity and the Moffat's Scalar–tensor–vector gravity attribute MONDian behavior to some scalar fields. GVT is the first example wherein the MONDian behavior is mapped to the gauge vector fields. The main features of GVT can be summarized as follows:

As it is derived from the action principle, GVT respects conservation laws;
In the weak-field approximation of the spherically symmetric, static solution, GVT reproduces the MOND acceleration formula;
It can accommodate gravitational lensing.
It is in total agreement with the Einstein–Hilbert action in the strong and Newtonian gravities.

Its dynamical degrees of freedom are:

Two gauge fields

 
 ;
A metric, 
 
 
 
 .

Details
The physical geometry, as seen by particles, represents the Finsler geometry–Randers type:



This implies that the orbit of a particle with mass 
 
 
 
  can be derived from the following effective action:



The geometrical quantities are Riemannian. GVT, thus, is a bi-geometric gravity.
Action
The metric's action coincides to that of the Einstein–Hilbert gravity:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Ricci scalar constructed out from the metric. The action of the gauge fields follow:



and



where L has the following MOND asymptotic behaviors



and 
 
 
 
  represent the coupling constants of the theory while 
 
 
 
  are the parameters of the theory and



Coupling to the matter
Metric couples to the energy-momentum tensor. The matter current is the source field of both gauge fields. The matter current is



where 
 
 
 
  is the density and 
 
 
 
  represents the four velocity.
Regimes of the GVT theory
GVT accommodates the Newtonian and MOND regime of gravity; but it admits the post-MONDian regime.
Strong and Newtonian regimes
The strong and Newtonian regime of the theory is defined to be where holds:



The consistency between the gravitoelectromagnetism approximation to the GVT theory and that predicted and measured by the Einstein–Hilbert gravity demands that



which results to 
 
 
 
  So the theory coincides to the Einstein–Hilbert gravity in its Newtonian and strong regimes.
MOND regime
The MOND regime of the theory is defined to be



So the action for the 
 
 
 
  field becomes aquadratic. For the static mass distribution, the theory then converts to the AQUAL model of gravity3 with the critical acceleration of



So the GVT theory is capable of reproducing the flat rotational velocity curves of galaxies. The current observations do not fix 
 
 
 
  which is supposedly of order one.
Post-MONDian regime
The post-MONDian regime of the theory is defined where both of the actions of the 
 
 
 
  are aquadratic. The MOND type behavior is suppressed in this regime due to the contribution of the second gauge field.
See also

Modified newtonian dynamics
Scalar–tensor–vector gravity
General theory of relativity
Law of universal gravitation
Pioneer anomaly
Nonsymmetric gravitational theory
Dark matter
Dark energy
Dark fluid
Tensor
Vector
Scalar – scalar field

References
"
Category:Theories of gravitation Category:Theoretical physics Category:Astrophysics










