


Twist (mathematics)




Twist (mathematics)

In mathematics (differential geometry) twist is the rate of rotation of a smooth ribbon around the space curve

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the arc-length of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  a unit vector perpendicular at each point to 
 
 
 
 . Since the ribbon 
 
 
 
  has edges 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the twist (or total twist number) 
 
 
 
  measures the average winding of the curve 
 
 
 
  around and along the curve 
 
 
 
 . According to Love (1944) twist is defined by



where 
 
 
 
  is the unit tangent vector to 
 
 
 
 . The total twist number 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed (Moffatt & Ricca 1992) into normalized total torsion

 
  and intrinsic twist

 
 , that is



where 
 
 
 
  is the torsion of the space curve 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  denotes the total rotation angle of 
 
 
 
  along 
 
 
 
 . The total twist number 
 
 
 
  depends on the choice of the vector field 
 
 
 
  (Banchoff & White 1975).
When the ribbon is deformed so as to pass through an inflectional state (i.e. 
 
 
 
  has a point of inflection) torsion becomes singular, but its singularity is integrable (Moffatt & Ricca 1992) and 
 
 
 
  remains continuous. This behavior has many important consequences for energy considerations in many fields of science.
Together with the writhe

 
  of 
 
 
 
 , twist is a geometric quantity that plays an important role in the application of the Călugăreanu–White–Fuller formula 
 
 
 
  in topological fluid dynamics (for its close relation to kinetic and magnetic helicity of a vector field), physical knot theory, and structural complexity analysis.
References

Banchoff, T.F. & White, J.H. (1975) The behavior of the total twist and self-linking number of a closed space curve under inversions. Math. Scand. 36, 254–262.
Love, A.E.H. (1944) A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity. Dover, 4th Ed., New York.
Moffatt, H.K. & Ricca, R.L. (1992) Helicity and the Călugăreanu invariant. Proc. R. Soc. A 439, 411–429.

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Topology


