


Versor (physics)




Versor (physics)

 
In geometry and physics, the versor of an axis or of a vector is a unit vector indicating its direction.
The versor of a Cartesian axis is also known as a standard basis vector. The versor of a vector is also known as a normalized vector.
Versors of a Cartesian coordinate system
The versors of the axes of a Cartesian coordinate system are the unit vectors codirectional with the axes of that system. Every Euclidean vector a in a n-dimensional Euclidean space () can be represented as a linear combination of the n versors of the corresponding Cartesian coordinate system. For instance, in a three-dimensional space (
 
 
3), there are three versors:









They indicate the direction of the Cartesian axes x, y, and z, respectively. In terms of these, any vector a can be represented as



where ax, ay, az are called the vector components (or vector projections) of a on the Cartesian axes x, y, and z (see figure), while ax, ay, az are the respective scalar components (or scalar projections).
In linear algebra, the set formed by these n versors is typically referred to as the standard basis of the corresponding Euclidean space, and each of them is commonly called a standard basis vector.
Notation
A hat above the symbol of a versor is sometimes used to emphasize its status as a unit vector (e.g., 
 
 
 
 ).
In most contexts it can be assumed that i, j, and k, (or 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) are versors of a 3-D Cartesian coordinate system. The notations 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 , with or without hat, are also used, particularly in contexts where i, j, k might lead to confusion with another quantity. This is recommended, for instance, when index symbols such as i, j, k are used to identify an element of a set of variables.
Versor of a non-zero vector
The versor (or normalized vector) 
 
 
 
  of a non-zero vector 
 
 
 
  is the unit vector codirectional with 
 
 
 
 :



where 
 
 
 
  is the norm (or length) of 
 
 
 
 .
"
Category:Vectors Category:Concepts in physics Category:Geometry Category:Elementary mathematics


