


Maximally informative dimensions




Maximally informative dimensions
'''Maximally informative dimensions''' is a [[dimensionality reduction]] technique used in the statistical analyses of 
 neural responses. Specifically, it is a way of projecting a stimulus onto a low-dimensional subspace so that as much information as possible about the stimulus is preserved in the neural response. It is motivated by the fact that natural stimuli are typically confined by their statistics to a lower-dimensional space than that spanned by white noise.1 Within this subspace, however, stimulus-response functions may be either linear or nonlinear. The idea was originally developed by Tatyana Sharpee, Nicole Rust, and William Bialek in 2003.2
Mathematical formulation
Neural stimulus-response functions are typically given as the probability of a neuron generating an action potential, or spike, in response to a stimulus 
 
 
 
 . The goal of maximally informative dimensions is to find a small relevant subspace of the much larger stimulus space that accurately captures the salient features of 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the dimensionality of the entire stimulus space and 
 
 
 
  denote the dimensionality of the relevant subspace, such that 
 
 
 
 . We let 
 
 
 
  denote the basis of the relevant subspace, and 
 
 
 
  the projection of 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
 . Using Bayes' theorem we can write out the probability of a spike given a stimulus:



where



is some nonlinear function of the projected stimulus.
In order to choose the optimal 
 
 
 
 , we compare the prior stimulus distribution 
 
 
 
  with the spike-triggered stimulus distribution 
 
 
 
  using the Shannon information. The average information (averaged across all presented stimuli) per spike is given by


 
 .3
Now consider a 
 
 
 
  dimensional subspace defined by a single direction 
 
 
 
 . The average information conveyed by a single spike about the projection 
 
 
 
  is


 
 ,
where the probability distributions are approximated by a measured data set via 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , i.e., each presented stimulus is represented by a scaled Dirac delta function and the probability distributions are created by averaging over all spike-eliciting stimuli, in the former case, or the entire presented stimulus set, in the latter case. For a given dataset, the average information is a function only of the direction 
 
 
 
 . Under this formulation, the relevant subspace of dimension 
 
 
 
  would be defined by the direction 
 
 
 
  that maximizes the average information 
 
 
 
 .
This procedure can readily be extended to a relevant subspace of dimension 
 
 
 
  by defining


 
  and



and maximizing 
 
 
 
 .
Importance
Maximally informative dimensions does not make any assumptions about the Gaussianity of the stimulus set, which is important, because naturalistic stimuli tend to have non-Gaussian statistics. In this way the technique is more robust than other dimensionality reduction techniques such as spike-triggered covariance analyses.
References
"
Category:Neuroscience Category:Computational neuroscience



D.J. Field. "Relations between the statistics of natural images and the response properties of cortical cells." J. Opt. Soc. am. A 4:2479-2394, 1987.↩
Sharpee, Tatyana, Nicole C. Rust, and William Bialek. "Maximally informative dimensions: analyzing neural responses to natural signals." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2003): 277-284.↩
N. Brenner, S. P. Strong, R. Koberle, W. Bialek, and R. R. de Ruyter van Steveninck. "Synergy in a neural code. Neural Comp., 12:1531-1552, 2000.↩




