


Tau-leaping




Tau-leaping

In probability theory, tau-leaping, or τ-leaping, is an approximate method for the simulation of a stochastic system.1 It is based on the Gillespie algorithm, performing all reactions for an interval of length tau before updating the propensity functions.2 By updating the rates less often this allows for more efficient simulation and thus the consideration of larger systems.
Cao et al. improved the method to prevent the generation of negative populations.34
Algorithm
The algorithm is analogous to the Euler method for deterministic systems, but instead of making a fixed change



the change is



where 
 
 
 
  is a Poisson distributed random variable with mean 
 
 
 
 .
Given a state 
 
 
 
  with events 
 
 
 
  occurring at rate 
 
 
 
  and with state change vectors 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  indexes the state variables, and 
 
 
 
  indexes the events), the method is as follows:

Initialise the model with initial conditions 
 
 
 
 .
Calculate the event rates 
 
 
 
 .
Choose a time step 
 
 
 
 . This may be fixed, or by some algorithm dependent on the various event rates.
For each event 
 
 
 
  generate 
 
 
 
 , which is the number of times each event occurs during the time interval 
 
 
 
 .
Update the state by
 
 



where 
 
 
 
  is the change on state variable 
 
 
 
  due to event 
 
 
 
 . At this point it may be necessary to check that no populations have reached unrealistic values (such as a population becoming negative due to the unbounded nature of the Poisson variable 
 
 
 
 ).
 

Repeat from Step 2 until some desired condition is met (e.g. a particular state variable reaches 0, or time 
 
 
 
  is reached).

Algorithm for efficient step size selection
This algorithm is described by Cao et al.5 The idea is to bound the relative change in each event rate 
 
 
 
  by a specified tolerance 
 
 
 
  (Cao et al. recommend 
 
 
 
 , although it may depend on model specifics). This is achieved by bounding the relative change in each state variable 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  depends on the rate that changes the most for a given change in 
 
 
 
 .Typically 
 
 
 
  is equal the highest order event rate, but this may be more complex in different situations (especially epidemiological models with non-linear event rates).
This algorithm typically requires computing 
 
 
auxiliary values (where 
 
 
 
  is the number of state variables 
 
 
 
 ), and should only require reusing previously calculated values 
 
 
 
 . An important factor in this since 
 
 
 
  is an integer value, then there is a minimum value by which it can change, preventing the relative change in 
 
 
 
  being bounded by 0, which would result in 
 
 
 
  also tending to 0.

For each state variable 
 
 
 
 , calculate the auxiliary values
 
 





For each state variable 
 
 
 
 , determine the highest order event in which it is involved, and obtain 
 
 

Calculate time step 
 
 
 
  as
 
 



This computed 
 
 
 
  is then used in Step 3 of the 
 
 
 
  leaping algorithm.
References
"
Category:Chemical kinetics Category:Computational chemistry Category:Monte Carlo methods Category:Stochastic simulation












