


Quotient stack




Quotient stack

In algebraic geometry, a quotient stack is a stack that parametrizes equivariant objects. Geometrically, it generalizes a quotient of a scheme or a variety by a group: a quotient variety, say, would be a coarse approximation of a quotient stack.
The notion is of fundamental importance in the study of stacks: a stack that arises in nature is often either a quotient stack itself or admits a stratification by quotient stacks (e.g., a Deligne–Mumford stack.) A quotient stack is also used to construct other stacks like classifying stacks or toric stacks.
Definition
A quotient stack is defined as follows. Let G be an affine smooth group scheme over a scheme S and X a S-scheme on which G acts. Let 
 
 
 
  be the category over the category of S-schemes: an object over T is a principal G-bundle P →T together with equivariant map P →X; an arrow from P →T to P' →T' is a bundle map (i.e., forms a cartesian diagram) that is compatible with the equivariant maps P →X and P' →X.
Suppose the quotient

 
  exists as, say, an algebraic space (for example, by the Keel–Mori theorem). The canonical map


 
 , that sends a bundle P over T to a corresponding T-point,1 need not be an isomorphism of stacks; that is, the space "X/G" is usually coarser. The canonical map is an isomorphism if and only if the stabilizers are trivial (in which case 
 
 
 
  usually exists.)
In general, 
 
 
 
  is an Artin stack (also called algebraic stack). If the stabilizers of the geometric points are finite and reduced, then it is a Deligne–Mumford stack.
Remark: It is possible to approach the construction from the point of view of simplicial sheaves; cf. 9.2. of Jardine's "local homotopy theory".2
Examples
If 
 
 
 
  with trivial action of G (often S is a point), then 
 
 
 
  is called the classifying stack of G (in analogy with the classifying space of G) and is usually denoted by BG. Borel's theorem describes the cohomology ring of the classifying stack.
Example:3 Let L be the Lazard ring; i.e., 
 
 
 
 . Then the quotient stack 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 ,


 
 , is called the moduli stack of formal group laws, denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
See also

homotopy quotient
moduli stack of principal bundles (which, roughly, is an infinite product of classifying stacks.)

References



Some other references are

http://www.math.missouri.edu/~edidin/Papers/mfile.pdf
http://www.math.ubc.ca/~behrend/thesis.pdf

"
Category:Algebraic geometry



The T-point is obtained by completing the diagram 
 
 
 
 .
http://www.math.uwo.ca/~jardine/papers/preprints/book.pdf
Taken from http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/252xnotes/Lecture11.pdf




