


Point process operation




Point process operation

In probability and statistics, a point process operation is a type of mathematical operation performed on a random object known as a point process, which are often used as mathematical models of phenomena that can be represented as points randomly located in space. These operations can be purely random, deterministic or both, and are used to construct new point processes, which can be then also used as mathematical models. The operations may include removing or thinning points from a point process, combining or superimposing multiple point processes into one point process or transforming the underlying space of the point process into another space.
One point process that gives particularly convenient results under point process operations is the Poisson point process,J. F. C. Kingman. Poisson processes, volume 3. Oxford university press, 1992.
 hence it is often used as a mathematical model.12
Point process operations and the resulting point processes are used in the theory of point processes and related fields such as stochastic geometry and spatial statistics.3
Point process notation
Point processes are mathematical objects that seek to represent collections of points randomly scattered on some underlying mathematical space. They have a number of interpretations, which is reflected by the various types of point process notation.4F. Baccelli and B. Błaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume II – Applications, volume 4, No 1–2 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.
 For example, if a point 
 
 
 
  belongs to or is a member of a point process, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , then this can be written as:5



and represents the point process as a random set. Alternatively, the number of points of 
 
 
 
 
  located in some Borel set

 
  is often written as:678



which reflects a random measure interpretation for point processes.
A point process needs to be defined on an underlying mathematical space. Often this space is d-dimensional Euclidean space denoted here by 
 
 
 
 , although point processes can be defined on more abstract mathematical spaces.9
Examples of operations
To develop suitable models with point processes in stochastic geometry, spatial statistics and related fields, there are number of useful transformations that can be performed on points processes including: thinning, superposition, mapping (or transformation of space), clustering, and random displacement.1011F. Baccelli and B. B{\l}aszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume I – Theory, volume 3, No 3–4 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.
A. Baddeley, I. B{\'a}r{\'a}ny, and R. Schneider. Spatial point processes and their applications. Stochastic Geometry: Lectures given at the CIME Summer School held in Martina Franca, Italy, September 13–18, 2004, pages 1–75, 2007.

Thinning
The thinning operation entails using some predefined rule to remove points from a point process 
 
 
 
  to form a new point process 
 
 
 
 
 . These rules may be completely random, which is the case for one of the simplest rules known as 
 
 
 
 -thinning:12 each point of 
 
 
 
  is independently removed (or kept) with some probability 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ). This rule may be generalized by introducing a non-negative function 
 
 
 
 
  in order to define the located-dependent 
 
 
 
 -thinning where now the probability of a point being removed is 
 
 
 
  and is dependent on where the point of 
 
 
 
  is located on the underlying space. A further generalization is to have the thinning probability 
 
 
 
  random itself.
These three operations are all types of independent thinning, which means the interaction between points has no effect on the where a point is removed (or kept). Another generalization involves dependent thinning where points of the point process are removed (or kept) depending on their location to other points of the point process. Thinning can be used to create new point processes such as hard-core processes where points do not exist (due to thinning) within a certain radius of each point in the thinned point process.13
Superposition
If there is a countable set or collection of point processes 
 
 
 
 
  with mean measures 
 
 
 
 , then their superposition



also forms a point process. In this expression the superposition operation is denoted by a set union), which implies the random set interpretation of point processes; see Point process notation for more information.
Poisson point process case
In the case where each 
 
 
 
  is a Poisson point process, then the resulting process 
 
 
 
  is also a Poisson point process with mean intensity



Clustering
The point operation known as clustering entails replacing every point 
 
 
 
  in a given point process 
 
 
 
  with a cluster of points 
 
 
 
 . Each cluster is also a point process, but with a finite number of points. The union of all the clusters forms a cluster point process



Often is it assumed that the clusters 
 
 
 
 
  are all sets of finite points with each set being independent and identically distributed. Furthermore, if the original point process 
 
 
 
  has a constant intensity 
 
 
 
 , then the intensity of the cluster point process 
 
 
 
  will be



where the constant 
 
 
 
 
  is the mean of number of points in each 
 
 
 
 .
Random displacement
A mathematical model may require randomly moving points of a point process from some locations to other locations on the underlying mathematical space.14 This point process operation is referred to as random displacement15 or translation.16 If each point in the process is displaced or translated independently to other all other points in the process, then the operation forms an independent displacement or translation.17 It is usually assume that all the random translations have a common probability distribution; hence the displacements form a set of independent and identically distributed random vectors in the underlying mathematical space.
Applying random displacements or translations to point processes may be used as mathematical models for mobility of objects in, for example, ecology18 or wireless networks.19
Poisson point process case
The result known as the displacement theorem20 effectively says that the random independent displacement of points of a Poisson point process (on the same underlying space) forms another Poisson point process.
Transformation of space
Another property that is considered useful is the ability to map a point process from one underlying space to another space. For example, a point process defined on the plane R2 can be transformed from Cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates.21
Poisson point process case
Provided that the mapping (or transformation) adheres to some conditions, then a result sometimes known as the mapping theorem22 says that if the original process is a Poisson point process with some intensity measure, then the resulting mapped (or transformed) collection of points also forms a Poisson point process with another intensity measure.
Convergence of point process operations
A point operation performed once on some point process can be, in general, performed again and again. In the theory of point processes, results have been derived to study the behaviour of the resulting point process, via convergence results, in the limit as the number of performed operations approaches infinity.D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. {II}. Probability and its Applications (New York). Springer, New York, second edition, 2008.
 For example, if each point in a general point process is repeatedly displaced in a certain random and independent manner, then the new point process, informally speaking, will more and more resemble a Poisson point process. Similar convergence results have been developed for the operations of thinning and superposition (with suitable rescaling of the underlying space).23
References


"
  Category:Spatial processes




D. Stoyan, W. S. Kendall, J. Mecke, and L. Ruschendorf. Stochastic geometry and its applications, volume 2. Wiley Chichester, 1995.↩




↩




















