


Mittag-Leffler distribution




Mittag-Leffler distribution

The Mittag-Leffler distributions are two families of probability distributions on the half-line 
 
 
 
 . They are parametrized by a real 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . Both are defined with the Mittag-Leffler function.1
The Mittag-Leffler function
For any complex 
 
 
 
 
  whose real part is positive, the series



defines an entire function. For 
 
 
 
 , the series converges only on a disc of radius one, but it can be analytically extended to 
 
 
 
 .
First family of Mittag-Leffler distributions
The first family of Mittag-Leffler distributions is defined by a relation between the Mittag-Leffler function and their cumulative distribution functions.
For all 
 
 
 
 , the function 
 
 
 
 
  is increasing on the real line, converges to 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . Hence, the function 
 
 
 
  is the cumulative distribution function of a probability measure on the non-negative real numbers. The distribution thus defined, and any of its multiples, is called a Mittag-Leffler distribution of order 
 
 
 
 
 .
All these probability distribution are Absolutely_continuous#Absolute_continuity_of_measures. Since 
 
 
 
  is the exponential function, the Mittag-Leffler distribution of order 
 
 
 
  is an exponential distribution. However, for 
 
 
 
 , the Mittag-Leffler distributions are Heavy-tailed_distribution. Their Laplace transform is given by:



which implies that, for 
 
 
 
 
 , the expectation is infinite. In addition, these distributions are geometric stable distributions.
Second family of Mittag-Leffler distributions
The second family of Mittag-Leffler distributions is defined by a relation between the Mittag-Leffler function and their moment-generating functions.
For all 
 
 
 
 , a random variable 
 
 
 
  is said to follow a Mittag-Leffler distribution of order 
 
 
 
  if, for some constant 
 
 
 
 ,



where the convergence stands for all 
 
 
 
  in the complex plane if 
 
 
 
 , and all 
 
 
 
  in a disc of radius 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 
 .
A Mittag-Leffler distribution of order 
 
 
 
  is an exponential distribution. A Mittag-Leffler distribution of order 
 
 
 
  is the distribution of the absolute value of a normal distribution random variable. A Mittag-Leffler distribution of order 
 
 
 
  is a degenerate distribution. In opposition to the first family of Mittag-Leffler distribution, these distributions are not heavy-tailed.
These distributions are commonly found in relation with the local time of Markov processes.
References
"
Category:Probability distributions Category:Continuous distributions








