


Lagrangian (field theory)




Lagrangian (field theory)

Lagrangian field theory is a formalism in classical field theory. It is the field theoretic analogue of Lagrangian mechanics. Lagrangian mechanics is used for discrete particles each with a finite number of degrees of freedom. Lagrangian field theory applies to continua and fields, which have an infinite number of degrees of freedom.
This article uses 
 
 
 
  for the Lagrangian density, and L for the Lagrangian.
The Lagrangian mechanics formalism was generalized further to handle field theory. In field theory, the independent variable is replaced by an event in spacetime (x, y, z, t), or more generally still by a point s on a manifold. The dependent variables (q) are replaced by the value of a field at that point in spacetime φ(x, y, z, t) so that the equations of motion are obtained by means of an action principle, written as:



where the action, 
 
 
 
 , is a functional of the dependent variables φi(s) with their derivatives and s itself



and where s = { sα} denotes the set of n independent variables of the system, indexed by α = 1, 2, 3,..., n. Notice L is used in the case of one independent variable (t) and 
 
 
 
  is used in the case of multiple independent variables (usually four: x, y, z, t).
Definitions
In Lagrangian field theory, the Lagrangian as a function of generalized coordinates is replaced by a Lagrangian density, a function of the fields in the system and their derivatives, and possibly the space and time coordinates themselves. In field theory, the independent variable t is replaced by an event in spacetime (x, y, z, t) or still more generally by a point s on a manifold.
Often, a "Lagrangian density" is simply referred to as a "Lagrangian".
Scalar fields
For one scalar field 
 
 
 
 , the Lagrangian density will take the form:It is a standard abuse of notation to abbreviate all the derivatives and coordinates in the Lagrangian density as follows:


 
  see four gradient. The 
 
 
 
  is an index which takes values 0 (for the time coordinate), and 1, 2, 3 (for the spatial coordinates), so strictly only one derivative or coordinate would be present. In general, all the spatial and time derivatives will appear in the Lagrangian density, for example in Cartesian coordinates, the Lagrangian density has the full form:


 
  Here we write the same thing, but using ∇ to abbreviate all spatial derivatives as a vector.1



For many scalar fields



Vector fields, tensor fields, spinor fields
The above can be generalized for vector fields, tensor fields, and spinor fields. In physics fermions are described by spinor fields and bosons by tensor fields.
Action
The time integral of the Lagrangian is called the action denoted by S. In field theory, a distinction is occasionally made between the Lagrangian L, of which the time integral is the action



and the Lagrangian density

 
 , which one integrates over all spacetime to get the action:



The spatial volume integral of the Lagrangian density is the Lagrangian, in 3d



Quantum field theories in particle physics, such as quantum electrodynamics, are usually described in terms of 
 
 
 
 , and the terms in this form of the Lagrangian translate quickly to the rules used in evaluating Feynman diagrams.
Notice that, in the presence of gravity or when using general curvilinear coordinates, the Lagrangian density 
 
 
 
  will include a factor of 
 
 
 
  or its equivalent to ensure that it is a scalar density so that the integral will be invariant.
Mathematical formalism
Suppose we have an n-dimensional manifold, M, and a target manifold, T. Let 
 
 
 
  be the configuration space of smooth functions from M to T.
In field theory, M is the spacetime manifold and the target space is the set of values the fields can take at any given point. For example, if there are m real-valued scalar fields, ϕ1, ..., ϕm, then the target manifold is 
 
 
 
 . If the field is a real vector field, then the target manifold is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 . There is actually a much more elegant way using tangent bundles over M, but we will just stick to this version.
Consider a functional,


 
 , called the action. Physical considerations require it be a mapping to 
 
 
 
  (the set of all real numbers), not 
 
 
 
  (the set of all complex numbers).
In order for the action to be local, we need additional restrictions on the action. If 
 
 
 
 , we assume 
 
 
 
  is the integral over M of a function of 
 
 
 
 , its derivatives and the position called the Lagrangian, 
 
 
 
 . In other words,



It is assumed below, in addition, that the Lagrangian depends on only the field value and its first derivative but not the higher derivatives.
Given boundary conditions, basically a specification of the value of 
 
 
 
  at the boundary if M is compact or some limit on 
 
 
 
  as x → ∞ (this will help in doing integration by parts), the subspace of 
 
 
 
  consisting of functions, 
 
 
 
 , such that all functional derivatives of S at 
 
 
 
  are zero and 
 
 
 
  satisfies the given boundary conditions is the subspace of on shell solutions.
The solution is given by the Euler–Lagrange equations (thanks to the boundary conditions),



The left hand side is the functional derivative of the action with respect to 
 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
To go with the section on test particles above, here are the equations for the fields in which they move. The equations below pertain to the fields in which the test particles described above move and allow the calculation of those fields. The equations below will not give you the equations of motion of a test particle in the field but will instead give you the potential (field) induced by quantities such as mass or charge density at any point 
 
 
 
 . For example, in the case of Newtonian gravity, the Lagrangian density integrated over spacetime gives you an equation which, if solved, would yield 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
 , when substituted back in equation (), the Lagrangian equation for the test particle in a Newtonian gravitational field, provides the information needed to calculate the acceleration of the particle.
Newtonian gravity
The Lagrangian (density) is 
 
 
 
  in J·m−3. The interaction term mΦ is replaced by a term involving a continuous mass density ρ in kg·m−3. This is necessary because using a point source for a field would result in mathematical difficulties. The resulting Lagrangian for the classical gravitational field is:



where G in m3·kg−1·s−2 is the gravitational constant. Variation of the integral with respect to Φ gives:



Integrate by parts and discard the total integral. Then divide out by δΦ to get:



and thus



which yields Gauss's law for gravity.
Einstein Gravity
The Lagrange density for general relativity in the presence of matter fields is



 
 
  is the curvature scalar, which is the Ricci tensor contracted with the metric tensor, and the Ricci tensor is the Riemann tensor contracted with a Kronecker delta. The integral of 
 
 
 
  is known as the Einstein-Hilbert action. The Riemann tensor is the tidal force tensor, and is constructed out of Christoffel symbols and derivatives of Christoffel symbols, which are the gravitational force field. Plugging this Lagrangian into the Euler-Lagrange equation and taking the metric tensor 
 
 
 
  as the field, we obtain the Einstein field equations


 
  The last tensor is the energy momentum tensor and is defined by



 
 
  is the determinant of the metric tensor when regarded as a matrix. 
 
 
 
  is the Cosmological constant. Generally, in general relativity, the integration measure of the action of Lagrange density is 
 
 
 
 . This makes the integral coordinate independent, as the root of the metric determinant is equivalent to the Jacobian determinant. The minus sign is a consequence of the metric signature (the determinant by itself is negative).2
Electromagnetism in special relativity
The interaction terms


 
  are replaced by terms involving a continuous charge density ρ in A·s·m−3 and current density 
 
 
 
  in A·m−2. The resulting Lagrangian for the electromagnetic field is:



Varying this with respect to ϕ, we get



which yields Gauss' law.
Varying instead with respect to 
 
 
 
 , we get



which yields Ampère's law.
Using tensor notation, we can write all this more compactly. The term 
 
 
 
  is actually the inner product of two four-vectors. We package the charge density into the current 4-vector and the potential into the potential 4-vector. These two new vectors are


 
  We can then write the interaction term as


 
  Additionally, we can package the E and B fields into what is known as the electromagnetic tensor

 
 . We define this tensor as


 
  The term we are looking out for turns out to be


 
  We have made use of the Minkowski metric to raise the indices on the EMF tensor. In this notation, Maxwell's equations are


 
  where ε is the Levi-Civita tensor. So the Lagrange density for electromagnetism in special relativity written in terms of Lorentz vectors and tensors is


 
  In this notation it is apparent that classical electromagnetism is a Lorentz-invariant theory. By the equivalence principle, it becomes simple to extend the notion of electromagnetism to curved spacetime.34
Electromagnetism in general relativity
The Lagrange density of electromagnetism in general relativity also contains the Einstein-Hilbert action from above. The pure electromagnetic Lagrangian is precisely a matter Lagrangian 
 
 
 
 . The Lagrangian is



This Lagrangian is obtained by simply replacing the Minkowski metric in the above flat Lagrangian with a more general (possibly curved) metric 
 
 
 
 . We can generate the Einstein Field Equations in the presence of an EM field using this lagrangian. The energy-momentum tensor is


 
  It can be shown that this energy momentum tensor is traceless, i.e. that


 
  If we take the trace of both sides of the Einstein Field Equations, we obtain


 
  So the tracelessness of the energy momentum tensor implies that the curvature scalar in an electromagnetic field vanishes. The Einstein equations are then


 
  Additionally, Maxwell's equations are


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the covariant derivative. For free space, we can set the current tensor equal to zero, 
 
 
 
 . Solving both Einstein and Maxwell's equations around a spherically symmetric mass distribution in free space leads to the Reissner-Nordstrom charged black hole, with the defining line element (written in natural units and with charge Q):5



Electromagnetism using differential forms
Using differential forms, the electromagnetic action S in vacuum on a (pseudo-) Riemannian manifold 
 
 
 
  can be written (using natural units, ) as


 
  Here, A stands for the electromagnetic potential 1-form, J is the current 1-form, F is the field strength 2-form and the star denotes the Hodge star operator. This is exactly the same Lagrangian as in the section above, except that the treatment here is coordinate-free; expanding the integrand into a basis yields the identical, lengthy expression. Note that with forms, an additional integration measure is not necessary because forms have coordinate differentials built in. Variation of the action leads to


 
  These are Maxwell's equations for the electromagnetic potential. Substituting  immediately yields the equation for the fields,


 
  because F is an exact form.
Dirac Lagrangian
The Lagrangian density for a Dirac field is:6



where ψ is a Dirac spinor (annihilation operator), 
 
 
 
  is its Dirac adjoint (creation operator), and 
 
 
 
  is Feynman slash notation for 
 
 
 
 .
Quantum electrodynamic Lagrangian
The Lagrangian density for QED is:



where 
 
 
 
  is the electromagnetic tensor, D is the gauge covariant derivative, and 
 
 
 
  is Feynman notation for 
 
 
 
 .
Quantum chromodynamic Lagrangian
The Lagrangian density for quantum chromodynamics is:789



where D is the QCD gauge covariant derivative, n = 1, 2, ...6 counts the quark types, and 
 
 
 
  is the gluon field strength tensor.
See also

Calculus of variations
Covariant classical field theory
Einstein–Maxwell–Dirac equations
Euler–Lagrange equation
Functional derivative
Functional integral
Generalized coordinates
Hamiltonian mechanics
Hamiltonian field theory


Lagrangian and Eulerian coordinates
Lagrangian mechanics
Lagrangian point
Lagrangian system
Noether's theorem
Onsager–Machlup function
Principle of least action
Scalar field theory

Footnotes
Notes
"
Category:Theoretical physics Category:Mathematical physics Category:Classical field theory Category:Calculus of variations Category:Quantum field theory



Mandl F., Shaw G., Quantum Field Theory, chapter 2↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Itzykson-Zuber, eq. 3-152↩
http://www.fuw.edu.pl/~dobaczew/maub-42w/node9.html↩
http://smallsystems.isn-oldenburg.de/Docs/THEO3/publications/semiclassical.qcd.prep.pdf↩
http://www-zeus.physik.uni-bonn.de/~brock/teaching/jets_ws0405/seminar09/sluka_quark_gluon_jets.pdf↩




