


Homotopy colimit




Homotopy colimit

In mathematics, especially in algebraic topology, the homotopy limit and colimit are variants of the notions of limit and colimit. They are denoted by holim and hocolim, respectively.
Introductory examples
Homotopy pushout
The concept of homotopy colimit is a generalization of homotopy pushouts. This notion is motivated by the following observation: the (ordinary) pushout


 
  is the space obtained by contracting the n-1-sphere (which is the boundary of the n-dimensional disk) to a single point. This space is homeomorphic to the n-sphere Sn. On the other hand, the pushout


 
  is a point. Therefore, even though the (contractible) disk Dn was replaced by a point, (which is homotopy equivalent to the disk), the two pushouts are not homotopy (or weakly) equivalent.
Therefore, the pushout is not well-aligned with a principle of homotopy theory, which considers weakly equivalent spaces as carrying the same information: if one (or more) of the spaces used to form the pushout is replaced by a weakly equivalent space, the pushout is not guaranteed to stay weakly equivalent. The homotopy pushout does not share this defect.
The homotopy pushout of two maps 
 
 
 
  of topological spaces is defined as


 
 , i.e., instead of glueing B in both A and C, two copies of a cylinder on B are glued together and their ends are glued to A and C. For example, the homotopy colimit of the diagram (whose maps are projections)


 
  is the join

 
 .
It can be shown that the homotopy pushout does not share the defect of the ordinary pushout: replacing A, B and / or C by a homotopic space, the homotopy pushout will also be homotopic. In this sense, the homotopy pushouts treats homotopic spaces as well as the (ordinary) pushout does with homeomorphic spaces.
Mapping telescope
The homotopy colimit of a sequence of spaces


 
  is the mapping telescope.1
General definition
Treating examples such as the mapping telescope and the homotopy pushout on an equal footing can be achieved by considering an I-diagram of spaces, where I is some "indexing" category. This is nothing but a functor


 
  i.e., to each object i in I, one assigns a space Xi and maps between them, according to the maps in i. The category of such diagrams is denoted SpacesI.
There is a natural functor called the diagonal,


 
  which sends any space X to the diagram which consists of X everywhere (and the identity of X as maps between them). In (ordinary) category theory, the right adjoint to this functor is the limit. The homotopy limit is defined by altering this situation: it is the right adjoint to


 
  which sends a space X to the I-diagram which at some object i gives


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  is the slice category (its objects are arrows j → i, where j is any object of I), N is the nerve of this category and |-| is the topological realization of this simplicial set.2
Relation to the (ordinary) colimit and limit
There is always a map


 
  Typically, this map is not a weak equivalence. For example, the homotopy pushout encountered above always maps to the ordinary pushout. This map is not typically a weak equivalence, for example the join is not weakly equivalent to the pushout of 
 
 
 
 , which is a point.
Further examples and applications
Just as limit is used to complete a ring, holim is used to complete a spectrum.
References



Hatcher, Algebraic Topology

Further reading

http://mathoverflow.net/questions/135462/homotopy-limit-colimit-diagrams-in-stable-model-categories

"
Category:Homotopy theory



Hatcher's Algebraic Topology, 4.G.
Bousfield & Kan: Homotopy limits, Completions and Localizations, Springer, LNM 304. Section XI.3.3




