


Moment measure




Moment measure

In probability and statistics, a moment measure is a mathematical quantity, function or, more precisely, measure that is defined in relation to mathematical objects known as point processes, which are types of stochastic processes often used as mathematical models of physical phenomena representable as randomly positioned points in time, space or both. Moment measures generalize the idea of (raw) moments of random variables, hence arise often in the study of point processes and related fields.D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. {II}. Probability and its Applications (New York). Springer, New York, second edition, 2008.

An example of a moment measure is the first moment measure or intensity measure of a point process, which gives the expected or average number of points of the point process being located in some region of space.1 In other words, if the number of points of a point process located in some region of space is a random variable, then the first moment measure corresponds to the first moment of this random variable.2
Moment measures feature prominently in the study of point processes3D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. I. Probability and its Applications (New York). Springer, New York, second edition, 2003.
A. Baddeley, I. Bárány, and R. Schneider. Spatial point processes and their applications. Stochastic Geometry: Lectures given at the CIME Summer School held in Martina Franca, Italy, September 13–18, 2004, pages 1-75, 2007.
 as well as the related fields of stochastic geometry4 and spatial statistics5J. Moller and R. P. Waagepetersen. Statistical inference and simulation for spatial point processes. CRC Press, 2003.
 whose applications are found in numerous scientific and engineering disciplines such as biology, geology, physics, and telecommunications.678
Point process notation
Point processes are mathematical objects that are defined on some underlying mathematical space. Since these processes are often used to represent collections of points randomly scattered in space, time or both, the underlying space is usually d-dimensional Euclidean space denoted here by 
 
 
 
 
 , but they can be defined on more abstract mathematical spaces.9
Point processes have a number of interpretations, which is reflected by the various types of point process notation.10F. Baccelli and B. Błaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume II – Applications, volume 4, No 1–2 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.
 For example, if a point 
 
 
 
  belongs to or is a member of a point process, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , then this can be written as:11



and represents the point process being interpreted as a random set. Alternatively, the number of points of 
 
 
 
  located in some Borel set

 
 
  is often written as:121314



which reflects a random measure interpretation for point processes. These two notations are often used in parallel or interchangeably.151617
Definitions
n-th power of a point process
For some integer

 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -th power of a point process 
 
 
 
  is defined as:F. Baccelli and B. Blaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume I - Theory, volume 3, No 3-4 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.




where 
 
 
 
  is a collection of not necessarily disjoint Borel sets (in 
 
 
 
 ), which form a 
 
 
 
 -fold Cartesian product of sets denoted by 
 
 
 
 . The symbol 
 
 
 
 
  denotes standard multiplication.
The notation 
 
 
 
  reflects the interpretation of the point process 
 
 
 
  as a random measure.18
The 
 
 
 
 -th power of a point process 
 
 
 
  can be equivalently defined as:19



where summation is performed over all 
 
 
 
 -tuples of (possibly repeating) points, and 
 
 
 
  denotes an indicator function such that 
 
 
 
 is a Dirac measure. This definition can be contrasted with the definition of the n-factorial power of a point process for which each n-tuples consists of n points.
n-th moment measure
The 
 
 
 
 -th moment measure is defined as:



where the E denotes the expectation (operator) of the point process 
 
 
 
 . In other words, the n-th moment measure is the expectation of the n-th power of some point process.
The 
 
 
 
 th moment measure of a point process 
 
 
 
  is equivalently defined20 as:



where 
 
 
 
 
  is any non-negative measurable function on 
 
 
 
  and the sum is over 
 
 
 
 -tuples of points for which repetition is allowed.
First moment measure
For some Borel set B, the first moment of a point process N is:



where 
 
 
 
  is known, among other terms, as the intensity measure21 or mean measure,J. F. C. Kingman. Poisson processes, volume 3. Oxford university press, 1992.
 and is interpreted as the expected or average number of points of 
 
 
 
 
  found or located in the set 
 
 
 
 .
Second moment measure
The second moment measure for two Borel sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is:



which for a single Borel set 
 
 
 
 
  becomes



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the variance of the random variable 
 
 
 
 .
The previous variance term alludes to how moments measures, like moments of random variables, can be used to calculate quantities like the variance of point processes. A further example is the covariance of a point process 
 
 
 
  for two Borel sets 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , which is given by:22



Example: Poisson point process
For a general Poisson point process with intensity measure 
 
 
 
  the first moment measure is:23



which for a homogeneous Poisson point process with constant intensity 
 
 
 
 
  means:



where 
 
 
 
  is the length, area or volume (or more generally, the Lebesgue measure) of 
 
 
 
 .
For the Poisson case with measure 
 
 
 
  the second moment measure is:24



which in the homogeneous case reduces to



See also

Factorial moment
Factorial moment measure
Moment

References


"
Category:Probability theory Category:Spatial data analysis



F. Baccelli and B. Błaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume I – Theory, volume 3, No 3-4 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.↩
D. Stoyan, W. S. Kendall, J. Mecke, and L. Ruschendorf. Stochastic geometry and its applications, volume 2. Wiley Chichester, 1995.↩





F. Baccelli and B. Błaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume II – Applications, volume 4, No 1-2 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.↩





↩
↩













