


Proximal gradient methods for learning




Proximal gradient methods for learning

Proximal gradient (forward backward splitting) methods for learning is an area of research in optimization and statistical learning theory which studies algorithms for a general class of convex regularization problems where the regularization penalty may not be differentiable. One such example is 
 
 
 
  regularization (also known as Lasso) of the form



Proximal gradient methods offer a general framework for solving regularization problems from statistical learning theory with penalties that are tailored to a specific problem application.12 Such customized penalties can help to induce certain structure in problem solutions, such as sparsity (in the case of lasso) or group structure (in the case of group lasso).
Relevant background
Proximal gradient methods are applicable in a wide variety of scenarios for solving convex optimization problems of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is convex and differentiable with Lipschitz continuous gradient, 
 
 
 
  is a convex, lower semicontinuous function which is possibly nondifferentiable, and 
 
 
 
  is some set, typically a Hilbert space. The usual criterion of 
 
 
 
  minimizes 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  in the convex, differentiable setting is now replaced by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the subdifferential of a real-valued, convex function 
 
 
 
 .
Given a convex function 
 
 
 
  an important operator to consider is its proximity operator

 
  defined by


 
  which is well-defined because of the strict convexity of the 
 
 
 
  norm. The proximity operator can be seen as a generalization of a projection.345 We see that the proximity operator is important because 
 
 
 
  is a minimizer to the problem 
 
 
 
  if and only if


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is any positive real number.6
Moreau decomposition
One important technique related to proximal gradient methods is the Moreau decomposition, which decomposes the identity operator as the sum of two proximity operators.7 Namely, let 
 
 
 
  be a lower semicontinuous, convex function on a vector space 
 
 
 
 . We define its Fenchel conjugate

 
  to be the function


 
  The general form of Moreau's decomposition states that for any 
 
 
 
  and any 
 
 
 
  that


 
  which for 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
 .89 The Moreau decomposition can be seen to be a generalization of the usual orthogonal decomposition of a vector space, analogous with the fact that proximity operators are generalizations of projections.10
In certain situations it may be easier to compute the proximity operator for the conjugate 
 
 
 
  instead of the function 
 
 
 
 , and therefore the Moreau decomposition can be applied. This is the case for group lasso.
Lasso regularization
Consider the regularized empirical risk minimization problem with square loss and with the 

 
  norm as the regularization penalty:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  The 
 
 
 
  regularization problem is sometimes referred to as lasso (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator).11 Such 
 
 
 
  regularization problems are interesting because they induce '' sparse'' solutions, that is, solutions 
 
 
 
  to the minimization problem have relatively few nonzero components. Lasso can be seen to be a convex relaxation of the non-convex problem


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the 
 
 
 
  "norm", which is the number of nonzero entries of the vector 
 
 
 
 . Sparse solutions are of particular interest in learning theory for interpretability of results: a sparse solution can identify a small number of important factors.12
Solving for 
 
 
 
  proximity operator
For simplicity we restrict our attention to the problem where 
 
 
 
 . To solve the problem


 
  we consider our objective function in two parts: a convex, differentiable term 
 
 
 
  and a convex function 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  is not strictly convex.
Let us compute the proximity operator for 
 
 
 
 . First we find an alternative characterization of the proximity operator 
 
 
 
  as follows:



For 
 
 
 
  it is easy to compute 
 
 
 
 : the 
 
 
 
 th entry of 
 
 
 
  is precisely



Using the recharacterization of the proximity operator given above, for the choice of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  we have that 
 
 
 
  is defined entrywise by






x_i-\gamma,&x;_i>\gamma\\ 0,&|x_i|\leq\gamma\\ x_i+\gamma,&x;_i
which is known as the soft thresholding operator 
 
 
 
 .1314
Fixed point iterative schemes
To finally solve the lasso problem we consider the fixed point equation shown earlier:



Given that we have computed the form of the proximity operator explicitly, then we can define a standard fixed point iteration procedure. Namely, fix some initial 
 
 
 
 , and for 
 
 
 
 
  define


 
  Note here the effective trade-off between the empirical error term 
 
 
 
  and the regularization penalty 
 
 
 
 . This fixed point method has decoupled the effect of the two different convex functions which comprise the objective function into a gradient descent step (
 
 
 
 ) and a soft thresholding step (via 
 
 
 
 
 ).
Convergence of this fixed point scheme is well-studied in the literature1516 and is guaranteed under appropriate choice of step size 
 
 
 
  and loss function (such as the square loss taken here). Accelerated methods were introduced by Nesterov in 1983 which improve the rate of convergence under certain regularity assumptions on 
 
 
 
 .17 Such methods have been studied extensively in previous years.18 For more general learning problems where the proximity operator cannot be computed explicitly for some regularization term 
 
 
 
 , such fixed point schemes can still be carried out using approximations to both the gradient and the proximity operator.1920
Practical considerations
There have been numerous developments within the past decade in convex optimization techniques which have influenced the application of proximal gradient methods in statistical learning theory. Here we survey a few important topics which can greatly improve practical algorithmic performance of these methods.2122
Adaptive step size
In the fixed point iteration scheme


 
  one can allow variable step size 
 
 
 
 
  instead of a constant 
 
 
 
 . Numerous adaptive step size schemes have been proposed throughout the literature.23242526 Applications of these schemes2728 suggest that these can offer substantial improvement in number of iterations required for fixed point convergence.
Elastic net (mixed norm regularization)
Elastic net regularization offers an alternative to pure 
 
 
 
  regularization. The problem of lasso (
 
 
 
 ) regularization involves the penalty term 
 
 
 
 , which is not strictly convex. Hence, solutions to 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is some empirical loss function, need not be unique. This is often avoided by the inclusion of an additional strictly convex term, such as an 
 
 
 
  norm regularization penalty. For example, one can consider the problem


 
  where 
 
 
 
  For 
 
 
 
 
  the penalty term 
 
 
 
  is now strictly convex, and hence the minimization problem now admits a unique solution. It has been observed that for sufficiently small 
 
 
 
 , the additional penalty term 
 
 
 
  acts as a preconditioner and can substantially improve convergence while not adversely affecting the sparsity of solutions.2930
Exploiting group structure
Proximal gradient methods provide a general framework which is applicable to a wide variety of problems in statistical learning theory. Certain problems in learning can often involve data which has additional structure that is known '' a priori''. In the past several years there have been new developments which incorporate information about group structure to provide methods which are tailored to different applications. Here we survey a few such methods.
Group lasso
Group lasso is a generalization of the lasso method when features are grouped into disjoint blocks.31 Suppose the features are grouped into blocks 
 
 
 
 . Here we take as a regularization penalty



which is the sum of the 
 
 
 
  norm on corresponding feature vectors for the different groups. A similar proximity operator analysis as above can be used to compute the proximity operator for this penalty. Where the lasso penalty has a proximity operator which is soft thresholding on each individual component, the proximity operator for the group lasso is soft thresholding on each group. For the group 
 
 
 
  we have that proximity operator of 
 
 
 
  is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 th group.
In contrast to lasso, the derivation of the proximity operator for group lasso relies on the Moreau decomposition. Here the proximity operator of the conjugate of the group lasso penalty becomes a projection onto the ball of a dual norm.32
Other group structures
In contrast to the group lasso problem, where features are grouped into disjoint blocks, it may be the case that grouped features are overlapping or have a nested structure. Such generalizations of group lasso have been considered in a variety of contexts.33343536 For overlapping groups one common approach is known as latent group lasso which introduces latent variables to account for overlap.3738 Nested group structures are studied in hierarchical structure prediction and with directed acyclic graphs.39
See also

Proximal gradient method
Statistical learning theory
Regularization
Convex analysis

References
"
First order methods Category:Convex optimization Category:Machine learning



↩
↩


↩



↩


↩

↩


↩
↩

↩

↩


↩
↩

↩

↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩





