


Matrix analysis




Matrix analysis

In mathematics, particularly in linear algebra and applications, matrix analysis is the study of matrices and their algebraic properties.1 Some particular topics out of many include; operations defined on matrices (such as matrix addition, matrix multiplication and operations derived from these), functions of matrices (such as matrix exponentiation and matrix logarithm, and even sines and cosines etc. of matrices),2 and the eigenvalues of matrices (eigendecomposition of a matrix, eigenvalue perturbation theory).
Matrix spaces
The set of all m×n matrices over a number field F denoted in this article Mmn(F) form a vector space. Examples of F include the set of integers ℤ, the real numbers ℝ, and set of complex numbers ℂ. The spaces Mmn(F) and Mpq(F) are different spaces if m and p are unequal, and if n and q are unequal; for instance M32(F) ≠ M23(F). Two m×n matrices A and B in Mmn(F) can be added together to form another matrix in the space Mmn(F):



and multiplied by a α in F, to obtain another matrix in Mmn(F):



Combining these two properties, a linear combination of matrices A and B are in Mmn(F) is another matrix in Mmn(F):



where α and β are numbers in F.
Any matrix can be expressed as a linear combination of basis matrices, which play the role of the basis vectors for the matrix space. For example, for the set of 2×2 matrices over the field of real numbers, M22(ℝ), one legitimate basis set of matrices is:



because any 2×2 matrix can be expressed as:



where a, b, c,d are all real numbers. This idea applies to other fields and matrices of higher dimensions.
Determinants
The determinant of a square matrix is an important property. The determinant indicates if a matrix is invertible (i.e. the inverse of a matrix exists when the determinant is nonzero). Determinants are used for finding eigenvalues of matrices (see below), and for solving a system of linear equations (see Cramer's rule).
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of matrices
Definitions
An n×n matrix A has eigenvectors x and eigenvalues λ defined by the relation:



In words, the matrix multiplication of A followed by an eigenvector x (here an n-dimensional column matrix), is the same as multiplying the eigenvector by the eigenvalue. For an n×n matrix, there are n eigenvalues. The eigenvalues are the roots of the characteristic polynomial:



where I is the n×n identity matrix.
Roots of polynomials, in this context the eigenvalues, can all be different, or some may be equal (in which case eigenvalue has multiplicity, the number of times an eigenvalue occurs). After solving for the eigenvalues, the eigenvectors corresponding to the eigenvalues can be found by the defining equation.
Perturbations of eigenvalues
Matrix similarity
Two n×n matrices A and B are similar if they are related by a similarity transformation:



The matrix P is called a similarity matrix, and is necessarily invertible.
Unitary similarity
Canonical forms
Row echelon form
Jordan normal form
Weyr canonical form
Frobenius normal form
Triangular factorization
LU decomposition
LU decomposition splits a matrix into a matrix product of an upper triangular matrix and a lower triangle matrix.
Matrix norms
Since matrices form vector spaces, one can form axioms (analogous to those of vectors) to define a "size" of a particular matrix. The norm of a matrix is a positive real number.
Definition and axioms
For all matrices A and B in Mmn(F), and all numbers α in F, a matrix norm, delimited by double vertical bars || ... ||, fulfills:3

Nonnegative:








with equality only for A = 0, the zero matrix.
 


Scalar multiplication:










The triangular inequality:









Frobenius norm
The Frobenius norm is analogous to the dot product of Euclidean vectors; multiply matrix elements entry-wise, add up the results, then take the positive square root:



It is defined for matrices of any dimension (i.e. no restriction to square matrices).
Positive definite and semidefinite matrices
Functions
Matrix elements are not restricted to constant numbers, they can be mathematical variables.
Functions of matrices
A functions of a matrix takes in a matrix, and return something else (a number, vector, matrix, etc...).
Matrix-valued functions
A matrix valued function takes in something (a number, vector, matrix, etc...) and returns a matrix.
See also
Other branches of analysis

Mathematical analysis
Tensor analysis
Matrix calculus
Numerical analysis

Other concepts of linear algebra

Tensor product
Spectrum of an operator
Matrix geometrical series

Types of matrix

Orthogonal matrix, unitary matrix
Symmetric matrix, antisymmetric matrix
Stochastic matrix

Matrix functions

Matrix polynomial
Matrix exponential

Footnotes
References
Notes
Further reading












"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Matrices Category:Numerical analysis



↩
↩
Some authors, e.g. Horn and Johnson, use triple vertical bars instead of double: |||A|||.↩




