


Lai-Massey scheme




Lai-Massey scheme

(Figure)
Lai Massey scheme diagram en.svg

The Lai-Massey scheme is a cryptographic structure used in the design of block ciphers.12 It is used in IDEA and IDEA NXT.
Construction details
Let 
 
 
 
  be the round function and 
 
 
 
  a half-round function and let 
 
 
 
  be the sub-keys for the rounds 
 
 
 
  respectively.
Then the basic operation is as follows:
Split the plaintext block into two equal pieces, (
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 )
For each round 
 
 
 
 , compute



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Then the ciphertext is 
 
 
 
 .
Decryption of a ciphertext 
 
 
 
  is accomplished by computing for 
 
 




where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Then 
 
 
 
  is the plaintext again.
The Lai-Massey scheme offers security properties similar to those of the Feistel structure. It also shares its advantage over a substitution-permutation network that the round function 
 
 
 
  does not have to be invertible.
The half-round function is required to prevent a trivial distinguishing attack (
 
 
 
 ). It commonly applies an orthomorphism 
 
 
 
  on the left hand side, that is,


 
  where both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are permutations (in the mathematical sense, that is, a bijection – not a permutation box). Since there are no orthomorphisms for bit blocks (groups of size 
 
 
 
 ), "almost orthomorphisms" are used instead.


 
  may depend on the key. If it doesn't, the last application can be omitted, since its inverse is known anyway. The last application is commonly called "round 
 
 
 
 " for a cipher that otherwise has 
 
 
 
  rounds.
Literature

X. Lai. On the design and security of block ciphers. ETH Series in Information Processing, vol. 1, Hartung-Gorre, Konstanz, 1992
X. Lai, J. L. Massey. A proposal for a new block encryption standard. Advances in Cryptology EUROCRYPT'90, Aarhus, Denemark, LNCS 473, p. 389-404, Springer, 1991
Serge Vaudenay: A Classical Introduction to Cryptography, [http://books.google.de/books?id=DVLEql738mwC&pg;;=PA33 p. 33]

References


"
Category:Block ciphers



Aaram Yun, Je Hong Park, Jooyoung Lee: Lai-Massey Scheme and Quasi-Feistel Networks. IACR Cryptology
Serge Vaudenay: On the Lai-Massey Scheme. ASIACRYPT'99




