


Near polygon




Near polygon

 In mathematics, a near polygon is an incidence structure introduced by Ernest E. Shult and Arthur Yanushka in 1980.1 Shult and Yanushka showed the connection between the so-called tetrahedrally closed line-systems in Euclidean spaces and a class of point-line geometries which they called near polygons. These structures generalise the notion of generalized polygon as every generalized 2n-gon is a near 2n-gon of a particular kind. These structures were extensively studied and connection between them and dual polar space 2 was shown in 1980s and early 1990s. Some sporadic simple groups, for example the Hall-Janko group and the Mathieu groups, act as automorphism groups of near polygons.
Definition
A near 2d-gon is an incidence structure (
 
 
 
 ), where 
 
 
 
  is the set of points, 
 
 
 
  is the set of lines and 
 
 
 
  is the incidence relation, such that:

The maximum distance between two points (the so-called diameter) is d.
For every point 
 
 
 
  and every line 
 
 
 
  there exists a unique point on 
 
 
 
  which is nearest to 
 
 
 
 .

Note that the distance are measure in the collinearity graph of points, i.e., the graph formed by taking points as vertices and joining a pair of vertices if they are incident with a common line. We can also give an alternate graph theoretic definition, a near 2d-gon is a connected graph of finite diameter d with the property that for every vertex x and every maximal clique M there exists a unique vertex x' in M nearest to x. The maximal cliques of such a graph correspond to the lines in the incidence structure definition. A near 0-gon (d = 0) is a single point while a near 2-gon (d = 1) is just a single line, i.e., a complete graph. A near quadrangle (d = 2) is same as a (possibly degenerate) generalized quadrangle. In fact, it can be shown that every generalized 2d-gon is a near 2d-gon that satisfies the following two additional conditions:

Every point is incident with at least two lines.
For every two points x, y at distance i < d, there exists a unique neighbour of y at distance i − 1 from x.

A near polygon is called dense if every line is incident with at least three points and if every two points at distance two have at least two common neighbours. It is said to have order (s, t) if every line is incident with precisely s + 1 points and every point is incident with precisely t + 1 lines. Dense near polygons have a rich theory and several classes of them (like the slim dense near polygons) have been completely classified.3
Examples

All connected bipartite graphs are near polygons. In fact any near polygon which has precisely two points per line must be a connected bipartite graph.
All generalized polygons.
All dual polar spaces.
The Hall–Janko near octagon4 associated with the Hall–Janko group. It can be constructed by choosing the conjugacy class of 315 central involutions of the Hall-Janko group as points and lines as three element subsets {x,y,xy} whenever x and y commute.
The M24 near hexagon related to the Mathieu group M24.5
Take the partitions of {1, 2,..., 2n+2} into n+1 2-subsets as points and the partitions into n 2-subsets and one 4-subset as lines. A point is incident to a line if as a partition it is a refinement of the line. This gives us a near 2n-gon with three points on each line, usually denoted as Hn. Its full automorphism group is S2n+2.6

Regular near polygons
A finite near 
 
 
 
 -gon S is called regular if it has an order 
 
 
 
  and if there exist constants 
 
 
 
 , such that for every two points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  at distance 
 
 
 
 , there are precisely 
 
 
 
  lines through 
 
 
 
  containing a (necessarily unique) point at distance 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 . It turns out that regular near 
 
 
 
 -gons are precisely those near 
 
 
 
 -gons whose point graph is a distance-regular graph. A generalized 
 
 
 
 -gon is a regular near 
 
 
 
 -gon of order 
 
 
 
  with parameters 
 
 

See also

Finite geometry
Polar space
Partial linear space
Association scheme
Hall–Janko graph

Notes
References


.



.






.



.



.




"
Category:Incidence geometry Category:Finite geometry Category:Set families



Shult, Ernest; Yanushka, Arthur. "Near n-gons and line systems".
Cameron, Peter J. "Dual polar spaces".
De Bruyn, Bart. Near Polygons
http://www.win.tue.nl/~aeb/graphs/HJ315.html
http://oai.cwi.nl/oai/asset/1493/1493A.pdf





