


Draft:Kane's Method




Draft:Kane's Method

 

Kane's method is developed by Thomas R. Kane for analyzing complex dynamics systems (originally called Lagrange form of d’Alembert’s principle).1 This method is based on Newtonian dynamics and consequently is a vectorial method. Despite being based on Newtonian mechanics, it prevents reaction forces and unwanted torques to appear in equations of motion, therefore can produce simple dynamical equations even for multi DOF systems. One example of multi DOF systems is a robot. Using this method can eliminate difficulties and limitations related to arm dynamics.2 3 4 5 This method focuses on motion of the system rather than general coordinates by introducing the concept of partial velocities6 7. Before giving the formal definition of partial velocities, first we need to review the concept of general coordinates.89
General Coordinates
If we have a set of particles "
 
 
 
 ", then the minimum set of parameters which completely specify the configuration of the system are called general coordinates denoted by 
 
 
 
 . The number of general coordinates depends on the degrees of freedom of the system and the number of constraints equations. There are two different types of constraints. First type of the constraints are called Holonomic constraints which reduce the number of independent coordinates, and in general are expressed as:



The other type of constraints are called Nonholonomic which are based on velocities and cannot reduce to Holonomic constraints. Nonholonomic constraints are expressed generally as



System "
 
 
 
 " is called a holonomic (nonholonomic) system, if it is constrained to holonomic (nonholonomic) constraints.
Generalized Speeds
Similar to general coordinates, one can also define generalized speeds. If a system "
 
 
 
 " has 
 
 
 
  general coordinates, then the corresponding velocities are 
 
 
 
  and generalized speeds are defined as 10


Where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are functions of general coordinates and time. They have to be chosen in a way such that the equations can be solved uniquely for 
 
 
 
  which means that they have to be independent. Generalized speeds can be chosen to be the same as 
 
 
 
  and in that case 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is Kronecker delta. If system 
 
 
 
  is a nonholonomic system, then corresponding constraints can be expressed in terms of generalized speeds as



where



Then the system is said to be a nonholonomic system with 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom.
Partial Velocities
As mentioned earlier, partial velocity is the key concept in Kane's method. Partial velocities of a particle are vector quantities which show the contribution of generalized speeds in velocity of that particle. If 
 
 
 
  is a particle in a holonomic system 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom, then velocity of 
 
 
 
  in reference frame A can be written as 11


where 
 
 
 
  are generalized speeds, and 
 
 
 
  is a function of general coordinates. 
 
 
 
  is recognized to be partial velocity and is called holonomic rth-partial velocity of particle 
 
 
 
 . If system 
 
 
 
  includes a rigid body B, then similarly its angular velocity in reference frame A is written as



Where 
 
 
 
  is a function of general coordinates, and 
 
 
 
  is called holonomic rth-partial angular velocity of rigid body B .
If 
 
 
 
  is a nonholonomic system with 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom, then the number of independent partial velocities which have contribution to velocity is decreased to 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, velocity of particle 
 
 
 
  and rigid body B are expressed as




and 
 
 
 
  are called nonholonomic rth-partial velocity and nonholonomic rth-partial angular velocity respectively.
Generalized Forces
Active Forces
If 
 
 
 
  is subjected to external forces, the concept of partial velocities can help us to find the contribution of each force to the motion of system 
 
 
 
 . Each particle in system 
 
 
 
  has several partial velocities corresponding to each degree of freedom. the scalar product of partial velocities and applied force on that particle gives the contribution of that force to each degree of freedom, i.e. 12


This scalar is called holonomic generalized active force. In this equation 
 
 
 
  is a particle of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is partial velocity of 
 
 
 
  in reference frame A and 
 
 
 
  is the resultant of all forces acting on 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a nonholonomic system then the nonholonomic generalized active force is defined similarly



Ridig Body
if system 
 
 
 
  contains a rigid body on which several forces are applied, then Generalized active forces can have a different form by using rigid body properties. Let 
 
 
 
  be forces acting on particles 
 
 
 
  of rigid body B. Then the contribution of these forces is expressed as



Let 
 
 
 
  be a particle of rigid body B, then velocities of each particle can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is the velocity of particle 
 
 
 
  in reference frame A, 
 
 
 
  is the angular veocity of rigid body B and 
 
 
 
  is the spatial vector from point 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . One can express velocity of each point based on its partial velocities and general speeds 
 
 
 
  of the system as




Since the right hand side is only a function of general coordinates, both sides are equal to zero. Therefore



we can use this relation to write the contribution of acting forces on rigid body B in a different form



If equivalent of all exerted forces is denoted by 
 
 
 
  and all torques about the point 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , then the contribution of forces acting on rigid body B is



Inertia Forces
Using previous results one can apply the effect of system inertia by introducing inertia forces and their contribution to the motion. inertia force for a particle 
 
 
 
  is defined as



Where 
 
 
 
  is the acceleration of particle 
 
 
 
  in A. Then the '' generalized inertia forces'' can be defined as 13



In a same way as previous sections, if B is a rigid body in 
 
 
 
 , the contribution of it in inertia forces is



In this equation: 



 
  is partial angular velocity of B in A.


 
  is inertia force of the center of mass.


 
  is partial velocity of the center of mass.


 
  is the moment of inertia of B which includes
 


 
  : Angular acceleration of B


 
  : Angular velocity of B


 
  : Inertia dyadic
 


 
  : Inertia scalars


 
  : unit vectors




Kane's Equation
Following equation is called '' Kane's dynamical equation'' 14 which describes all motions of the system 
 
 
 
 .



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are generalized forces introduced in previous sections.
Example
 This section provides an example for Kane's method. As it is shown in the figure, the ball with radius 
 
 
 
  has rolling without slipping motion on a fixed frame with radius 
 
 
 
 . In order to find the equations of motion, we implement Kane's method. First we need to define generalized speeds. The system has one degree of freedom, and we choose 
 
 
 
  as general coordinate. Define the generalized speeds as



There is only one contributing force in this system which is gravity force on the ball. In order to find the generalized active force, we need partial velocities. Velocity of B' (representing the center mass), and the angular velocity of ball in reference frame A are found as




Relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be easily found



By using these expressions, one can find the 1th-partial velocity and 1th-angular velocity as




The gravity force acting on ball is



Therefore, generalized active force is



In order to find generalized inertia forces, we need acceleration of center mass and angular acceleration of ball which are




and the inertia forces are




Therefore generalized inertia forces are found




substituting in Kane's equation



which describes motion of the ball. It is interesting to note that above equation can be derived simply by using Newtonian mechanics considering rigid body motion of the ball about the contact point 
 
 
 
 . However, Kane's method provides a systematic way which can be handy in more complex situations.
References
"



↩
A.Purushotham, Mr. J.Anjeneyulu. "Kane's Method for Robotic Arm Dynamics: a Novel Approach"↩
W. Zhuang, X. Liu, C. Fang, H. Sun. "Dynamic Modeling of a Spherical Robot with Arms by Using Kane's Method"↩
S. Peng, G. Wang. Equations of General Robots Using Kane’s Method"↩
Thomas R. Kurfess. Robotics and Automation Handbook."Chapter 6. Kane’s Method in Robotics" ISBN: 978-0-8493-1804-7↩
J. Storch, S. Gates. "Motivating Kane's method for obtaining equations of motion for dynamic systems"↩
Martin Lesser."A Geometrical Interpretation of Kane's Equations"↩

Carlos M. Roithmayr, Dewey H. Hodges. "Dynamics: Theory and Application of Kane's Method"↩









