


Universality and quantum systems




Universality and quantum systems

In quantum mechanics, universality is the observation that there are properties for a large class of systems that are independent of the exact structural details of the system. The notion of universality is familiar in the study and application of statistical mechanics to various physical systems since its introduction in a very precise fashion by Leo Kadanoff. Although not quite the same, it is closely related to universality as applied to quantum systems. This concept links to the essence of renormalization and scaling in many problems. Renormalization is based on the notion that a measurement device of wavelength 
 
 
 
  is insensitive to details of structure at distances much smaller than 
 
 
 
 . An important consequence of universality is that one can mimic the real short-structure distance of the measurement device and the system to be measured by simple short-distance structure. Even though it is seen that scaling, universality and renormalization are closely related, they are not to be used interchangeably.1
Universal Characteristics of Shapes of Potential Steps
For low energy particles, the exact detail of the potential step is irrelevant. This means that the intermediate change in the potential between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is irrelevant for particles with extremely low energies. An important consequence of this is that theoretical calculations made for a Heaviside step function potential work perfectly well for potentials that have a finite spatial rate of change in potential: finite ∆
 
 
 
  over ∆
 
 
 
 , which is the case with physical situations, for e.g. - Quantum confinement systems of nano dots, etc.
For a general potential barrier:


 
  The time-dependent Schrödinger's equation in one-dimension is:


 
  It is instructive to analyse this equation after expanding 
 
 
 
  in the plane wave basis 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 , then, is real for 
 
 
 
  > 
 
 
 
 . For when 
 
 
 
  V, the relevant length scale in this problem is the range of the wavefunction under the barrier which is given by
 
 
 
  ≃ 
 
 
 
  for low energy particles, i.e. - 
 
 
 
  → 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  ≫ 
 
 
 
 , the wave cannot resolve the detailed shape of the potential and one must have 
 
 
 
 . The wavelength of a particle in the region of zero potential (essentially, a free particle) with energy 
 
 
 
  is given as
 
 
 
 . For low-energy waves incident on this potential from the left
 
 
 
  ≫ 
 
 
 
 . Essentially, for low energy, or large wavelength, particles, the exact detail of the potential barrier is irrelevant. This is a feature that is universal to different 
 
 
 
  for a well behaved function 
 
 
 
 . 2
Universal Characteristics of Potential Barriers
Potentials display universality in their structural aspects and their resonance phenomena. For scattering at a finite potential barrier of height 
 
 
 
 , the time-independent Schrödinger equation for the wave function 
 
 
 
  reads:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Hamiltonian, 
 
 
 
  is the (reduced) Planck constant, 
 
 
 
  is the mass, 
 
 
 
  the energy of the particle and



is the barrier potential with height 
 
 
 
  and width 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is the Heaviside step function.
In terms of dimensionless parameters 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 










With the subscripts I, II and III to 
 
 
 
  given by the regions of y mentioned alongside their expressions.
For a wave that is incident from the left, we have 
 
 
 
  and one finds the reflection coefficient to be:



The wavelength of the incident wave is an exact multiple of the barrier width whenever 
 
 
 
 . For such energies, one finds that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In terms of the dimensionless variables, these Resonances in scattering from potentials occur at energies, 
 
 
 
 .
The quantity 
 
 
 
  defined as:


 
  is a shape property of the potential, and is independent of the energy. Two different potentials (for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) with the same 
 
 
 
  have the same physics. This can be heuristically understood as a relation to the relevant length scales in the problem
 
 
 
  is the length of the potential and this identifies a momentum scale for this problem as, setting 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . In mass weighted scales, we identify an energy scale as 
 
 
 
  and form a dimensionless quantity using the height of the potential and the energy scale 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . Reintroducing 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we discover
 
 
 
 , which is precisely our shape parameter 
 
 
 
 .
Using 
 
 
 
 , the reflection coefficient becomes:


 
  For 
 
 
 
 , one finds 
 
 
 
  ≅ 
 
 
 
  ∝ 
 
 
 
 . The power of 
 
 
 
  is universal in the sense that it is independent of 
 
 
 
 . However, the constant of proportionality depends on 
 
 
 
 .3A very simple proof of above for one dimensional system is given by observing that once the shape of potential is determined , reflectivity4 becomes a function of energy only.Further from its definition it is clear that its maximum and minimum value are 1 and 0 respectively.At the resonance energy 
 
 
 
  the reflectivity is 0.
Making a taylor expansion of R(E) = 
 
 

As at resonance energy 
 
 
 
  ,the reflectivity is minimum,and therefore we have 
 
 
 
  Also at 
 
 
 
  So near resonance energy ,


 ∝  


In terms of 
 
 
 
 ,up to first order 
 
 
 
  ∝ 
 
 
 
 . So near resonance energy we have ,


 
  ∝ 
 
 
 
  .
Other Systems
A complex current source J(r,t) of size d that generates radiation with wavelengths 
 
 
 
  is accurately mimicked by a sum of point-like multipole currents. The Multipole Expansion is a simple example of a renormalization analysis. In thinking about the long-wavelength radiation it is generally much easier to treat the source as a sum of multipoles than to deal with the true current directly. This is particularly true since usually only one or two multipoles are needed for sufficient accuracy.
In a Quantum Field Theory, a Quantum Fluctuation probes arbitrarily short distances. This is evident when one computes radiative corrections in perturbation theory which seem infinitely sensitive to short-distance behavior. Universality tells us that to look at the low momentum physics, or the large wavelength limit, we do not need to know what happens at large momenta. As in the multipole expansion, we can replicate the highly non-trivial high-energy by a generic set of effective point-like interactions.5
References
"
Category:Quantum mechanics



Stanley E., Scaling, universality and renormalization: Three pillars of modern critical phenomena Reviews of Modern Physics, Vol. 71, No. 2, Centenary 1999↩
Avery J., Hyperspherical Harmonics and Generalized Sturmians 1989↩
Gupta, S. - Lectures on Quantum Mechanics (2013): http://theory.tifr.res.in/~sgupta/courses/qm2013/hand7.pdf↩
Transmission coefficient↩
Lepage, S. - How to Renormalize the Schrodinger Equation: http://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/9706029v1↩




