


Nearest neighbour distribution




Nearest neighbour distribution

In probability and statistics, a nearest neighbour function, nearest neighbour distance distribution,1 nearest-neighbour distribution function2 or nearest neighbour distribution3 is a mathematical function that is defined in relation to random mathematical objects known as point processes, which are types of stochastic processes often used as mathematical models of physical phenomena representable as randomly positioned points in time, space or both.45 More specifically, nearest neighbour functions are defined with respect to some point in the point process as being the probability distribution of the distance from this point to its nearest neighbouring point in the same point process, hence they are used to describe the probability of another point existing within some distance of a point. A nearest neighbour function can be contrasted with a spherical contact distribution function, which is not defined in reference to some initial point but rather as the probability distribution of the radius of a sphere when it first encounters or makes contact with a point of a point process.
Nearest neighbour function are used in the study of point processes678 as well as the related fields of stochastic geometry9 and spatial statistics,1011 which are applied in various scientific and engineering disciplines such as biology, geology, physics, and telecommunications.12131415
Point process notation
Point processes are mathematical objects that are defined on some underlying mathematical space. Since these processes are often used to represent collections of points randomly scattered in space, time or both, the underlying space is usually d-dimensional Euclidean space denoted here by 
 
 
 
 , but they can be defined on more abstract mathematical spaces.16
Point processes have a number of interpretations, which is reflected by the various types of point process notation.17F. Baccelli and B. Błaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume II – Applications, volume 4, No 1–2 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.
 For example, if a point 
 
 
 
  belongs to or is a member of a point process, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , then this can be written as:18



and represents the point process being interpreted as a random set. Alternatively, the number of points of 
 
 
 
  located in some Borel set

 
  is often written as:192021



which reflects a random measure interpretation for point processes. These two notations are often used in parallel or interchangeably.222324
Definitions
Nearest neighbour function
The nearest neighbour function, as opposed to the spherical contact distribution function, is defined in relation to some point of a point process already existing in some region of space. More precisely, for some point in the point process 
 
 
 
 , the nearest neighbour function is the probability distribution of the distance from that point to the nearest or closest neighbouring point.
To define this function for a point located in 
 
 
 
 
  at, for example, the origin

 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional ball

 
  of radius 
 
 
 
  centered at the origin o is considered. Given a point of 
 
 
 
 
  existing at 
 
 
 
 , then the nearest neighbour function is defined as:25



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the conditional probability that there is one point of 
 
 
 
  located in 
 
 
 
 
  given there is a point of 
 
 
 
  located at 
 
 
 
 .
The reference point need not be at the origin, and can be located at an arbitrary point 
 
 
 
 . Given a point of 
 
 
 
  existing at 
 
 
 
 
 , then the nearest neighbour function, is defined as:



Examples
Mathematical expressions of the nearest neighbour distribution only exist for a few point processes.
Poisson point process
For a Poisson point process

 
  on 
 
 
 
  with intensity measure

 
  the nearest neighbour function is:



which for the homogeneous case becomes



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the volume (or more specifically, the Lebesgue measure) of the (hyper) ball of radius 
 
 
 
 . In the plane 
 
 
 
  with the reference point located at the origin, this becomes



Relationship to other functions
Spherical contact distribution function
In general, the spherical contact distribution function and the corresponding nearest neighbour function are not equal. However, these two functions are identical for Poisson point processes.26 In fact, this characteristic is due to a unique property of Poisson processes and their Palm distributions, which forms part of the result known as the Slivnyak–Mecke27 or Slivnyak's theorem.28


 
 -function
The fact that the spherical distribution function Hs(r) and nearest neighbour function Do(r) are identical for the Poisson point process can be used to statistically test if point process data appears to be that of a Poisson point process. For example, in spatial statistics the 
 
 
 
 -function is defined for all 
 
 
 
  ≥ 0 as:29



For a Poisson point process, the 
 
 
 
 
  function is simply 
 
 
 
  = 1, hence why it is used as a non-parametric test for whether data behaves as though it were from a Poisson process. It is, however, thought possible to construct non-Poisson point processes for which 
 
 
 
  = 1,30 but such counterexamples are viewed as somewhat 'artificial' by some and exist for other statistical tests.31
More generally, 
 
 
 
 -function serves as one way (others include using factorial moment measures32) to measure the interaction between points in a point process.33
See also

Factorial moment
Local feature size
Moment measure
Spherical contact distribution function

References


"
Category:Probability theory Category:Spatial data analysis



A. Baddeley, I. Bárány, and R. Schneider. Spatial point processes and their applications. Stochastic Geometry: Lectures given at the CIME Summer School held in Martina Franca, Italy, September 13–18, 2004, pages 1–75, 2007.


D. Stoyan, W. S. Kendall, J. Mecke, and L. Ruschendorf. Stochastic geometry and its applications, volume 2. Wiley Chichester, 1995.
D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. I. Probability and its Applications (New York). Springer, New York, second edition, 2003.


D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. {II}. Probability and its Applications (New York). Springer, New York, second edition, 2008.


J. Moller and R. P. Waagepetersen. Statistical inference and simulation for spatial point processes. CRC Press, 2003.


F. Baccelli and B. Błaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume I – Theory, volume 3, No 3-4 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.
F. Baccelli and B. Błaszczyszyn. Stochastic Geometry and Wireless Networks, Volume II – Applications, volume 4, No 1-2 of Foundations and Trends in Networking. NoW Publishers, 2009.






















