


Solid partition




Solid partition

In mathematics, solid partitions are natural generalizations of partitions and plane partitions defined by Percy Alexander MacMahon.1 A solid partition of 
 
 
 
  is a three-dimensional array, 
 
 
 
 , of non-negative integers (the indices 
 
 
 
 ) such that


 
  and


 
  Let 
 
 
 
  denote the number of solid partitions of 
 
 
 
 . As the definition of solid partitions involves three-dimensional arrays of numbers, they are also called three-dimensional partitions in notation where plane partitions are two-dimensional partitions and partitions are one-dimensional partitions. Solid partitions and their higher-dimensional generalizations are discussed in the book by Andrews.2
Ferrers diagrams for solid partitions
Another representation for solid partitions is in the form of Ferrers diagrams. The Ferrers diagram of a solid partition of 
 
 
 
  is a collection of 
 
 
 
  points or nodes, 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  satisfying the condition:3

Condition FD: If the node 
 
 
 
 , then so do all the nodes 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
 

For instance, the Ferrers diagram


 
  where each column is a node, represents a solid partition of 
 
 
 
 . There is a natural action of the permutation group 
 
 
 
  on a Ferrers diagram – this corresponds to permuting the four coordinates of all nodes. This generalises the operation denoted by conjugation on usual partitions.
Equivalence of the two representations
Given a Ferrers diagram, one constructs the solid partition (as in the main definition) as follows.

Let 
 
 
 
  be the number of nodes in the Ferrers diagram with coordinates of the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes an arbitrary value. The collection 
 
 
 
  form a solid partition. One can verify that condition FD implies that the conditions for a solid partition are satisfied.
 

Given a set of 
 
 
 
  that form a solid partition, one obtains the corresponding Ferrers diagram as follows.

Start with the Ferrers diagram with no nodes. For every non-zero 
 
 
 
 , add 
 
 
 
  nodes 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  to the Ferrers diagram. By construction, it is easy to see that condition FD is satisfied.
 

For example, the Ferrers diagram with 
 
 
 
  nodes given above corresponds to the solid partition with


 
  with all other 
 
 
 
  vanishing.
Generating function
Let 
 
 
 
 . Define the generating function of solid partitions, 
 
 
 
 , by


 
  The generating functions of partitions and plane partitions have simple formulae due to Euler and MacMahon respectively. However, a guess of MacMahon fails to correctly reproduce the solid partitions of 6 as shown by Atkin et al.4 It appears that there is no simple formula for the generating function of solid partitions. Somewhat confusingly, Atkin et al. refer to solid partitions as four-dimensional partitions as that is the dimension of the Ferrers diagram.5
Exact enumeration using computers
Given the lack of an explicitly known generating function, the enumerations of the numbers of solid partitions for larger integers have been carried out numerically. There are two algorithms that are used to enumerate solid partitions and their higher-dimensional generalizations. The work of Atkin. et al. used an algorithm due to Bratley and McKay.6 In 1970, Knuth proposed a different algorithm to enumerate topological sequences that he used to evaluate numbers of solid partitions of all integers 
 
 
 
 .7 Mustonen and Rajesh extended the enumeration for all integers 
 
 
 
 .8 In 2010, S. Balakrishnan proposed a parallel version of Knuth's algorithm that has been used to extend the enumeration to all integers 
 
 
 
 .9 One finds


 
  which is a 19 digit number illustrating the difficulty in carrying out such exact enumerations.
Asymptotic behavior
It is known that from the work of Bhatia et al. that10


 
  The value of this constant was estimated using Monte-Carlo simulations by Mustonen and Rajesh to be 
 
 
 
 .11
References
External links

OEIS entry for solid partitions
The Solid Partitions Project of IIT Madras
The Mathworld entry for Solid Partitions

"
Category:Enumerative combinatorics Category:Number theory Category:Combinatorics



P. A. MacMahon, Combinatory Analysis. Cambridge Univ. Press, London and New York, Vol. 1, 1915 and Vol. 2, 1916; see vol. 2, p 332.↩
G. E. Andrews, The theory of partitions, Cambridge University Press, 1998.↩
A. O. L. Atkin, P. Bratley, I. G. McDonald and J. K. S. McKay, Some computations for'' ''m-dimensional partitions, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 63 (1967), 1097–1100.↩


P. Bratley and J. K. S. McKay, "Algorithm 313: Multi-dimensional partition generator", Comm. ACM, 10 (Issue 10, 1967), p. 666.↩
D. E. Knuth, "A note on solid partitions", Math. Comp., 24 (1970), 955–961.↩
Ville Mustonen and R. Rajesh, "Numerical Estimation of the Asymptotic Behaviour of Solid Partitions of an Integer", J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 36 (2003), no. 24, 6651.cond-mat/0303607↩
Srivatsan Balakrishnan, Suresh Govindarajan and Naveen S. Prabhakar, "On the asymptotics of higher-dimensional partitions", J.Phys. A: Math. Gen. 45 (2012) 055001 arXiv:1105.6231.↩
D P Bhatia, M A Prasad and D Arora, "Asymptotic results for the number of multidimensional partitions of an integer and directed compact lattice animals", J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 30 (1997) 2281↩





