


Generalized relative entropy




Generalized relative entropy

Generalized relative entropy (
 
 
 
 -relative entropy) is a measure of dissimilarity between two quantum states. It is a "one-shot" analogue of quantum relative entropy and shares many properties of the latter quantity.
In the study of quantum information theory, we typically assume that information processing tasks are repeated multiple times, independently. The corresponding information-theoretic notions are therefore defined in the asymptotic limit. The quintessential entropy measure, von Neumann entropy, is one such notion. In contrast, the study of one-shot quantum information theory is concerned with information processing when a task is conducted only once. New entropic measures emerge in this scenario, as traditional notions cease to give a precise characterization of resource requirements. 
 
 
 
 -relative entropy is one such particularly interesting measure.
In the asymptotic scenario, relative entropy acts as a parent quantity for other measures besides being an important measure itself. Similarly, 
 
 
 
 -relative entropy functions as a parent quantity for other measures in the one-shot scenario.
Definition
To motivate the definition of the 
 
 
 
 
 -relative entropy 
 
 
 
 , consider the information processing task of hypothesis testing. In hypothesis testing, we wish to devise a strategy to distinguish between two density operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . A strategy is a POVM with elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . The probability that the strategy produces a correct guess on input 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
  and the probability that it produces a wrong guess is given by 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 -relative entropy captures the minimum probability of error when the state is 
 
 
 
 
 , given that the success probability for 
 
 
 
  is at least 
 
 
 
 .
For 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -relative entropy between two quantum states
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is defined as








From the definition, it is clear that 
 
 
 
 . This inequality is saturated if and only if 
 
 
 
 , as shown below.
Relationship to the trace distance
Suppose the trace distance between two density operators 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is








For 
 
 
 
 , it holds that


a) 
 
 




In particular, this implies the following analogue of the Pinsker inequality1


b) 
 
 




Furthermore, the proposition implies that for any 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 , inheriting this property from the trace distance. This result and its proof can be found in Dupuis et al.2
Proof of inequality a)
Upper bound: Trace distance can be written as








This maximum is achieved when 
 
 
 
 
  is the orthogonal projector onto the positive eigenspace of 
 
 
 
 . For any POVM element 
 
 
 
  we have








so that if 
 
 
 
 , we have








From the definition of the 
 
 
 
 -relative entropy, we get








Lower bound: Let 
 
 
 
  be the orthogonal projection onto the positive eigenspace of 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
 
  be the following convex combination of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :








where 
 
 

This means








and thus








Moreover,








Using 
 
 
 
 , our choice of 
 
 
 
 , and finally the definition of 
 
 
 
 
 , we can re-write this as















Hence








Proof of inequality (b)
To derive this Pinsker-like inequality, observe that








Alternative proof of the Data Processing inequality
A fundamental property of von Neumann entropy is strong subadditivity. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the von Neumann entropy of the quantum state 
 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be a quantum state on the tensor product Hilbert space

 
 . Strong subadditivity states that








where 
 
 
 
  refer to the reduced density matrices on the spaces indicated by the subscripts. When re-written in terms of mutual information, this inequality has an intuitive interpretation; it states that the information content in a system cannot increase by the action of a local quantum operation on that system. In this form, it is better known as the data processing inequality, and is equivalent to the monotonicity of relative entropy under quantum operations:3








for every CPTP map

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the relative entropy of the quantum states 
 
 
 
 .
It is readily seen that 
 
 
 
 -relative entropy also obeys monotonicity under quantum operations:4




 
 
 ,
 



for any CPTP map 
 
 
 
 . To see this, suppose we have a POVM 
 
 
 
  to distinguish between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
 . We construct a new POVM 
 
 
 
  to distinguish between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since the adjoint of any CPTP map is also positive and unital, this is a valid POVM. Note that 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is the POVM that achieves 
 
 
 
 . Not only is this interesting in itself, but it also gives us the following alternative method to prove the data processing inequality.5
By the quantum analogue of the Stein lemma,6



















where the minimum is taken over 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

Applying the data processing inequality to the states 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with the CPTP map 
 
 
 
 , we get








Dividing by 
 
 
 
  on either side and taking the limit as 
 
 
 
 , we get the desired result.
See also

Quantum relative entropy
Strong subadditivity
Classical information theory
Min entropy

References
"
Category:Quantum mechanical entropy



Watrous, J. Theory of Quantum Information, Fall 2013. Ch. 5, page 194 https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~watrous/CS766/DraftChapters/5.QuantumEntropy.pdf
Dupuis, F., et al. "Generalized entropies." .
Ruskai, Mary Beth. "Inequalities for quantum entropy: A review with conditions for equality." Journal of Mathematical Physics 43 (2002): 4358. 
Wang, L. and Renner, R. "One-shot classical-quantum capacity and hypothesis testing." Physical Review Letters 108.20 (2012): 200501. 
Dupuis, F., et al. "Generalized entropies."  (2012).
Petz, Dénes. Quantum information theory and quantum statistics. Springer, 2008. Chapter 8




