


Spatial Poisson process




Spatial Poisson process

In statistics and probability theory the spatial Poisson process (SPP) is a multidimensional generalization of the Poisson process, which can be described as a counting process where the number of points (events) in disjoint intervals are independent and have a Poisson distribution. Similarly, one can think of "points" being scattered over a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space in some random manner and of the spatial Poisson process as counting the number of points in a given set. It is also common to speak of a Poisson point process instead of a SPP.
Definition
Usually, an SPP is considered on the Euclidean space 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 . As with the one-dimensional Poisson process, a realization of an SPP on 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be a countable subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
  can be seen as a countable set of points. The distribution of 
 
 
 
  through the number 
 
 
 
  of its points lying in a subset 
 
 
 
  is one way of characterizing an SPP. It is assumed, that there is a well defined notion of the "volume" of 
 
 
 
 . Specifically, 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a Borel- 
 
 
 
  algebra. Then 
 
 
 
  is the volume given by the Lebesgue measure of the Borel set 
 
 
 
 .1 More generally it is possible to consider a state space 
 
 
 
  in which the points of a Poisson process sit. Though, it is naturally assumed that 
 
 
 
  is a measurable space and that its measurable sets form a 

 
 -field. It is also possible to define the SPP with a general measure

 
  instead of using the Lebesgue measure. In that case 
 
 
 
  is replaced by 
 
 
 
 . 2
SPPs are typically categorized as either homogeneous or inhomogeneous. When the intensity of the process 
 
 
 
  is constant over 
 
 
 
 , the process is homogeneous, while if the intensity varies, the process is inhomogeneous.
Homogeneous spatial Poisson process
The random countable subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is called a homogeneous spatial Poisson process with (constant) intensity 
 
 
 
  if, for all 
 
 
 
 , the random variables 
 
 
 
  satisfy:3



 
  has the Poisson distribution with parameter 
 
 
 
 , and
if 
 
 
 
  are disjoint sets in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  are independent random variables.

The counting process 
 
 
 
  is commonly referred to be itself a Poisson process if it satisfies 1. and 2. above. The special case when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the situation is interpreted as 
 
 
 
 .
Inhomogeneous spatial Poisson process
Roughly speaking, the inhomogeneous case differs from the homogeneous case by the intensity 
 
 
 
 , which is not constant anymore. As indicated above, it is useful to have a definition of a Poisson process with other measures than Lebesgue measure. In order to get another measure 
 
 
 
  than 
 
 
 
  the Euclidean element 
 
 
 
  is replaced by the element 
 
 
 
 . As a consequence the definition follows 
 
 

That leads to the following
Definition4 Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-negative measurable function such that 
 
 
 
  for all bounded 
 
 
 
 . The random countable subset 
 
 
 
  is called inhomogeneous spatial Poisson process with intensity function 
 
 
 
  if, for all 
 
 
 
 , the random variables 
 
 
 
  satisfy:



 
  has the Poisson distribution with parameter 
 
 
 
 , and
if 
 
 
 
  are disjoint sets in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  are independent random variables.

The function 
 
 
 
  is often called the mean measure of the process 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
Besides the application of the Poisson process in one dimension, there are many examples in two and higher dimensions. Modeling with a spatial Poisson process can be done in the following situations:56

The distribution of stars in a galaxy or of galaxies in the universe,
Positions of animals in their habitat,
The locations of active sites in a chemical reaction or of the weeds in your lawn,
Defects on a surface or in a volume in reliability engineering.
Positionally resolved photo-electron events on a photo-cathode focal plane array.

Even when a Poisson process is not a perfect description of such a system, it can provide a relatively simple yardstick against which to measure the improvements which may be offered by more sophisticated but often less tractable models.
Mathematical properties
Many properties known from the Poisson Process hold also true in the multidimensional process. The Poisson point process is also characterized by the single parameter 
 
 
 
 . It is a simple, stationary point process with mean measure 
 
 
 
 . 7
Equivalent formulation
It can be shown, that because of the two essential conditions the distribution of the spatial Poisson process is given by8



for any disjoint bounded subsets 
 
 
 
  and non-negative integers 
 
 
 
 .
Derivation from physically postulates
Using the law of rare events the Poisson process can be concluded by certain physically plausible postulates.9 Let 
 
 
 
  be a random point process fulfilling these postulates, then 
 
 
 
  is a homogeneous Poisson Point Process with intensity 
 
 
 
  derived from the postulates and the distribution is given as above in the Equivalent Formulation. Namely the four postulates are:

The possible values for 
 
 
 
  are the nonnegative integers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 .
The probability distribution of 
 
 
 
  depends on the set 
 
 
 
  only through its size (length, area, or volume) 
 
 
 
 , with the further property that 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 

For 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  are disjoint regions, then 
 
 
 
  are independent random variables and 
 
 





While postulate 1 excludes extreme or trivial cases, the second one asserts that the probability distribution of 
 
 
 
  does depend only on the size of 
 
 
 
 , not on the shape or location. Thirdly it is postulated, that disjoint regions are independent regarding the outcome of the process. Finally, postulate 4 requires that there cannot be tow points occupying the same location.
Distribution of n points in a given set
We are interested in the distribution of a point from which is supposed to be contained in a region 
 
 
 
  with positive size 
 
 
 
 . In other words
 
 
 
 . The question where the point can be found in 
 
 
 
  is answered by a uniform distribution:10


 
  for any set 
 
 

Consider again a region with positive size 
 
 
 
 , and suppose now it is known that 
 
 
 
  contains exactly 
 
 
 
  points. Then, these points are independent and uniformly distributed in 
 
 
 
  in the sense that for any disjoint partition 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , and any positive integers 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , we have


 
  Thus, the conditional distribution follows a multinomial distribution.11
Other properties
The union of two independent SPP is again a spatial Poisson process:
Superposition Theorem12 Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be independent Poisson processes on 
 
 
 
  with respective intensity functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The set 
 
 
 
  is a Poisson process with intensity function 
 
 
 
 .
 The theorem can be generalized to the union of more than two processes.
There exist a complementary version to the superposition theorem:
Colouring theorem13 Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-homogeneous Poisson process on 
 
 
 
  with intensity function 
 
 
 
 . We colour the points of 
 
 
 
  in the following way. A point of 
 
 
 
  at position x is coloured green with probability 
 
 
 
 ; otherwise it is coloured scarlet (with probability 
 
 
 
 ). Points are coloured independently of one another. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the sets of points coloured green and scarlet, respectively. Then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are independent Poisson processes with respective intensity functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Generalization
The Spatial Poisson Process is a very common example of a Point process.
References
"
Category:Point processes Category:Statistics Category:Spatial processes



G. R. Grimmett, D. Stirzaker, Probability and Random Processes , Oxford University Press, Third Edition 2001, pages 281–292
J. F. C. Kingman, Poisson Processes, Oxford Studies in Probability, Oxford University Press New York, 1993, pages 11–25



Mark A. Pinsky, Samuel Karlin, An Introduction to Stochastic Modeling , Elsevier, Fourth Edition 2011, pages 259–263











