


Min entropy




Min entropy

The min entropy, in information theory, is the smallest of the Rényi family of entropies, corresponding to the most conservative way of measuring the unpredictability of a set of outcomes, as the negative logarithm of the probability of the most likely outcome. The various Rényi entropies are all equal for a uniform distribution, but measure the unpredictability of a nonuniform distribution in different ways. The min entropy is never greater than the ordinary or Shannon entropy (which measures the average unpredictability of the outcomes) and that in turn is never greater than the Hartley or max entropy, defined as the logarithm of the number of outcomes.
As with the classical Shannon entropy and its quantum generalization, the von Neumann entropy, one can define a conditional versions of min entropy. The conditional quantum min entropy is a one-shot, or conservative, analog of conditional quantum entropy.
To interpret a conditional information measure, suppose Alice and Bob were to share a bipartite quantum state 
 
 
 
 . Alice has access to system A and Bob to system B. The conditional entropy measures the average uncertainty Bob has about Alice's state upon sampling from his own system. The min entropy can be interpreted as the distance of a state from a maximally entangled state.
This concept is useful in quantum cryptography, in the context of privacy amplification (See for example 1).
Definitions
Definition: Let 
 
 
 
  be a bipartite density operator on the space 
 
 
 
 . The min-entropy of A conditioned on B is defined to be








where the infimum ranges over all density operators 
 
 
 
  on the space 
 
 
 
 . The measure 
 
 
 
  is the maximum relative entropy defined as








The smooth min entropy is defined in terms of the min entropy.








where the sup and inf range over density operators 
 
 
 
  which are 
 
 
 
 -close to 
 
 
 
 . This measure of 
 
 
 
 -close is defined in terms of the purified distance








where 
 
 
 
  is the fidelity measure.
These quantities can be seen as generalizations of the von Neumann entropy. Indeed, the von Neumann entropy can be expressed as








This is called the fully quantum asymptotic equipartition theorem.2 The smoothed entropies share many interesting properties with the von Neumann entropy. For example, the smooth min entropy satisfy a data-processing inequality: 3








Operational interpretation of smoothed min entropy
Henceforth, we shall drop the subscript 
 
 
 
  from the min entropy when it is obvious from the context on what state it is evaluated.
Min-entropy as uncertainty about classical information
Suppose an agent had access to a quantum system B whose state 
 
 
 
  depends on some classical variable X. Furthermore, suppose that each of its elements 
 
 
 
  is distributed according to some distribution 
 
 
 
 . This can be described by the following state over the system XB.








where 
 
 
 
  form an orthonormal basis. We would like to know what the agent can learn about the classical variable 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the probability that the agent guesses X when using an optimal measurement strategy








where 
 
 
 
  is the POVM that maximizes this expression. It can be shown that this optimum can be expressed in terms of the min-entropy as








If the state 
 
 
 
  is a product state i.e. 
 
 
 
  for some density operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then there is no correlation between the systems X and B. In this case, it turns out that 
 
 

Min-entropy as distance from maximally entangled state
The maximally entangled state 
 
 
 
  on a bipartite system 
 
 
 
  is defined as








where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  form an orthonormal basis for the spaces A and B respectively. For a bipartite quantum state 
 
 
 
 , we define the maximum overlap with the maximally entangled state as








where the maximum is over all CPTP operations 
 
 
 
 . This is a measure of how correlated the state 
 
 
 
  is. It can be shown that 
 
 
 
 . If the information contained in A is classical, this reduces to the expression above for the guessing probability.
Proof of operational characterization of min-entropy
The proof is from a paper by König, Schaffner, Renner '08.4 It involves the machinery of semidefinite programs,.5 Suppose we are given some bipartite density operator 
 
 
 
 . From the definition of the min-entropy, we have








This can be re-written as








subject to the conditions











We notice that the infimum is taken over compact sets and hence can be replaced by a minimum. This can then be expressed succinctly as a semidefinite program. Consider the primal problem



















This primal problem can also be fully specified by the matrices 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the adjoint of the partial trace over A. The action of 
 
 
 
  on operators on B can be written as








We can express the dual problem as a maximization over operators 
 
 
 
  on the space AB as



















Using the Choi Jamiolkowski isomorphism, we can define the channel 
 
 
 
  such that








where the bell state is defined over the space AA'. This means that we can express the objective function of the dual problem as
















as desired.
Notice that in the event that the system A is a partly classical state as above, then the quantity that we are after reduces to








We can interpret 
 
 
 
  as a guessing strategy and this then reduces to the interpretation given above where an adversary wants to find the string 
 
 
 
  given access to quantum information via system B.
See also

von Neumann entropy
Generalized relative entropy

References
"
Category:Quantum mechanical entropy



Vazirani, Umesh, and Thomas Vidick. "Fully device independent quantum key distribution."  (2012)↩
Marco Tomamichel, Roger Colbeck, Renato Renner. "The Fully Quantum Asymptotic Equipartition Property." Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on 55 (2009), p. 5840-5847↩
Renato Renner, "Security of Quantum Key Distribution", Ph.D. Thesis, Diss. ETH No. 16242 ↩
König, R., Renato Renner, and Christian Schaffner. "The operational meaning of min-and max-entropy." Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on 55.9 (2009): 4337-4347. ↩
John Watrous, Theory of quantum information, Fall 2011, course notes, https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~watrous/CS766/LectureNotes/07.pdf↩




