


Differentiable stack




Differentiable stack

In differential geometry, a differentiable stack is a stack over the category of differentiable manifolds (with the usual open covering topology) which admits an atlas. In other words, a differentiable stack is a stack that can be represented by a Lie groupoid.
Connection with Lie groupoids
Every Lie groupoid Γ gives rise to a differentiable stack that is the category of Γ-torsors. In fact, every differentiable stack is of this form. Hence, roughly, "a differentiable stack is a Lie groupoid up to Morita equivalence."1
Differential space
A differentiable space is a differentiable stack with trivial stabilizers. For example, if a Lie group acts freely but not necessarily properly on a manifold, then the quotient by it is in general not a manifold but a differentiable space.
With Grothendieck topology
A differentiable stack X may be equipped with Grothendieck topology in a certain way (see the reference). This gives the notion of a sheaf over X. For example, the sheaf 
 
 
 
  of differential p-forms over X is given by, for any x in X over a manifold U, letting 
 
 
 
  be the space of p-forms on U. The sheaf 
 
 
 
  is called the structure sheaf on X and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  comes with exterior derivative and thus is a complex of sheaves of vector spaces over X: one thus has the notion of de Rham cohomology of X.
Gerbes
An epimorphism between differentiable stacks 
 
 
 
  is called a gerbe over X if 
 
 
 
  is also an epimorphism. For example, if X is a stack, 
 
 
 
  is a gerbe. A theorem of Giraud says that 
 
 
 
  corresponds one-to-one to the set of gerbes over X that are locally isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  and that come with trivializations of their bands.
References

Kai Behrend, Ping Xu, Differentiable Stacks and Gerbes, 2008
Eugene Lerman, Anton Malkin, Differential characters as stacks and prequantization, 2008

External links

http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/differentiable+stack

"
Category:Differential geometry








