


Intersection (Euclidean geometry)




Intersection (Euclidean geometry)

In geometry, an intersection is a point, line, or curve common in two or more objects (such as lines, curves, planes, and surfaces). The most simple case in Euclidean geometry is the intersection points of two distinct lines, that is either one point or does not exist if lines are parallel. 
Determination of the intersection of flats is a simple task of linear algebra, namely a system of linear equations. In general the determination of an intersection leads to non-linear equations, which can be solved numerically, for example using a Newton iteration. Intersection problems between a line and a conic section (circle, ellipse, parabola, ...) or a quadric (sphere, cylinder, hyperboloid, ...) lead to quadratic equations that can be easily solved. Intersections between quadrics lead to quartic equations that can be solved algebraically.
On a plane
Two lines
For the determination of the intersection point of two non-parallel lines





one gets from Cramer's rule for the coordinates of the intersection point 
 
 



 
  (In case of 
 
 
 
 
  the lines are parallel.)
If the lines are given by two points each, see next section.
Two line segments
 For two non-parallel line segments

 
  and 
 
 
 
  there is no need for an intersection point (see picture), because the intersection point 
 
 
 
  of the corresponding lines need not to be contained in the line segments. In order to check the situation one uses parametric representations of the lines:





 
  The line segments intersect only in a common point 
 
 
 
  of the corresponding lines if the corresponding parameters 
 
 
 
  fulfill the condition 
 
 
 
 . The parametrs 
 
 
 
  are the solution of the linear system





 
  It can be solved using Cramer's rule (see above). If the condition 
 
 
 
  is fulfilled one inserts 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  into the corresponding parametric representation and gets the intersection point 
 
 
 
 
 .
Example: For the line segments 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  one gets the linear system





 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . That means: the lines intersect at point 
 
 
 
 .
Remark: Considering lines (not segments!) determined by pairs of points, each, condition 
 
 
 
  can be skipped and the method yield the intersection point of the lines (see above).
(Figure)
line–circle intersection

A line and a circle
For the intersection of

line 
 
 
 
  and circle



one solves the line equation for 
 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  and substitutes it into the equation of the circle and gets for the solution (using the formula of a quadratic equation) 
 
 
 
  with





 
  if 
 
 
 
 
  If this condition holds with strict inequality, there are two intersection points; in this case the line is called a secant line of the circle, and the line segment connecting the intersection points is called a chord of the circle.
If 
 
 
 
  holds, there exists only one intersection point and the line is tangent to the circle. If the weak inequality does not hold, the line does not intersect the circle.
  If the circle's midpoint is not the origin, see.1 The intersection of a line and a parabola or hyperbola may be treated analogously.
Two circles
  The determination of the intersection points of two circles





can be reduced to the previous case of intersecting a line and a circle. By subtraction of the two given equations one gets the line equation:



Two conic sections
The problem of intersection of an ellipse/hyperbola/parabola with another conic section leads to a system of quadratic equations, which can be solved in special cases easily by elimination of one coordinate. In general the intersection points can be determined by solving the equation by a Newton iteration. If a) both conics are given implicitly (by an equation) a 2-dimensional Newton iteration b) one implicitly and the other parametrically given a 1-dimensional Newton iteration is necessary. See next section.
Two curves
  Two curves in 
 
 
 
 , which are continuously differentiable (i.e. there is no sharp bend), have an intersection point, if they have a point of the plane in common and have at this point

a: different tangent lines (transversal intersection), or
 
b: the tangent line in common and they are crossing each other (touching intersection, s. picture).
 

If both the curves have a point 
 
 
 
 
  and the tangent line there in common but do not cross each other, they are just touching at point 
 
 
 
 .
Because touching intersection appears rarely and is difficult to deal with, the following considerations omit this case. In any case below all necessary differential conditions are presupposed. The determination of intersection points always lead to 1 or 2 non-linear equations which can be solved by a Newton iteration. A list of the appearing cases follows:
 

If both curves are explicitly given
 
 
 
 , equalizing yields the equation










If both curves are parametrically given
 
 



Equalizing yields two equations for two variables:
 
 





If one curve is parametrically and the other implicitly given
 
 



This is beside the explicit case the simplest case. One has to insert the parametric representation of 
 
 
 
  into the equation 
 
 
 
  of curve 
 
 
 
  and one gets the equation:
 
 





If both curves are implicitly given
 
 



Here, an intersection point is a solution of the system
 
 




Any Newton iteration needs convenient starting values, which can be derived by a visualization of both the curves. A parametrically or explicitly given curve can easily be visualized, because to any parameter 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  respectively it is easy to calculate the corresponding point. For implicitly given curves this task is not as easy. In this case one has to determine a curve point with help of starting values and an iteration. See .2
Examples:

1
 
 
 
  and circle 
 
 
 
  (s. picture).
 
The Newton iteration 
 
 
 
  for function
 
 

 
  has to be done. As startvalues one can choose −1 and 1.5.

The intersection points are: (−1.1073, −1.3578), (1.6011, 4.1046)
 


2
 
 


 
  (s. picture).

The Newton iteration
 
 

 
  has to be performed, where 
 
 
 
  is the solution of the linear system
:




 \frac{\partial f_1}{\partial x} & \frac{\partial f_1}{\partial y} \\
 \frac{\partial f_2}{\partial x} & \frac{\partial f_2}{\partial y} 
\end{pmatrix}{\delta_x \choose \delta_y}={-f_1\choose -f_2}
 at point 
 
 
 
 . As starting values one can choose(−0.5, 1) and (1, −0.5).


The linear system can be solved by Cramer's rule.
 
The intersection points are (−0.3686, 0.9953) and (0.9953, −0.3686).
 



Two polygons
 If one wants to determine the intersection points of two polygons, one can check the intersection of any pair of line segments of the polygons (see above). For polygons with a lot of segments this method is rather time consuming. In praxis one accelerates the intersection algorithm by using window tests. In this case one divides the polygons into small sub-polygons and determines the smallest window (rectangle with sides parallel to the coordinate axes) for any sub-polygon. Before starting the time consuming determination of the intersection point of two line segments any pair of windows is tested for common points. See.3
In space (three dimensions)
In 3-dimensional space there are intersection points (common points) between curves and surfaces. In the following sections we consider transversal intersection only.
A line and a plane
 The intersection of a line and a plane in general position in three dimensions is a point.
Commonly a line in space is represented parametrically 
 
 
 
  and a plane by an equation 
 
 
 
 
 . Inserting the parameter representation into the equation yields the linear equation


 
  for parameter 
 
 
 
  of the intersection point 
 
 
 
 .
If the linear equation has no solution, the line either lies on the plane or is parallel to it.
Three planes
If a line is defined by two intersecting planes 
 
 
 
  and should be intersected by a third plane 
 
 
 
 
 , the common intersection point of the three planes has to be evaluated.
Three planes 
 
 
 
  with linear independent normal vectors 
 
 
 
  have the intersection point


 
  For the proof one should establish 
 
 
 
  using the rules of a scalar triple product. If the scalar triple product equals to 0, then planes either do not have the triple intersection or it is a line (or a plane, if all three planes are the same).
A curve and a surface
 Analogously to the plane case the following cases lead to non-linear systems, which can be solved using a 1- or 3-dimensional Newton iteration.4

parametric curve 
 
 
 
 
  and


parametric surface 
 
 



parametric curve 
 
 
 
  and


implicit surface 
 
 


Example:

parametric curve 
 
 
 
  und
 
implicit surface 
 
 
 
 
  (s. picture).
 
The intersection points are: (−0.8587, 0.7374, −0.6332), (0.8587, 0.7374, 0.6332).
 

A line–sphere intersection is a simple special case.
Like the case of a line and a plane, the intersection of a curve and a surface in general position consists of discrete points, but a curve may be partly or totally contained in a surface.
A line and a polyhedron
Two surfaces
Two transversally intersecting surfaces give an intersection curve. The most simple case the intersection line of two non-parallel planes.
See also

Computational geometry
Equation of a line

References


"
Category:Euclidean geometry Category:Linear algebra Category:Computational geometry



Erich Hartmann: Geometry and Algorithms for COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN. Lecture notes, Technische Universität Darmstadt, October 2003, p. 17↩
Erich Hartmann: Geometry and Algorithms for COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN. Lecture notes, Technische Universität Darmstadt, October 2003, p. 33↩
Erich Hartmann: CDKG: Computerunterstützte Darstellende und Konstruktive Geometrie. Lecture notes, TU Darmstadt, 1997, p. 79 (PDF; 3,4 MB)↩
Erich Hartmann: Geometry and Algorithms for COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN. Lecture notes, Technische Universität Darmstadt, October 2003, p. 93↩




