


Approximate tangent space




Approximate tangent space

In geometric measure theory an approximate tangent space is a measure theoretic generalization of the concept of a tangent space for a differentiable manifold.
Definition
In differential geometry the defining characteristic of a tangent space is that it approximates the smooth manifold to first order near the point of tangency. Equivalently, if we zoom in more and more at the point of tangency the manifold appears to become more and more straight, asymptotically tending to approach the tangent space. This turns out to be the correct point of view in geometric measure theory.
Definition for sets
Definition. Let 
 
 
 
  be a set that is measurable with respect to m-dimensional Hausdorff measure

 
 , and such that the restriction measure 
 
 
 
  is a Radon measure. We say that an m-dimensional subspace 
 
 
 
  is the approximate tangent space to 
 
 
 
  at a certain point 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 , if


 
  as 
 
 

in the sense of Radon measures. Here for any measure 
 
 
 
  we denote by 
 
 
 
  the rescaled and translated measure:



Certainly any classical tangent space to a smooth submanifold is an approximate tangent space, but the converse is not necessarily true.
Multiplicities
The parabola



is a smooth 1-dimensional submanifold. Its tangent space at the origin 
 
 
 
  is the horizontal line 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand if we incorporate the reflection along the x-axis:



then 
 
 
 
  is no longer a smooth 1-dimensional submanifold, and there is no classical tangent space at the origin. On the other hand by zooming in at the origin the set 
 
 
 
  is approximately equal to two straight lines that overlap in the limit. It would be reasonable to say it has an approximate tangent space 
 
 
 
  with multiplicity two.
Definition for measures
One can generalize the previous definition and proceed to define approximate tangent spaces for certain Radon measures, allowing for multiplicities as explained in the section above.
Definition. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Radon measure on 
 
 
 
 . We say that an m-dimensional subspace 
 
 
 
  is the approximate tangent space to 
 
 
 
  at a point 
 
 
 
  with multiplicity 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
  with multiplicity 
 
 
 
 , if


 
  as 
 
 

in the sense of Radon measures. The right-hand side is a constant multiple of m-dimensional Hausdorff measure restricted to 
 
 
 
 .
This definition generalizes the one for sets as one can see by taking 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
  as in that section. It also accounts for the reflected paraboloid example above because for 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  with multiplicity two.
Relation to rectifiable sets
The notion of approximate tangent spaces is very closely related to that of rectifiable sets. Loosely speaking, rectifiable sets are precisely those for which approximate tangent spaces exist almost everywhere. The following lemma encapsulates this relationship:
Lemma. Let 
 
 
 
  be measurable with respect to m-dimensional Hausdorff measure. Then 
 
 
 
  is m-rectifiable if and only if there exists a positive locally 
 
 
 
 -integrable function 
 
 
 
  such that the Radon measure



has approximate tangent spaces 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 -almost every 
 
 
 
 .
References


, particularly Chapter 3, Section 11 "'Basic Notions, Tangent Properties.''"







"
Category:Geometry Category:Measure theory


