


Q-construction




Q-construction

In algebra, Quillen's Q-construction associates to an exact category (e.g., an abelian category) an algebraic K-theory. More precisely, given an exact category C, the construction creates a topological space

 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is the Grothendieck group of C and, when C is the category of finitely generated projective modules over a ring R, for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the i-th K-group of R in the classical sense. (The notation "+" is meant to suggest the construction adds more to the classifying space BC.) One puts


 
  and call it the i-th K-group of C. Similarly, the i-th K-group of C with coefficients in a group G is defined as the homotopy group with coefficients:


 
 .
The construction is widely applicable and is used to define an algebraic K-theory in a non-classical context. For example, one can define equivariant K-theory as 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  of the category of equivariant sheaves on a scheme.
Waldhausen's S-construction generalizes the Q-construction in a stable sense; in fact, the former, which uses a more general Waldhausen category, produces a spectrum instead of a space. Grayson's binary complex also gives a construction of algebraic K-theory for exact categories.1 See also module spectrum#K-theory for a K-theory of a ring spectrum.
Operations
Every ring homomorphism 
 
 
 
  induces 
 
 
 
  and thus 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the category of finitely generated projective modules over R. One can easily show this map (called transfer) agrees with one defined in Milnor's Introduction to algebraic K-theory.2 The construction is also compatible with the suspension of a ring (cf. Grayson).
Details
Let C be an exact category; i.e., an additive full subcategory of an abelian category that is closed under extension. If there is an exact sequence 
 
 
 
  in C, then the arrow from M' is called an admissible mono and the arrow from M is called an admissible epi.
Let QC be the category whose objects are the same as those of C and morphisms from X to Y are isomorphism classes of diagrams 
 
 
 
  such that the first arrow is an admissible epi and the second admissible mono and two diagrams are isomorphic if they differ only at the middle and there is an isomorphism between them. The composition of morphisms is given by pullback.
Define a topological space 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a loop space functor and 
 
 
 
  is the classifying space of the category QC (geometric realization of the nerve). As it turns out, it is uniquely defined up to homotopy equivalence (so the notation is justified.)
A theorem of Quillen states that, when C is the category of finitely generated projective modules over a ring R, 
 
 
 
  is the i-th K-group of R in the classical sense for 
 
 
 
 . The usual proof of the theorem (cf. Weibel) relies on an intermediate homotopy equivalence. If S is a symmetric monoidal category in which every morphism is an isomorphism, one constructs (cf. Grayson) the category 
 
 
 
  that generalizes the Grothendieck group construction of a monoid. Let C be an exact category in which every exact sequence splits; e.g., the category of finitely generated projective modules, and put 
 
 
 
 , the subcategory of C with the same class of objects but with morphisms that are isomorphisms in C. Then there is a "natural" homotopy equivalence:3


 
 . The equivalence is constructed as follows. Let E be the category whose objects are short exact sequences in C and whose morphisms are isomorphism classes of diagrams between them. Let 
 
 
 
  be the functor that sends an short exact sequence to the third term in the sequence. Note the fiber 
 
 
 
 , which is a subcategory, consists of exact sequences whose third term is X. This makes E a category fibered over QC. Writing 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , there is an obvious (hence natural) inclusion 
 
 
 
  into the homotopy fiber

 
 , which can be shown to be a homotopy equivalence. On the other hand, by Quillen's Theorem B, one can show that 
 
 
 
  is the homotopy pullback of 
 
 
 
  along 
 
 
 
  and thus is homotopy equivalent to the 
 
 
 
 .
We now take C to be the category of finitely generated projective modules over a ring R and shows that 
 
 
 
  are the 
 
 
 
  of R in the classical sense for 
 
 
 
 . First of all, by definition, 
 
 
 
 . Next, 
 
 
 
  gives us:


 
 . (Here, 
 
 
 
  is either the classifying space of the category 
 
 
 
  or the Eilenberg–MacLane space of the type 
 
 
 
 , amounting to the same thing.) The image actually lies in the identity component of 
 
 
 
  and so we get:


 
  Let 
 
 
 
  be the full subcategory of S consisting of modules isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  (thus, 
 
 
 
  is the connected component containing 
 
 
 
 ). Let 
 
 
 
  be the component containing R. Then, by a theorem of Quillen,


 
  Thus, a class on the left is of the form 
 
 
 
 . But 
 
 
 
  is induced by the action of 
 
 
 
 . Hence,


 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is an H-group,


 
  It remains to see 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . Writing 
 
 
 
  for the homotopy fiber, we have the long exact sequence:


 
 . From homotopy theory, we know the second term is central; i.e., 
 
 
 
  is a central extension. It then follows from the next lemma that 
 
 
 
  is the universal central extension (i.e., 
 
 
 
  is the Steinberg group of R and the kernel is 
 
 
 
 .)
Proof: The homotopy type of 
 
 
 
  does not change if we replace f by the pullback 
 
 
 
  along the universal covering of Y

 
 . Thus, we can replace the hypothesis by one that Y is simply connected and 
 
 
 
 . Now, Serre spectral sequences for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  say:





 
  By the comparison theorem for spectral sequences, it follows that 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., 
 
 
 
  is acyclic. (Coincidentally, by reversing argument, one can say this implies 
 
 
 
 ; thus, the hypothesis of the lemma.) Next, the spectral sequence for the covering

 
  with group 
 
 
 
  says:


 
 . An inspection with this spectral sequence gives the desired result.
References

Daniel Grayson, Higher algebraic K-theory II [after Daniel Quillen], 1976

C. Weibel "The K-book: An introduction to algebraic K-theory"

"
Category:Algebraic K-theory



Daniel R. Grayson, Algebraic K-theory via binary complexes↩
↩
↩




