


Draft:Exact couple




Draft:Exact couple

In mathematics, an exact couple, due to , is a general source of spectral sequences. It is common especially in algebraic topology; for example, Serre spectral sequence can be constructed by first constructing an exact couple.
For the definition of an exact sequence and the construction of a spectral sequence from it (which is immediate), see spectral sequence#Exact couples. For a basic example, see Bockstein spectral sequence. The present article covers additional materials.
Exact couple of a filtered complex
Let R be a ring, which is fixed throughout the discussion. Note if R is Z, then modules over R are the same thing as abelian groups.
Each filtered chain complex of modules determines an exact couple, which in turn determines a spectral sequence, as follows. Let C be a chain complex graded by integers and suppose it is given an increasing filtration: for each integer p, there is an inclusion of complexes:


 
 . From the filtration one can form the associated graded complex:


 
  which is doubly-graded and which is the zero-th page of the spectral sequence:



To get the first page, for each fixed p, we look at the short exact sequence of complexes:


 
  from which we obtain a long exact sequence of homologies: (p is still fixed)


 
  With the notation 
 
 
 
 , the above reads:


 
 , which is precisely an exact couple and 
 
 
 
  is a complex with the differential 
 
 
 
 . The derived couple of this exact couple gives the second page and we iterate. In the end, one obtains the complexes 
 
 
 
  with the differential d:



The next lemma gives a more explicit formula for the spectral sequence; in particular, it shows the spectral sequence constructed above is the same one in more traditional direct construction, in which one uses the formula below as definition (cf. Spectral sequence#The spectral sequence of a filtered complex).
.}} Sketch of proof:12 Remembering 
 
 
 
 , it is easy to see:


 
 , where they are viewed as subcomplexes of 
 
 
 
 .
We will write the bar for 
 
 
 
 . Now, if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, remembering k is a connecting homomorphism, 
 
 
 
  where x is a representative living in 
 
 
 
 . Thus, we can write
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . Hence, 
 
 
 
  modulo 
 
 
 
 , yielding 
 
 
 
 .
Next, we note that a class in 
 
 
 
  is represented by a cycle x such that 
 
 
 
 . Hence, since j is induced by 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
We conclude: since 
 
 
 
 ,




Proof: See the last section of May. 
 
 

Exact couple of a double complex
A double complex determines two exact couples; whence, the two spectra sequences, as follows. (Some authors call the two spectral sequences horizontal and vertical.) Let 
 
 
 
  be a double complex.3 With the notation 
 
 
 
 , for each with fixed p, we have the exact sequence of cochain complexes:


 
 . Taking cohomology of it gives rise to an exact couple:


 
  where we used the notation By symmetry, that is, by switching first and second indexes, one also obtains the other exact couple.
Example: Serre spectral sequence
The Serre spectral sequence arises from a fibration:


 
 . For the sake of transparency, we only consider the case when the spaces are CW complexes, F is connected and B is simply connected; the general case involves more technicality (namely, local coefficient system).
References

J. P. May, A primer on spectral sequences
W. Massey, Exact couples in algebraic topology, Annals of Math. 56 (1952), 363–396.


"





We prefer cohomological notation here since the applications are often in algebraic geometry.




