


Equivariant sheaf




Equivariant sheaf

In mathematics, given the action 
 
 
 
  of a group scheme G on a scheme (or stack) X over a base scheme S, an equivariant sheaf F on X is a sheaf of 

 
 -modules together with the isomorphism of 
 
 
 
 -modules


 
    that satisfies the cocycle condition:1 writing m for multiplication,


 
 . On the stalk level, the cocycle condition says that the isomorphism 
 
 
 
  is the same as the composition 
 
 
 
 ; i.e., the associativity of the group action.
The unitarity of a group action, on the other hand, is a consequence: applying 
 
 
 
  to both sides gives 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
  is the identity.
Note that 
 
 
 
  is an additional data; it is "a lift" of the action of G on X to the sheaf F. A structure of an equivariant sheaf on a sheaf (namely 
 
 
 
 ) is also called a linearlization. In practice, one typically imposes further conditions; e.g., F is quasi-coherent, G is smooth and affine.
If the action of G is free, then the notion of an equivariant sheaf simplifies to a sheaf on the quotient X/G, because of the descent along torsors.
By Yoneda's lemma, to give the structure of an equivariant sheaf to an 
 
 
 
 -module F is the same as to give group homomorphisms for rings R over 
 
 
 
 ,


 
 .2
Remark: There is also a definition of equivariant sheaves in terms of simplicial sheaves.
One example of an equivariant sheaf is a linearlized line bundle in geometric invariant theory. Another example is the sheaf of equivariant differential forms.
Equivariant vector bundle
A definition is simpler for a vector bundle (i.e., a variety corresponding to a locally free sheaf of constant rank). We say a vector bundle E on an algebraic variety X acted by an algebraic group G is equivariant if G acts fiberwise: i.e., 
 
 
 
  is a "linear" isomorphism of vector spaces.3 In other words, an equivariant vector bundle is a pair consisting of a vector bundle and the lifting of the action 
 
 
 
  to that of 
 
 
 
  so that the projection 
 
 
 
  is equivariant.
(Locally free sheaves and vector bundles correspond contravariantly. Thus, if V is a vector bundle corresponding to F, then 
 
 
 
  induces isomorphisms between fibers 
 
 
 
 , which are linear maps.)
Just like in the non-equivariant setting, one can define an equivariant characteristic class of an equivariant vector bundle.
Examples

The tangent bundle of a manifold or a smooth variety is an equivariant vector bundle.

See also

Equivariant K-theory
Equivariant bundle
Equivariant cohomology
Quotient stack

Notes
References

J. Bernstein, V. Lunts, "Equivariant sheaves and functors," Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 1578 (1994).
Mumford, David; Fogarty, J.; Kirwan, F. Geometric invariant theory. Third edition. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (2) (Results in Mathematics and Related Areas (2)), 34. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994. xiv+292 pp.  ISBN 3-540-56963-4
Thomason, R.W.:Algebraic K-theory of group scheme actions. In: Browder, W. (ed.) Algebraic topology and algebraic K-theory. (Ann. Math. Stud., vol. 113, pp. 539–563) Princeton: Princeton University Press 1987

External links

http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/264796/equivariant-sheaves

"
Category:Scheme theory





If E is viewed as a sheaf, then g needs to replaced by 
 
 
 
 .




