


Cyclic sieving




Cyclic sieving

In combinatorial mathematics, cyclic sieving is a phenomenon by which evaluating a generating function for a finite set at roots of unity counts symmetry classes of objects acted on by a cyclic group.1
Definition
Let C be a cyclic group generated by an element c of order n. Suppose C acts on a set X. Let X(q) be a polynomial with integer coefficients. Then the triple (X, X(q), C) is said to exhibit the cyclic sieving phenomenon (CSP) if for all integers d, the value X(e2
 
 
id/n) is the number of elements fixed by cd. In particular X(1) is the cardinality of the set X, and for that reason X(q) is regarded as a generating function for X.
Examples
The q-binomial coefficient



is the polynomial in q defined by



It is easily seen that its value at q = 1 is the usual binomial coefficient

 
 , so it is a generating function for the subsets of {1, 2, ..., n} of size k. These subsets carry a natural action of the cyclic group C of order n which acts by adding 1 to each element of the set, modulo n. For example, when n = 4 and k = 2, the group orbits are


 
  (of size 2)
and


 
  (of size 4).
One can show2 that evaluating the q-binomial coefficient when q is an nth root of unity gives the number of subsets fixed by the corresponding group element.
In the example n = 4 and k = 2, the q-binomial coefficient is



evaluating this polynomial at q = 1 gives 6 (as all six subsets are fixed by the identity element of the group); evaluating it at q = −1 gives 2 (the subsets {1, 3} and {2, 4} are fixed by two applications of the group generator); and evaluating it at q = ±i gives 0 (no subsets are fixed by one or three applications of the group generator).
Notes and references

Sagan, Bruce. The cyclic sieving phenomenon: a survey. Surveys in combinatorics 2011, 183–233, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 392, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2011.

"
Category:Combinatorics Category:Generating functions



↩
V. Reiner, D. Stanton and D. White, The cyclic sieving phenomenon, Journal of Combinatorial Theory Series A, Volume 108 Issue 1, October 2004, Pages 17–50↩




