


Lang's theorem




Lang's theorem

In algebraic geometry, Lang's theorem, introduced by Serge Lang, states: if G is a connected smooth algebraic group over a finite field

 
 , then, writing 
 
 
 
  for the Frobenius, the morphism of varieties


 
   is surjective. Note that the kernel of this map (i.e., 
 
 
 
 
 ) is precisely 
 
 
 
 .
The theorem implies that 
 
 
 
    vanishes,1 and, consequently, any G-bundle on 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the trivial one. Also, the theorem plays a basic role in the theory of finite groups of Lie type.
It is not necessary that G is affine. Thus, the theorem also applies to abelian varieties (e.g., elliptic curves.) In fact, this application was Lang's initial motivation. If G is affine, the Frobenius 
 
 
 
  may be replaced by any surjective map with finitely many fixed points (see below for the precise statement.)
The proof (given below) actually goes through for any 
 
 
 
 
  that induces a nilpotent operator on the Lie algebra of G.2
The Lang–Steinberg theorem
gave a useful improvement to the theorem.
Suppose that F is an endomorphism of an algebraic group G. The Lang map is the map from G to G taking g to g−1F(g).
The Lang–Steinberg theorem states3 that if F is surjective and has a finite number of fixed points, and G is a connected affine algebraic group over an algebraically closed field, then the Lang map is surjective.
Proof of Lang's theorem
Define:


 
  Then (identifying the tangent space at a with the tangent space at the identity element) we have:


 
   where 
 
 
 
 . It follows 
 
 
 
  is bijective since the differential of the Frobenius 
 
 
 
 
  vanishes. Since 
 
 
 
 , we also see that 
 
 
 
  is bijective for any b.4 Let X be the closure of the image of 
 
 
 
 . The smooth points of X form an open dense subset; thus, there is some b in G such that 
 
 
 
  is a smooth point of X. Since the tangent space to X at 
 
 
 
 
  and the tangent space to G at b have the same dimension, it follows that X and G have the same dimension, since G is smooth. Since G is connected, the image of 
 
 
 
  then contains an open dense subset U of G. Now, given an arbitrary element a in G, by the same reasoning, the image of 
 
 
 
  contains an open dense subset V of G. The intersection 
 
 
 
  is then nonempty but then this implies a is in the image of 
 
 
 
 .
Notes
References

T.A. Springer, "Linear algebraic groups", 2nd ed. 1998.



"
Category:Algebraic groups Category:Theorems in algebraic geometry



This is "unwinding definition". Here, 
 
 
 
 
  is Galois cohomology; cf. Milne, Class field theory.↩
↩
↩
This implies that 
 
 
 
  is étale.↩




