


Shearlet




Shearlet

In applied mathematical analysis, shearlets are a multiscale framework which allows to efficiently encode anisotropic features in multivariate problem classes. Originally, shearlets were introduced in 2006 1 for the analysis as well as sparse approximation of functions 
 
 
 
 . They are a natural extension of wavelets to accommodate the fact that multivariate functions are typically governed by anisotropic features such as edges in images, however, wavelets as isotropic objects are not capable of capturing such phenomena.
Shearlets are constructed by parabolic scaling, shearing and translation applied to few generating functions. At fine scales, they are essentially supported within skinny and directional ridges following the parabolic scaling law, which reads length² ≈ width. Similar to wavelets, shearlets arise from the affine group and allow a unified treatment of the continuum and digital situation leading to faithful implementations. Although they do not constitute an orthonormal basis for 
 
 
 
 , they still form a frame allowing stable expansions of arbitrary functions 
 
 
 
 .
One of the most important properties of shearlets is the fact that they provide optimally sparse approximations (in the sense of optimality in 2) for cartoon-like functions

 
 
 . In imaging sciences, cartoon-like functions serve as a model for anisotropic features and are compactly supported in 
 
 
 
  while being 
 
 
 
  apart from a closed piecewise 
 
 
 
  singularity curve with bounded curvature. The decay rate of the 
 
 
 
 -error of the 
 
 
 
 
 -term shearlet approximation obtained by taking the 
 
 
 
  largest coefficients from the shearlet expansion is in fact optimal up to a log-factor:34


 
  where the constant 
 
 
 
  depends only on the maximum curvature of the singularity curve and the maximum magnitudes of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This approximation rate significantly improves the best 
 
 
 
 -term approximation rate of wavelets providing only 
 
 
 
  for such class of functions.
Shearlets are to date the only directional representation system which provides sparse approximation of anisotropic features while providing a unified treatment of the continuum and digital realm in the sense of allowing faithful implementation. Extensions of shearlet systems to 
 
 
 
  are also available. A comprehensive presentation of the theory and applications of shearlets can be found in: 5
Definition
Continuous shearlet systems
The construction of continuous shearlet systems is based on parabolic scaling matrices



as a mean to change the resolution, on shear matrices



as a means to change the orientation, and finally on translations to change the positioning. In comparison to curvelets, shearlets use shearings instead of rotations, the advantage being that the shear operator 
 
 
 
  leaves the integer lattice invariant in case 
 
 
 
 , i.e., 
 
 
 
  This indeed allows a unified treatment of the continuum and digital realm, thereby guaranteeing a faithful digital implementation.
For 
 
 
 
 
  the continuous shearlet system generated by 
 
 
 
  is then defined as



and the corresponding continuous shearlet transform is given by the map



Discrete shearlet systems
A discrete version of shearlet systems can be directly obtained from 
 
 
 
  by discretizing the parameter set 
 
 
 
 
  There are numerous approaches for this but the most popular one is given by



From this, the discrete shearlet system associated with the shearlet generator 
 
 
 
  is defined by



and the associated discrete shearlet transform is defined by



Examples
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a function satisfying the discrete Calderón condition, i.e.,



with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Fourier transform of 
 
 
 
 
  For instance, one can choose 
 
 
 
  to be a Meyer wavelet. Furthermore, let 
 
 
 
  be such that 
 
 

 
  and



One typically chooses 
 
 
 
  to be a smooth bump function. Then 
 
 
 
  given by



is called a classical shearlet. It can be shown that the corresponding discrete shearlet system 
 
 
 
  constitutes a Parseval frame for 
 
 
 
 
  consisting of bandlimited functions.6
Another example are compactly supported shearlet systems, where a compactly supported function 
 
 
 
  can be chosen so that 
 
 
 
  forms a frame for 
 
 
 
 .78910 In this case, all shearlet elements in 
 
 
 
  are compactly supported providing superior spatial localization compared to the classical shearlets, which are bandlimited. Although a compactly supported shearlet system does not generally form a Parseval frame, any function 
 
 
 
 
  can be represented by the shearlet expansion due to its frame property.
Cone-adapted shearlets
One drawback of shearlets defined as above is the directional bias of shearlet elements associated with large shearing parameters. This effect is already recognizable in the frequency tiling of classical shearlets (see Figure in Section #Examples), where the frequency support of a shearlet increasingly aligns along the 
 
 
 
 -axis as the shearing parameter 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity. This causes serious problems when analyzing a function whose Fourier transform is concentrated around the 
 
 
 
 -axis.
 To deal with this problem, the frequency domain is divided into a low-frequency part and two conic regions (see Figure):



 The associated cone-adapted discrete shearlet system consists of three parts, each one corresponding to one of these frequency domains. It is generated by three functions 
 
 
 
  and a lattice sampling factor 
 
 




where



with



The systems 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  basically differ in the reversed roles of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus, they correspond to the conic regions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. Finally, the scaling function

 
  is associated with the low-frequency part 
 
 
 
 .
Applications

Image processing and computer sciences 11

Denoising
Inverse problems
Image enhancement
Edge detection
Inpainting
Image separation

PDEs 12

Resolution of the wavefront set
Transport equations

Coorbit theory, characterization of smoothness spaces 13
Differential geometry: manifold learning

Generalizations and extensions

3D-Shearlets 1415


 
 -Shearlets 16
Parabolic molecules 17

See also

Wavelet transform
Curvelet transform
Contourlet transform
Bandelet transform
Chirplet transform
Noiselet transform

References
External links

Shearlet homepage
Shearlab homepage
Homepage of Gitta Kutyniok
Homepage of Demetrio Labate

"
Category:Image processing Category:Time–frequency analysis Category:Signal processing Category:Wavelets
























