


Artin–Schreier curve




Artin–Schreier curve

In mathematics, an Artin–Schreier curve is a plane curve defined over an algebraically closed field of characteristic 
 
 
 
  by an equation


 
  for some rational function

 
  over that field.
One of the most important examples of such curves is hyperelliptic curves in characteristic 2, whose Jacobian varieties have been suggested for use in cryptography.1 It is common to write these curves in the form


 
  for some polynomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
More generally, an Artin-Schreier curve defined over an algebraically closed field of characteristic 
 
 
 
  is a branched covering


 
  of the projective line of degree 
 
 
 
 
 . Such a cover is necessarily cyclic, that is, the Galois group of the corresponding algebraic function field extension is the cyclic group

 
 . In other words, 
 
 
 
  is an Artin–Schreier extension.
The fundamental theorem of Artin–Schreier theory implies that such a curve defined over a field 
 
 
 
  has an affine model


 
  for some rational function 
 
 
 
 
  that is not equal for 
 
 
 
  for any other rational function 
 
 
 
 . In other words, if we define polynomial 
 
 
 
 , then we require that 
 
 
 
 .
Ramification
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be an Artin–Schreier curve. Rational function 
 
 
 
  over an algebraically closed field 
 
 
 
  has partial fraction decomposition


 
  for some finite set 
 
 
 
  of elements of 
 
 
 
 
  and corresponding non-constant polynomials 
 
 
 
  defined over 
 
 
 
 , and (possibly constant) polynomial 
 
 
 
 . After a change of coordinates, 
 
 
 
  can be chosen so that the above polynomials have degrees coprime to 
 
 
 
 
 , and the same either holds for 
 
 
 
  or it is zero. If that is the case, we define


 
  Then the set 
 
 
 
  is precisely the set of branch points of the covering 
 
 
 
 .
For example, Artin–Schreier curve 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial, is ramified at a single point over the projective line.
Since degree of the cover is a prime number, over each branching point 
 
 
 
  lies a single ramification point 
 
 
 
  with corresponding ramification index equal to



Genus
Since, 
 
 
 
 
  does not divide 
 
 
 
 , ramification indices 
 
 
 
  are not divisible by 
 
 
 
  either. Therefore, Riemann-Roch theorem may be used to compute that genus of an Artin–Schreier curve is given by



For example, for a hyperelliptic curve defined over a field of characteristic 
 
 
 
 
  by equation 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  decomposing as above, we have



Generalizations
Artin–Schreier curves are a particular case of plane curves defined over an algebraically closed field 
 
 
 
  of characteristic 
 
 
 
 
  by an equation


 
  for some separable polynomial

 
  and rational function 
 
 
 
 . Mapping 
 
 
 
  yields a covering map from the curve 
 
 
 
 
  to the projective line 
 
 
 
 . Separability of defining polynomial 
 
 
 
  ensures separability of the corresponding function field extension 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , a change of variables can be found so that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It has been shown 2 that such curves can be built via a sequence of Artin-Schreier extension, that is, there exists a sequence of cyclic coverings of curves


 
  each of degree 
 
 
 
 , starting with the projective line.
See also

Artin–Schreier theory
Hyperelliptic curve
Superelliptic curve

References



"
Category:Algebraic curves









