


Matrix product state




Matrix product state

(Figure)
A matrix product state of five particles, as drawn with Penrose graphical notation (also known as tensor diagram notation).

Matrix product state (MPS) is a pure quantum state of many particles, written in the following form:



where 
 
 
 
  are complex, square matrices of order 
 
 
 
  (this dimension is called local dimension). Indices 
 
 
 
  go over states in the computational basis. For qubits, it is 
 
 
 
 . For qudits (d-level systems), it is 
 
 
 
 .
It is particularly useful for dealing with ground states of one-dimensional quantum spin models (e.g. Heisenberg model (quantum)). The parameter 
 
 
 
  is related to entanglement between particles. In particular, if the state is a product state (i.e. not entangled at all), it can be described as a matrix product state with
 
 
 
 .
For states that are translationally symmetric, we can choose:



In general, every state can be written in the MPS form (with 
 
 
 
  growing exponentially with the particle number N). However, MPS are practical when 
 
 
 
  is small – for example, does not depend on the particle number. Except for a small number of specific cases (some mentioned in the section Examples), such thing is not possible. Though, in many cases it serves as a good approximation.
MPS decomposition is not unique.
Introductions in.1 and.2 In the context of finite automata:3
Obtaining MPS
One method to obtain MPS is to use Schmidt decomposition  times.
Examples
Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger state
Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger state, which for  particles can be written as superposition of  zeros and  ones


 
  can be expressed as a Matrix Product State, up to normalization, with


 
  or equivalently, using notation from:4



This notation uses matrices with entries being wave functions (instead of complex numbers), and when multiplying matrices using tensor product for its entries (instead of product of two complex numbers). Such matrix is constructed as


 
  Note that tensor product is not commutative.
In this particular example, a product of two A matrices is:



W state
W state, i.e. a being symmetric superposition of a single one among. Even through the state is permutation-symmetric, its simplest MPS representation is not.5 For example:



AKLT model
The AKLT ground state wavefunction, which is the historical example of MPS approach:,6 corresponds to the choice7









where the 
 
 
 
  are Pauli matrices, or



Majumdar–Ghosh model
Majumdar–Ghosh ground state can be written as MPS with



See also

Density matrix renormalization group
Variational method (quantum mechanics)
Renormalization
Markov chain
Projected Entangled Pair States (PEPS)

External links

State of Matrix Product States – Physics Stack Exchange
A Practical Introduction to Tensor Networks: Matrix Product States and Projected Entangled Pair States8

References
"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Mathematical physics















