


Moduli stack of principal bundles




Moduli stack of principal bundles

In algebraic geometry, given a smooth projective curve X over a finite field 
 
 
 
  and a smooth affine group scheme G over it, the moduli stack of principal bundles over X, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is an algebraic stack given by:1 for any 
 
 
 
 -algebra R,


 
  the category of principal G-bundles over the relative curve 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the category of 
 
 
 
 -points of 
 
 
 
 , that is, 
 
 
 
 , is the category of G-bundles over X.
Similarly, 
 
 
 
  can also be defined when the curve X is over the field of complex numbers. Roughly, in the complex case, one can define 
 
 
 
  as the quotient stack of the space of holomorphic connections on X by the gauge group. Replacing the quotient stack (which is not a topological space) by a homotopy quotient (which is a topological space) gives the homotopy type of 
 
 
 
 .
In the finite field case, it is not common to define the homotopy type of 
 
 
 
 . But one can still define a (smooth) cohomology and homology of 
 
 
.
Basic properties
It is known that 
 
 
 
  is a smooth stack of dimension 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the genus of X. It is not of finite type but of locally of finite type; one thus usually uses a stratification by open substacks of finite type (cf. the Harder–Narasimhan stratification.) If G is a split reductive group, then the set of connected components 
 
 
 
  is in a natural bijection with the fundamental group 
 
 
 
 .2
The Atiyah–Bott formula
Behrend's trace formula
This is a (conjectural) version of the Lefschetz trace formula for 
 
 
 
  when X is over a finite field, introduced by Behrend in 1993.3 It states:4 if G is a smooth affine group scheme with semisimple connected generic fiber, then


 
  where (see also Behrend's trace formula for the details)

l is a prime number that is not p and the ring 
 
 
 
  of l-adic integers is viewed as a subring of 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the geometric Frobenius.


 
 , the sum running over all isomorphism classes of G-bundles on X and convergent.


 
  for a graded vector space

 
 , provided the series on the right absolutely converges.

A priori, neither left nor right side in the formula converges. Thus, the formula states that the two sides converge to finite numbers and that those numbers coincide.
Notes
References

J. Heinloth, Lectures on the moduli stack of vector bundles on a curve, 2009 preliminary version
J. Heinloth, A.H.W. Schmitt, The Cohomology Ring of Moduli Stacks of Principal Bundles over Curves, 2010 preprint, available at http://www.uni-essen.de/~hm0002/.
Gaitsgory, D; Lurie, J.; Weil's Conjecture for Function Fields. 2014, 1

Further reading

http://mathoverflow.net/questions/87171/tamagawa-number-for-functional-fields
C. Sorger, Lectures on moduli of principal G-bundles over algebraic curves

See also

Geometric Langlands conjectures
Ran space

"
Category:Algebraic geometry



http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/283notes/Lecture2-FunctionFields.pdf

http://www.math.ubc.ca/~behrend/thesis.pdf





