


Graded (mathematics)




Graded (mathematics)

In mathematics, the term “graded” has a number of meanings, mostly related:
In abstract algebra, it refers to a family of concepts:

An algebraic structure

 
  is said to be 
 
 
 
 -graded for an index set 
 
 
 
  if it has a gradation or grading, i.e. a decomposition into a direct sum 
 
 
 
  of structures; the elements of 
 
 
 
  are said to be “homogeneous of degree i”.
 
The index set I is most commonly 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , and may be required to have extra structure depending on the type of 
 
 
 
 .
Grading by 
 
 
 
  (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) is also important.
The trivial (
 
 
 
 - or 
 
 
 
 -) gradation has 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and a suitable trivial structure 
 
 
 
 .
An algebraic structure is said to be doubly graded if the index set is a direct product of sets; the pairs may be called “bidegrees” (e.g. see spectral sequence).

A 
 
 
 
 -graded vector space or graded linear space is thus a vector space with a decomposition into a direct sum 
 
 
 
  of spaces.
 
A graded linear map is a map between graded vector spaces respecting their gradations.

A graded ring is a ring that is a direct sum of abelian groups 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  taken from some monoid, usually 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , or semigroup (for a ring without identity).
 
The associated graded ring of a commutative ring 
 
 
 
  with respect to a proper ideal 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .

A graded module is left module 
 
 
 
  over a graded ring which is a direct sum 
 
 
 
  of modules satisfying 
 
 
 
 .
 
The associated graded module of an 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
  with respect to a proper ideal 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
A differential graded module, differential graded 
 
 
 
 -module or DG-module is a graded module 
 
 
 
  with a differential

 
  making 
 
 
 
  a chain complex, i.e. 
 
 
 
  .

A graded algebra is an algebra 
 
 
 
  over a ring 
 
 
 
  that is graded as a ring; if 
 
 
 
  is graded we also require 
 
 
 
 .
 
The graded Leibniz rule for a map 
 
 
 
  on a graded algebra 
 
 
 
  specifies that 
 
 
 
  .
A differential graded algebra, DG-algebra or DGAlgebra is a graded algebra which is a differential graded module whose differential obeys the graded Leibniz rule.
A homogeneous derivation on a graded algebra A is a homogeneous linear map of grade d = |D| on A such that 
 
 
 
  acting on homogeneous elements of A.
A graded derivation is a sum of homogeneous derivations with the same 
 
 
 
 .
A DGA is an augmented DG-algebra, or differential graded augmented algebra, (see differential graded algebra).
A superalgebra is a 
 
 
 
 -graded algebra.
 
A graded-commutative superalgebra satisfies the “supercommutative” law 
 
 
 
  for homogeneous x,y, where 
 
 
 
  represents the “parity” of 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 0 or 1 depending on the component in which it lies.

CDGA may refer to the category of augmented differential graded commutative algebras.

A graded Lie algebra is a Lie algebra which is graded as a vector space by a gradation compatible with its Lie bracket.
 
A graded Lie superalgebra is a graded Lie algebra with the requirement for anticommutativity of its Lie bracket relaxed.
A supergraded Lie superalgebra is a graded Lie superalgebra with an additional super 
 
 
 
 -gradation.
A Differential graded Lie algebra is a graded vector space over a field of characteristic zero together with a bilinear map 
 
 
 
  and a differential 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
  for any homogeneous elements x, y in L, the “graded Jacobi identity” and the graded Leibniz rule.

The Graded Brauer group is a synonym for the Brauer–Wall group

 
  classifying finite-dimensional graded central division algebras over the field F.
An 
 
 
 
 -graded category for a category 
 
 
 
  is a category 
 
 
 
  together with a functor 
 
 
 
 .
 
A differential graded category or ' DG category' is a category whose morphism sets form differential graded 
 
 
 
 -modules.

Graded manifold – extension of the manifold concept based on ideas coming from supersymmetry and supercommutative algebra, including sections on
 
Graded function
Graded vector fields
Graded exterior forms
Graded differential geometry
Graded differential calculus


In other areas of mathematics:

Functionally graded elements are used in finite element analysis.
A graded poset is a poset 
 
 
 
  with a rank function

 
  compatible with the ordering (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) such that 
 
 
covers

 
  .

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Differential operators


