


Lieb-Robinson bounds




Lieb-Robinson bounds

The Lieb-Robinson bound is a theoretical upper limit on the speed at which information can propagate in non-relativistic quantum systems. It demonstrates that information cannot travel instantaneously in quantum theory, even when the relativity limits of the speed of light are ignored.
In the study of quantum systems such as quantum optics, quantum information theory, atomic physics and condensed matter physics it is important to know that there is a finite speed with which information can propagate. The theory of relativity shows that no information, or anything else for that matter, can travel faster than the speed of light. When non-relativistic mechanics is considered, however, (Newton's equations of motion or Schrödinger's equation of quantum mechanics) it was thought that there is then no limitation to the speed of propagation of information. The fact that this is not so, for certain kinds of quantum systems of atoms arranged in a lattice (often called quantum spin systems), is important conceptually and also practically because it means that for short periods of time distant parts of the system act independently.
The surprising existence of such a finite speed of propagation (up to exponentially small error terms) was discovered mathematically in the 1972 paper.1 It turns the locality properties of physical systems into the existence of an upper bound for this speed. The bound is known as the Lieb-Robinson bound and the speed is known as the Lieb-Robinson velocity. The velocity is not universal, because it depends on the details of the system under consideration, but for each system there is a finite velocity.
One of the practical applications of Lieb-Robinson bounds is quantum computing. Current proposals to construct quantum computers built out of atomic-like units mostly rely on the existence of this finite speed of propagation to protect against too rapid dispersal of information.
Review articles can be found in the following references, for example,234
Set up
To define the bound it is first necessary to describe basic facts about quantum mechanical systems composed of several units, each with a finite dimensional Hilbert space.
Lieb-Robinson bounds are considered on a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional lattice (
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ) such as the square lattice 
 
 
 
 .
A Hilbert space of states 
 
 
 
  is associated with each point 
 
 
 
 . The dimension of this space is finite, but this was generalized in 2008 (see below). This is called quantum spin system.
For every finite subset of the lattice, 
 
 
 
 , the associated Hilbert space is given by the tensor product


 
 . 
 
 
 
  is a subspace of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 .
An observable

 
  supported on (i.e., depends only on) a finite set 
 
 
 
  is a linear operator on the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 .
When 
 
 
 
  is finite dimensional choose a finite basis of operators that span the set of linear operators on 
 
 
 
 . Then any observable on 
 
 
 
  can be written as a sum of basis operators on 
 
 
 
 .
The Hamiltonian of the system is described by an interaction 
 
 
 
 . The interaction is a function from the finite sets 
 
 
 
  to self-adjoint observables 
 
 
 
  supported in 
 
 
 
 . The interaction is assumed to be finite range (meaning that 
 
 
 
  if the size of 
 
 
 
  exceeds a certain prescribed size) and translation invariant. These requirements were lifted later, see:56
Although translation invariance is usually assumed, it is not necessary to do so. It is enough to assume that the interaction is bounded above and below on its domain. Thus, the bound is quite robust in the sense that it is tolerant of changes of the Hamiltonian. A finite range is essential, however. An interaction is said to be of finite range if there is a finite number 
 
 
 
  such that for any set 
 
 
 
  with diameter greater than 
 
 
 
  the interaction is zero, i.e., 
 
 
 
 .
The Hamiltonian of the system with interaction 
 
 
 
  is defined formally by:


 
 .
The laws of quantum mechanics say that corresponding to every physically observable quantity there is a self-adjoint operator 
 
 
 
 . For every observable 
 
 
 
  with a finite support the Hamiltonian defines a continuous one-parameter group 
 
 
 
  of transformations of the observables 
 
 
 
  given by


 
  Here, 
 
 
 
  has the physical meaning of time. (Technically speaking, this time evolution is defined by a power-series expansion that is known to be a norm-convergent series 
 
 
 
 , see,7 Theorem 7.6.2, which is an adaptation from.8 More rigorous details can be found in.9)
The bound in question was proved in 10 and is the following: For any observables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with finite supports 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, and for any time 
 
 
 
  the following holds for some positive constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :
where 
 
 
 
  denotes the distance between the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The operator 
 
 
 
  is called the commutator of the operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , while the symbol 
 
 
 
  denotes the norm, or size, of an operator 
 
 
 
 . It is very important to note that the bound has nothing to do with the state of the quantum system, but depends only on the Hamiltoninan governing the dynamics. Once this operator bound is established it necessarily carries over to any state of the system.
A positive constant 
 
 
 
  depends on the norms of the observables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the sizes of the supports 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the interaction, the lattice structure and the dimension of the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 . A positive constant 
 
 
 
  depends on the interaction and the lattice structure only. The number 
 
 
 
  can be chosen at will provided 
 
 
 
  is chosen sufficiently large. In other words, the further out one goes on the light cone, 
 
 
 
 , the sharper the exponential decay rate is. (In later works authors tended to regard 
 
 
 
  as a fixed constant.) The constant 
 
 
 
  is called the group velocity or Lieb-Robinson velocity.
The bound () is presented slightly differently from the equation in the original paper.11 This more explicit form () can be seen from the proof of the bound 12
Lieb-Robinson bound shows that for times 
 
 
 
  the norm on the right-hand side is exponentially small. This is the exponentially small error mentioned above.
The reason for considering the commutator on the left-hand side of the Lieb–Robinson bounds is the following:
The commutator between observables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is zero if their supports are disjoint.
The converse is also true: if observable 
 
 
 
  is such that its commutator with any observable 
 
 
 
  supported outside some set 
 
 
 
  is zero, then 
 
 
 
  has a support inside set 
 
 
 
 .
This statement is also approximately true in the following sense:13 suppose that there exists some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for some observable 
 
 
 
  and any observable 
 
 
 
  that is supported outside the set 
 
 
 
 . Then there exists an observable 
 
 
 
  with support inside set 
 
 
 
  that approximates an observable 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
Thus, Lieb-Robinson bounds say that the time evolution of an observable 
 
 
 
  with support in a set 
 
 
 
  is supported (up to exponentially small errors) in a 
 
 
 
 -neighborhood of set 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  being the Lieb-Robinson velocity. Outside this set there is no influence of 
 
 
 
 . In other words, this bounds assert that the speed of propagation of perturbations in quantum spin systems is bounded.
Improvements of the Lieb-Robinson bounds
In 14 Robinson generalized the bound () by considering exponentially decaying interactions (that need not be translation invariant), i.e., for which the strength of the interaction decays exponentially with the diameter of the set. This result is discussed in detail in,15 Chapter 6. No great interest was shown in the Lieb-Robinson bounds until 2004 when Hastings 16 applied them to the Lieb–Schultz–Mattis theorem. Subsequently Nachtergaele and Sims 17 extended the results of 18 to include models on vertices with a metric and to derive exponential decay of correlations. From 2005–2006 interest in Lieb–Robinson bounds strengthened with additional applications to exponential decay of correlations (see 192021 and the sections below). New proofs of the bounds were developed and, in particular, the constant in () was improved making it independent of the dimension of the Hilbert space.
Several further improvements of the constant 
 
 
 
  in () were made.22 In 2008 the Lieb-Robinson bound was extended to the case in which each 
 
 
 
  is infinite dimensional.23 In 24 it was shown that on-site unbounded perturbations do not change the Lieb-Robinson bound. That is, Hamiltonians of the following form can be considered on a finite subset 
 
 
 
 :


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a self-adjoint operator over 
 
 
 
 , which needs not to be bounded.
Harmonic and Anharmonic Hamiltonians
The Lieb-Robinson bounds were extended to certain continuous quantum systems, that is to a general harmonic Hamiltonian,25 which, in a finite volume 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are positive integers, takes the form:


 
  where the periodic boundary conditions are imposed and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  are canonical basis vectors in 
 
 
 
 .
Anharmonic Hamiltonians with on-site and multiple-site perturbations were considered and the Lieb–Robinson bounds were derived for them,2627 Further generalizations of the harmonic lattice were discussed,2829
Irreversible dynamics
Another generalization of the Lieb–Robinson bounds was made to the irreversible dynamics, in which case the dynamics has a Hamiltonian part and also a dissipative part. The dissipative part is described by terms of Lindblad form, so that the dynamics 
 
 
 
  satisfies the Lindblad-Kossakowski master equation.
Lieb-Robinson bounds for the irreversible dynamics were considered by 30 in the classical context and by 31 for a class of quantum lattice systems with finite-range interactions. Lieb-Robinson bounds for lattice models with a dynamics generated by both Hamiltonian and dissipative interactions with suitably fast decay in space, and that may depend on time, were proved by,32 where they also proved the existence of the infinite dynamics as a strongly continuous cocycle of unit preserving completely positive maps.
Some applications
Lieb–Robinson bounds are used in many areas of mathematical physics. Among the main applications of the bound there is the existence of the thermodynamic limit, the exponential decay of correlations and the Lieb–Schultz–Mattis theorem.
Thermodynamic limit of the dynamics
One of the important properties of any model meant to describe properties of bulk matter is the existence of the thermodynamic limit. This says that intrinsic properties of the system should be essentially independent of the size of the system which, in any experimental setup, is ﬁnite.
The static thermodynamic limit from the equilibrium point of view was settled much before the Lieb–Robinson bound was proved, see 33 for example. In certain cases one can use a Lieb–Robinson bound to establish the existence of a thermodynamic limit of the dynamics, 
 
 
 
 , for an infinite lattice 
 
 
 
  as the limit of finite lattice dynamics. The limit is usually considered over an increasing sequence of finite subsets 
 
 
 
 , i.e. such that for 
 
 
 
 . In order to prove the existence of the infinite dynamics 
 
 
 
  as a strongly continuous, one-parameter group of automorphisms, it was proved that 
 
 
 
  is a Cauchy sequence and consequently is convergent. By elementary considerations, the existence of the thermodynamic limit then follows. A more detailed discussion of the thermodynamic limit can be found in 34 section 6.2.
Robinson was the first to show the existence of the thermodynamic limit for exponentially decaying interactions.35 Later, Nachtergaele et al.363738 showed the existence of the infinite volume dynamics for almost every type of interaction described in the section "Improvements of Lieb–Robinson bounds" above.
 Exponential decay of correlations
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the expectation value of the observable 
 
 
 
  with respect to a state 
 
 
 
 . The correlation function between two observables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 

Lieb–Robinson bounds are used to show that the correlations decay exponentially in distance for a system with an energy gap above a non-degenerate ground state

 
 , see.3940 In other words, the inequality


 
  holds for observables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with support in the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively. Here 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are some constants.
Alternatively the state 
 
 
 
  can be taken as a product state, in which case correlations decay exponentially without assuming the energy gap above the ground state.41
Such a decay was long known for relativistic dynamics, but only guessed for Newtonian dynamics. The Lieb–Robinson bounds succeed in replacing the relativistic symmetry by local estimates on the Hamiltonian.
 Lieb-Schultz-Mattis theorem
Lieb-Schultz-Mattis theorem implies that the ground state of the Heisenberg antiferromagnet on a bipartite lattice with isomorphic sublattices, is non-degenerate, i.e., unique, but the gap can be very small.42
For one-dimensional and quasi-one-dimensional systems of even length and with half-integral spin Affleck and Lieb,43 generalizing the original result by Lieb, Schultz, and Mattis,44 proved that the gap 
 
 
 
  in the spectrum above the ground state is bounded above by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the size of the lattice and $c$ is a constant. Many attempts were made to extend this result to higher dimensions, $d>1$,
Finally, the Lieb–Robinson bound was utilized by Hastings 45 and by Nachtergaele-Sims 46 in a proof of the Lieb–Schultz–Mattis Theorem for higher-dimensional cases. The following bound on the gap was obtained:
$$\gamma_L\leq c\log (L)/L.$$.
Experiments
The first experimental observation of the Lieb–Robinson velocity was done by Cheneau et al.47
References
"
Category:Quantum information theory



E. Lieb, D. Robinson, The ﬁnite group velocity of quantum spin systems, Commun. Math. Phys. 28, 251–257, (1972)
B. Nachtergaele, R. Sims, Much Ado About Something: Why Lieb-Robinson bounds are useful, IAMP News Bulletin, October 2010, 22–29, (2010)
M. Kliesch, C. Gogolin, J. Eisert, Lieb-Robinson bounds and the simulation of time evolution of local observables in lattice systems, arXiv:1306.0716, (2013)
M. B. Hastings, Locality in quantum systems, arXiv:1008.5137
M. Hastings, T. Koma, Spectral Gap and Exponential Decay of Correlations, Commun. Math. Phys. 256, 781, (2006)

D. Ruelle, Statistical mechanics. Rigorous results, Benjamin, New York, 1969
D. W. Robinson, Statistical mechanics of quantum spin systems II. Comm. Math. Phys. 7, 337–348, (1968)




S. Bachmann, S. Michalakis, B. Nachtergaele, R. Sims, Automorphic Equivalence within Gapped Phases of Quantum Lattice Systems, Commun. Math. Phys. 309, 835–871, (2012)
D. W. Robinson, Properties of propagation of quantum spin systems, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 19 (Series B), 387–399, (1976)
O. Bratteli, D. W. Robinson, Operator algebras and quantum statistical mechanics, 1ed., vol. 2, Springer-Verlag, 1981 and 2 ed., vol. 2, Springer-Verlag, 1997
M. Hastings, Lieb–Schultz–Mattis in higher dimensions, Phys. Rev. B 69, 104431–10444, (2004)
B. Nachtergaele, R. Sims, Lieb-Robinson bounds and the exponential clustering theorem, Commun. Math. Phys., 265, 119–130, (2006)


B. Nachtergaele, Y. Ogata, R. Sims, Propagation of Correlations in Quantum Lattice Systems, J. Stat. Phys. 124, 1–13, (2006)
M. Hastings, Locality in quantum and Markov dynamics on lattices and networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 140402, (2004)
B. Nachtergaele, R. Sims. Locality Estimates for Quantum Spin Systems, Sidoravicius, Vladas (Ed.), New Trends in Mathematical Physics. Selected contributions of the XVth International Congress on Mathematical Physics, Springer Verlag, 591–614, (2009)
B. Nachtergaele, H. Raz, B. Schlein, R. Sims, Lieb-Robinson bounds for harmonic and anharmonic lattice systems, Commun. Math. Phys. 286, 1073–1098, (2009)



B. Nachtergaele, B. Schlein, R. Sims, S. Starr, V. Zagrebnov, On the existence of the dynamics for anharmonic quantum oscillator systems, Rev. Math. Phys., 22, 207–231, (2010)
M. Cramer, A. Serafini, J. Eisert, Locality of dynamics in general harmonic quantum systems, arXiv:0803.0890, (2008)
J. Juenemann, A. Cadarso, D. Perez-Garcia, A. Bermudez, J. J. Garcia-Ripoll, Lieb–Robinson bounds for spin-boson lattice models and trapped ions, arXiv:1307.1992, (2013)

D. Poulin, Lieb–Robinson bound and locality for general Markovian quantum dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 190401, (2010)
B. Nachtergaele, A. Vershynina, V. Zagrebnov, Lieb-Robinson bounds and Existence of the thermodynamic limit for a class of irreversible quantum dynamics, AMS Contemporary Mathematics, 552, 161–175, (2011)

O. Bratteli, D. W. Robinson, Operator algebras and quantum statistical mechanics, 2 ed., vol. 2, Springer Verlag, 1997







E. Lieb, D. Mattis, Ordering energy levels in interacting spin chains, Journ. Math. Phys. 3, 749–751, (1962)
I. Aﬄeck, E.H. Lieb, A proof of part of Haldane’s conjecture on quantum spin chains, Lett. Math. Phys. 12, 57–69, (1986)
E. Lieb, T. Schultz, D. Mattis, Two soluble models of an antiferromagnetic chain, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 16, 407–466, (1961)
M. Hastings, Lieb–Schultz–Mattis in higher dimensions, Phys. Rev. B 69, 104431–10444, (2004)
B. Nachtergaele, R. Sims, A multi-dimensional Lieb–Schultz–Mattis theorem, Commun. Math. Phys. 276, 437-472, (2007)
M. Cheneau, P. Barmettler, D. Poletti, M. Endres, P. Schauß, T. Fukuhara, C. Gross, I. Bloch, C. Kollath, S. Kuhr, Light-cone-like spreading of correlations in a quantum many-body system, Nature 481, 484–487, (2012)




