


Andreotti–Norguet formula




Andreotti–Norguet formula
The Andreotti–Norguet formula, first introduced by ,1 is a higher–dimensional analogue of Cauchy integral formula for expressing the derivatives of a holomorphic function. Precisely, this formula express the value of the partial derivative of any multiindex order of a holomorphic function of several variables,2 in any interior point of a given bounded domain, as a hypersurface integral of the values of the function on the boundary of the domain itself. In this respect, it is analogous and generalizes the Bochner–Martinelli formula,3 reducing to it when the absolute value of the multiindex order of differentiation is 
 
 
 
 .4 When considered for functions of  complex variables, it reduces to the ordinary Cauchy formula for the derivative of a holomorphic function:5 however, when 
 
 
 
 , its integral kernel is not obtainable by simple differentiation of the Bochner–Martinelli kernel.6
Historical note
The Andreotti–Norguet formula was first published in the research announcement :7 however, its full proof was only published later in the paper .8 Another, different proof of the formula was given by .9 In 1977 and 1978, Lev Aizenberg gave still another proof and a generalization of the formula based on the Cauchy–Fantappiè–Leray kernel instead on the Bochner–Martinelli kernel.10
The Andreotti–Norguet integral representation formula
The notation adopted in the following description of the integral representation formula is the one used by  and by : the notations used in the original works and in other references, though equivalent, are significantly different.11 Precisely, it is assumed that



 
  is a fixed natural number,


 
  are complex vectors,
 is a multiindex whose absolute value is ,


 
  is a bounded domain whose closure is 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  is the function space of functions holomorphic on the interior of 
 
 
 
  and continuous on its boundary

 
 .
the iterated Wirtinger derivatives of order 
 
 
 
  of a given complex valued function 
 
 
 
  are expressed using the following simplified notation:




The Andreotti–Norguet kernel
1|Definition 1. For every multiindex 
 
 
 
 , the Andreotti–Norguet kernel 
 
 
 
  is the following differential form in 
 
 
 
  of bidegree 
 
 
 
 :



where  and



The integral formula
2|Theorem 1 (Andreotti and Norguet). For every function 
 
 
 
 , every point 
 
 
 
  and every multiindex 
 
 
 
 , the following integral representation formula holds



See also

Bergman–Weil formula

Notes
References


, revised translation of the 1990 Russian original.
{{Citation

| last = Aizenberg
| first = L. A. 
| author-link = Lev Aizenberg
| last2 = Yuzhakov
| first2 = A. P.
| author2-link = Aleksandr Yuzhakov
| title = Integral Representations and Residues in Multidimensional Complex Analysis
| url = http://books.google.it/books?id=2ZWsf6ufee8C&printsec;;=frontcover&hl;=en



For a brief historical sketch, see the "historical section" of the present entry.
Partial derivatives of a holomorphic function of several complex variables are defined as partial derivatives respect to its complex arguments, i.e. as Wirtinger derivatives.
See , ,  and .
As remarked in  and .
As remarked by .
See the remarks by  and .
As correctly stated by  and .  cites only the later work  which, however, contains the full proof of the formula.
See .
According to , ,  and , who does not describe his results in this reference, but merely mentions them.
See , , the references cited in those sources and the brief remarks by , : each of these works gives Aizenberg's proof.
Compare, for example, the original ones by  and those used by , also briefly described in reference .




