


Gale–Ryser theorem




Gale–Ryser theorem

The Gale–Ryser theorem is a result in graph theory and combinatorial matrix theory, two branches of combinatorics. It provides one of two known approaches solving the bipartite realization problem, i.e. it gives a necessary and sufficient condition for two finite sequences of natural numbers to be the degree sequence of a labeled simple bipartite graph;a sequence obeying these conditions is called "bigraphic". It is an analog of the Erdős–Gallai theorem for simple graphs. The theorem was published in 1957 by H. J. Ryser and also by David Gale.
Theorem statement
A pair of sequences of nonnegative integers

 
  and 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  is bigraphic if and only if 
 
 
 
  and the following inequality holds for k such that 
 
 
 
 :



Remark
Sometimes this theorem is stated with the additional constraint 
 
 
 
 . This condition is not necessary, because the labels of vertices of one partite set in a bipartite graph can be switched arbitrarily. In 1962 Ford and Fulkerson 1 gave a different but equivalent formulation for the theorem.
Other notations
The theorem can also be stated in terms of zero-one matrices. The connection can be seen if one realizes that each bipartite graph has a biadjacency matrix where the column sums and row sums correspond to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Each sequence can also be considered as a partition of the same number 
 
 
 
 . It turns out that partition 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the conjugate partition of 
 
 
 
 . The conjugate partition can be determined by a Ferrers diagram. Moreover, there is a connection to the relation majorization. Consider sequences 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 , the theorem above states that a pair of nonnegative integer sequences a and b with nonincreasing a is bigraphic if and only if the conjugate partition 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  majorizes 
 
 
 
 . A third formulation is in terms of degree sequences of simple directed graphs with at most one loop per vertex. In this case the matrix is interpreted as the adjacency matrix of such a directed graph. When are pairs of nonnegative integers

 
  the indegree-outdegree pairs of a labeled directed graph with at most one loop per vertex? The theorem can easily be adapted to this formulation, because there does not exist a special order of b.
Proofs
The proof is composed of two parts: the necessity of the condition and its sufficiency. We outline the proof of both parts in the language of matrices. To see that the condition in the theorem is necessary, consider a the adjacency matrix of a bigraphic realization with row sums 
 
 
 
  and column sums 
 
 
 
 , and shift all ones in the matrix to the left. The row sums remain, while the column sums are now 
 
 
 
 . The operation of shifting all ones to the left increases a partition in majorization order, and so 
 
 
 
  majorizes 
 
 
 
 . The original proof of sufficiency of the condition was rather complicated.  gave a simple algorithmic proof. The idea is to start with the Ferrers diagram of 
 
 
 
  and shift ones to the right until the column sums are 
 
 
 
 . The algorithm runs in at most 
 
 
 
  steps, in each of which a single one entry is moved to the right.
Stronger version
Berger2 proved that it suffices to consider those 
 
 
 
 th inequalities such that 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and the inequality for 
 
 
 
 .
Generalization
A pair of finite sequences of nonnegative integers

 
  and 
 
 
 
  with nonincreasing 
 
 
 
  is bigraphic if and only if 
 
 
 
  and there exists a sequence 
 
 
 
  such that the pair 
 
 
 
  is bigraphic and 
 
 
 
  majorizes 
 
 
 
 .3
Characterizations for similar problems
Similar theorems describe the degree sequences of simple graphs and simple directed graphs. The first problem is characterized by the Erdős–Gallai theorem. The latter case is characterized by the Fulkerson–Chen–Anstee theorem.
Notes
References








.

.

"
Category:Theorems in graph theory










