


Discrete-stable distribution




Discrete-stable distribution

The discrete-stable distributions1 are a class of probability distribution and are the discrete analogue of the continuous-stable distributions.
The discrete-stable distributions have been used in numerous fields, in particular in scale-free networks such as the internet, social networks2 or even semantic networks3
Both classes of distribution have properties such as infinitely divisibility, power law tails and unimodality.
The most well-known discrete stable distribution is the Poisson distribution which is a special case as the only discrete-stable distribution for which the mean and all higher-order moments are finite.
The distribution
The discrete-stable distributions are defined4 through their moment-generating function:



In the above, 
 
 
 
  is a scale parameter and 
 
 
 
  describes the power-law behaviour such that when 
 
 
 
 
 ,



When 
 
 
 
  the distribution becomes the familiar Poisson distribution with mean 
 
 
 
 .
The original distribution is recovered through repeated differentiation of the generating function:



A closed-form expression using elementary functions for the probability distribution of the discrete-stable distributions is not known except for in the Poisson case, in which



Expressions do exist, however, using special functions for the case 
 
 
5 (in terms of Bessel functions) and 
 
 
6 (in terms of hypergeometric functions).
As compound probability distributions
The entire class of discrete-stable distributions can be formed as compound probability distributions where the mean, 
 
 
 
 , of a Poisson distribution is defined as a probability density function (PDF). When the PDF of the mean is a one-sided continuous-stable distribution with stability parameter 
 
 
 
  and scale parameter 
 
 
 
 
  the resultant distribution is7 discrete-stable with index 
 
 
 
  and scale parameter 
 
 
 
 .
Formally, this is written:



where 
 
 
 
  is the pdf of a one-sided continuous-stable distribution with symmetry parameter 
 
 
 
  and location parameter 
 
 
 
 .
A more general result8 states that forming a compound distribution from any discrete-stable distribution with index 
 
 
 
  with a one-sided continuous-stable distribution with index 
 
 
 
  results in a discrete-stable distribution with index 
 
 
 
 , reducing the power-law index of the original distribution by a factor of 
 
 
 
 .
In other words,



In the Poisson limit
In the limit 
 
 
 
 , the discrete-stable distributions behave9 like a Poisson distribution with mean 
 
 
 
  for small 
 
 
 
 , however for 
 
 
 
 , the power-law tail dominates.
The convergence of i.i.d. random variates with power-law tails 
 
 
 
  to a discrete-stable distribution is extraordinarily slow10 when 
 
 
 
  - the limit being the Poisson distribution when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Stable distribution
Poisson distribution

References
Further reading

Feller, W. (1971) An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Volume 2. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-25709-5




"
Category:Articles created via the Article Wizard Category:Probability distributions




Barabási, Albert-László (2003). Linked: how everything is connected to everything else and what it means for business, science, and everyday life. New York, NY: Plum.












