


Tilde




Tilde

The tilde (;1 ˜ or ~)2 is a grapheme with several uses. The name of the character came into English from Spanish, into which it came as an alteration of obsolete Catalan tilde, which in turn came from the Latin titulus, meaning "title" or "superscription".3
The reason for the name was that it was originally written over a letter as a scribal abbreviation, as a "mark of suspension", shown as a straight line when used with capitals. Thus the commonly used words Anno Domini were frequently abbreviated to Ao Dñi, an elevated terminal with a suspension mark placed above the "n". Such a mark could denote the omission of one letter or several letters. This saved on the expense of the scribe's labour and the cost of vellum and ink. Mediaeval European charters written in Latin are largely made up of such abbreviated words with suspension marks; only uncommon words were given in full. The tilde has since been applied to a number of other uses as a diacritic mark or a character in its own right. These are encoded in Unicode at  and , and there are additional similar characters for different roles. In lexicography, the latter kind of tilde and the swung dash () are used in dictionaries to indicate the omission of the entry word.4
Common use
This symbol (in English) informally5 means "approximately", such as: "~30 minutes before" meaning "approximately 30 minutes before".6 It can mean "similar to",7 including "of the same order of magnitude as",8 such as: "
 
 
 
 " meaning that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are of the same order of magnitude. Another approximation symbol is the double-tilde ≈, meaning "approximately equal to"91011 the critical difference being the subjective level of accuracy: ≈ indicates a value which can be considered functionally equivalent for a calculation within an acceptable degree of error, whereas ~ is usually used to indicate a larger, possibly significant, degree of error. The tilde is also used to indicate equal to, or approximately equal to by placing it over the "=" symbol, like this: ≅.
Use by medieval scribes
 The text of the Domesday Book of 1086, relating for example, to the manor of Molland in Devonshire (see image left), is highly abbreviated as indicated by numerous tildes. The text with abbreviations expanded is as follows:

"Mollande tempore regis Edwardi geldabat pro iiii hidis et uno ferling. Terra est xl carucis. In dominio sunt iii carucae et x servi et xxx villani et xx bordarii cum xvi carucis. Ibi xii acrae prati et xv acrae silvae. Pastura iii leugae in longitudine et latitudine. Libras ad pensam. Huic manerio est adjuncta Blachepole. Elwardus tenebat tempore regis Edwardi pro manerio et geldabat pro dimidia hida. Terra est ii carucis. Ibi sunt v villani cum i servo. Valet xx solidos ad pensam et arsuram. Eidem manerio est injuste adjuncta Nimete et valet xv solidos. Ipsi manerio pertinet tercius denarius de Hundredis Nortmoltone et Badentone et Brantone et tercium animal pasturae morarum"


Diacritical use
In some languages, the tilde is used as a diacritical mark ( ˜ ) placed over a letter to indicate a change in pronunciation, such as nasalization.
Pitch
It was first used in the polytonic orthography of Ancient Greek, as a variant of the circumflex, representing a rise in pitch followed by a return to standard pitch.
Abbreviation
 Later, it was used to make abbreviations in medieval Latin documents. When an  or  followed a vowel, it was often omitted, and a tilde (i.e., a small ) was placed over the preceding vowel to indicate the missing letter; this is the origin of the use of tilde to indicate nasalization (compare the development of the umlaut as an abbreviation of .) The practice of using the tilde over a vowel to indicate omission of an  or  continued in printed books in French as a means of reducing text length until the 17th century. It was also used in Portuguese, Catalan and Spanish.
The tilde was also used occasionally to make other abbreviations, such as over the letter  ("q̃") to signify the word que ("that").
Nasalization
It is also as a small  that the tilde originated when written above other letters, marking a Latin  which had been elided in old Galician-Portuguese. In modern Portuguese it indicates nasalization of the base vowel: mão "hand", from Lat. manu-; razões "reasons", from Lat. rationes. This usage has been adopted in the orthographies of several native languages of South America, such as Guarani and Nheengatu, as well as in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) and many other phonetic alphabets. For example,  is the IPA transcription of the pronunciation of the French place-name Lyon.
In Breton, the symbol  after a vowel means that the letter  serves only to give the vowel a nasalised pronunciation, without being itself pronounced, as it normally is. For example  gives the pronunciation  whereas  gives .
Palatal n
The tilded  (, ) developed from the digraph  in Spanish. In this language,  is considered a separate letter called eñe (), rather than a letter-diacritic combination; it is placed in Spanish dictionaries between the letters  and . In addition, the word tilde can refer to any diacritic in this language; for example, the acute accent in José is also called a tilde in Spanish.12 Current languages in which the tilded  () is used for the palatal nasal consonant  include:

Asturian
Basque
Chamorro language
Filipino
Galician
Guaraní
Mapudungun
Papiamento
Quechua
Spanish
Tetum

Tone
In Vietnamese, a tilde over a vowel represents a creaky rising tone (ngã).
International Phonetic Alphabet
In phonetics, a tilde is used as a diacritic either placed above a letter, below it or superimposed onto the middle of it (see International Phonetic Alphabet → Diacritics):

A tilde above a letter indicates nasalization, e.g. .
A tilde superimposed onto the middle of a letter indicates velarization or pharyngealization, e.g. . If no precomposed unicode character exists, the unicode character  can be used to generate one.
A tilde below a letter indicates laryngealisation, e.g. . If no precomposed unicode character exists, the unicode character  can be used to generate one.

Letter extension
In Estonian, the symbol  stands for the close-mid back unrounded vowel, and it is considered an independent letter.
Other uses
Some languages and alphabets use the tilde for other purposes:

Arabic script: A symbol resembling the tilde (maddah ) is used over the letter  () to become , denoting a long  sound ().
Guaraní: The tilded  (note that  with tilde is not available as a precomposed glyph in Unicode) stands for the velar nasal consonant. Also, the tilded  () stands for the nasalized upper central rounded vowel . A small number of other alphabets also use .
Unicode has a combining vertical tilde character,  (U+033E). It is used to indicate middle tone in linguistic transcription of certain dialects of the Lithuanian language13 and for transliteration of the Cyrillic palatalization sign,  (U+0484).

Precomposed Unicode characters
The following characters using the tilde as a diacritic exist as precomposed Unicode characters:




Character

Code point

Name





U+00C3

Ã

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A WITH TILDE



U+00D1

Ñ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER N WITH TILDE



U+00D5

Õ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH TILDE



U+00E3

ã

LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH TILDE



U+00F1

ñ

LATIN SMALL LETTER N WITH TILDE



U+00F5

õ

LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH TILDE



U+0128

Ĩ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER I WITH TILDE



U+0129

ĩ

LATIN SMALL LETTER I WITH TILDE



U+0168

Ũ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER U WITH TILDE



U+0169

ũ

LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH TILDE



U+019F

Ɵ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+022C

Ȭ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH TILDE AND MACRON



U+022D

ȭ

LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH TILDE AND MACRON



U+026B

ɫ

LATIN SMALL LETTER L WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D6C

ᵬ

LATIN SMALL LETTER B WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D6D

ᵭ

LATIN SMALL LETTER D WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D6E

ᵮ

LATIN SMALL LETTER F WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D6F

ᵯ

LATIN SMALL LETTER M WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D70

ᵰ

LATIN SMALL LETTER N WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D71

ᵱ

LATIN SMALL LETTER P WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D72

ᵲ

LATIN SMALL LETTER R WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D73

ᵳ

LATIN SMALL LETTER R WITH FISHHOOK AND MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D74

ᵴ

LATIN SMALL LETTER S WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D75

ᵵ

LATIN SMALL LETTER T WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1D76

ᵶ

LATIN SMALL LETTER Z WITH MIDDLE TILDE



U+1E1A

Ḛ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER E WITH TILDE BELOW



U+1E1B

ḛ

LATIN SMALL LETTER E WITH TILDE BELOW



U+1E2C

Ḭ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER I WITH TILDE BELOW



U+1E2D

ḭ

LATIN SMALL LETTER I WITH TILDE BELOW



U+1E4C

Ṍ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH TILDE AND ACUTE



U+1E4D

ṍ

LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH TILDE AND ACUTE



U+1E4E

Ṏ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH TILDE AND DIAERESIS



U+1E4F

ṏ

LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH TILDE AND DIAERESIS



U+1E74

Ṵ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER U WITH TILDE BELOW



U+1E75

ṵ

LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH TILDE BELOW



U+1E78

Ṹ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER U WITH TILDE AND ACUTE



U+1E79

ṹ

LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH TILDE AND ACUTE



U+1E7C

Ṽ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER V WITH TILDE



U+1E7D

ṽ

LATIN SMALL LETTER V WITH TILDE



U+1EAA

Ẫ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A WITH CIRCUMFLEX AND TILDE



U+1EAB

ẫ

LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH CIRCUMFLEX AND TILDE



U+1EB4

Ẵ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A WITH BREVE AND TILDE



U+1EB5

ẵ

LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH BREVE AND TILDE



U+1EBC

Ẽ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER E WITH TILDE



U+1EBD

ẽ

LATIN SMALL LETTER E WITH TILDE



U+1EC4

Ễ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER E WITH CIRCUMFLEX AND TILDE



U+1EC5

ễ

LATIN SMALL LETTER E WITH CIRCUMFLEX AND TILDE



U+1ED6

Ỗ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH CIRCUMFLEX AND TILDE



U+1ED7

ỗ

LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH CIRCUMFLEX AND TILDE



U+1EE0

Ỡ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH HORN AND TILDE



U+1EE1

ỡ

LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH HORN AND TILDE



U+1EEE

Ữ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER U WITH HORN AND TILDE



U+1EEF

ữ

LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH HORN AND TILDE



U+1EF8

Ỹ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER Y WITH TILDE



U+1EF9

ỹ

LATIN SMALL LETTER Y WITH TILDE



U+2C62

Ɫ

LATIN CAPITAL LETTER L WITH MIDDLE TILDE



Similar characters
There are a number of Unicode characters similar to the tilde.




Character

Code point

Name

Comments





~

U+007E

TILDE

Same as keyboard tilde. In-line.



˜

U+02DC

SMALL TILDE

Raised but quite small.



◌̃

U+0303

COMBINING TILDE




͊

U+034A

COMBINING NOT TILDE ABOVE

Raised, small, with slash through.



῀

U+0342

COMBINING GREEK PERISPOMENI

Used as an Ancient Greek accent under the name "circumflex"; it can also be written as an inverted breve.



◌̰

U+0330

COMBINING TILDE BELOW

Used in IPA to indicate creaky voice



◌̴

U+0334

COMBINING TILDE OVERLAY

Used in IPA to indicate velarization or pharyngealization



ס֘

U+0598

HEBREW ACCENT ZARQA

Hebrew cantillation mark



ס֮

U+05AE

HEBREW ACCENT ZINOR

Hebrew cantillation mark



◌᷉

U+1DC9

COMBINING ACUTE-GRAVE-ACUTE

Used in IPA as a tone mark



⁓

U+2053

SWUNG DASH




∼

U+223C

TILDE OPERATOR

Used in mathematics. In-line. Ends not curved as much.



∽

U+223D

REVERSED TILDE

In some fonts it is the tilde's simple mirror image; others extend the tips to resemble a ∞



∿

U+223F

SINE WAVE




≈

U+2248

ALMOST EQUAL TO




〜

U+301C

WAVE DASH

Used in Japanese punctuation



〰

U+3030

WAVY DASH




﹋

U+FE4B

WAVY OVERLINE




﹏

U+FE4F

WAVY LOW LINE




～

U+FF5E

FULLWIDTH TILDE

50% wider. In-line. Ends not curved much.



ASCII tilde (U+007E)




Serif:

—~—



Sans-serif:

—~—



Monospace:

—~—



A tilde between two em dashes
 in three font families



 Most modern proportional fonts align plain spacing tilde at the same level as dashes, or only slightly upper. This distinguish it from small tilde ˜, which is always raised. But in some monospace fonts, especially used in text user interfaces, ASCII tilde character is raised too. This apparently is a legacy of typewriters, where pairs of similar spacing and combining characters relied on one glyph. Even in line printers' age character repertoires were often not large enough to distinguish between plain tilde, small tilde and combining tilde. Overprinting of a letter by the tilde was a working method of combining a letter.
Punctuation
The swung dash (~) is used in various ways in punctuation:
Range
In some languages (though not English), a tilde-like wavy dash may be used as punctuation (instead of an unspaced hyphen or en-dash) between two numbers, to indicate a range rather than subtraction or a hyphenated number (such as a part number or model number).
Before a number the tilde is used to mean "approximately"; "~42" means "approximately 42".14 Japanese and other East Asian languages almost always use this convention, but it is often done for clarity in some other languages as well.
Chinese uses the wavy dash and full-width em dash interchangeably for this purpose. In English, the tilde is often used to express ranges and model numbers in electronics but rarely in formal grammar or type-set documents, as a wavy dash preceding a number sometimes represents an approximation (see the Mathematics section, below).
Japanese
The  is used for various purposes in Japanese, including to denote ranges of numbers, in place of dashes or brackets, and to indicate origin. The wave dash is also used to separate a title and a subtitle in the same line, as a colon is used in English.
When used in conversations via email or instant messenger it may be used as a sarcasm mark.
The sign is used as a replacement for the chouon, katakana character, in Japanese, extending the final syllable.
Unicode and Shift JIS encoding of wave dash
In practice the , Unicode U+FF5E, is often used instead of the , Unicode U+301C, because the Shift JIS code for the wave dash, 0x8160, which is supposed to be mapped to U+301C,1516 is not mapped to U+301C but mapped to U+FF5E17 in code page 932 (Microsoft's code page for Japanese), a widely used extension of Shift JIS, in order to avoid the shape definition error in Unicode: the wave dash glyph in JIS/Shift JIS18 is identical to the Unicode reference glyph for U+FF5E,19 while the reference glyph for U+301C20 was incorrectly turned upside down when Unicode imported the JIS wave dash. In other platforms such as Mac OS and Mac OS X, 0x8160 is correctly mapped to U+301C. It is generally difficult, if not impossible, for users of Japanese Windows to type U+301C, especially in legacy, non-Unicode applications.
Nevertheless, the Japanese wave dash is still formally mapped to U+301C as of JIS X 0213. Those two code points have the identical or very similar glyph in several fonts, reducing the confusion and incompatibility.
Mathematics
As a unary operator
A tilde in front of a single quantity can mean "approximately", "about" or "of the same order of magnitude as."
In written mathematical logic, the tilde represents negation: "~p" means "not p", where "p" is a proposition. Modern use has been replacing the tilde with the negation symbol (¬) for this purpose, to avoid confusion with equivalence relations.
As a binary operator
In the 1800s 
 
 
 
  was the 'difference' operator, and thus meant 
 
 
 
 , (the absolute value of 
 
 
 
 ).
As an equivalence operator
In mathematics, the tilde operator (Unicode U+223C), sometimes called "twiddle", is often used to denote an equivalence relation between two objects. Thus "
 
 
 
 " means "
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 ". It is a weaker statement than stating that 
 
 
equals

 
 . The expression "
 
 
 
 " is sometimes read aloud as "
 
 
 
  twiddles 
 
 
 
 ", perhaps as an analogue to the verbal expression of "
 
 
 
 ".21
The tilde can indicate approximate equality in a variety of ways. It can be used to denote the asymptotic equality of two functions. For example, 
 
 
 
  means that .22
A tilde is also used to indicate "approximately equal to" (e.g. 1.902 ~= 2). This usage probably developed as a typed alternative to the libra symbol used for the same purpose in written mathematics, which is an equal sign with the upper bar replaced by a bar with an upward hump, bump, ︎or loop in the middle (︍︍♎︎) or, sometimes, a tilde (≃). The symbol "≈" is also used for this purpose.︎
In physics and astronomy, a tilde can be used between two expressions (e.g. ) to state that the two are of the same order of magnitude.23
In statistics and probability theory, the tilde means "is distributed as";24 see random variable.
A tilde can also be used to represent geometric similarity (e.g. 
 
 
 
 , meaning triangle

 
  is similar to 
 
 
 
 ). A triple tilde () is often used to show congruence, an equivalence relation in geometry.
As an accent
The symbol "
 
 
 
 " is often pronounced "eff twiddle" or, particularly in American English, "eff wiggle".25 This can be used to denote the Fourier transform of f, or a lift of f, and can have a variety of other meanings depending on the context.
A tilde placed below a letter in mathematics can represent a vector quantity (e.g. 
 
 
 
 ).
In statistics and probability theory, a tilde placed on top of a variable is sometimes used to represent the median of that variable; thus 
 
 
 
  would indicate the median of the variable 
 
 
 
 . A tilde over the letter n (
 
 
 
 ) is sometimes used to indicate the harmonic mean.
Physics
Often in physics, one can consider an equilibrium solution to an equation, and then a perturbation to that equilibrium. For the variables in the original equation (for instance 
 
 
 
 ) a substitution 
 
 
 
  can be made, where 
 
 
 
  is the equilibrium part and 
 
 
 
  is the perturbed part.
Economics
For relations involving preference, economists sometimes use the tilde to represent indifference between two or more bundles of goods. For example, to say that a consumer is indifferent between bundles x and y, an economist would write x ~ y.
Electronics
It can approximate the sine wave symbol (, U+223F), which is used in electronics to indicate alternating current, in place of +, −, or  for direct current.
Computing
Directories and URLs
On Unix-like operating systems (including AIX, BSD, GNU/Linux and Mac OS X), tilde normally indicates the current user's home directory: for example, if the current user's home directory is /home/bloggsj, then cd, cd ~, cd /home/bloggsj or cd $HOME are equivalent. This convention derives from the Lear-Siegler ADM-3A terminal in common use during the 1970s, which happened to have the tilde symbol and the word "Home" (for moving the cursor to the upper left) on the same key. When prepended to a particular username, the tilde indicates that user's home directory (e.g., ~janedoe for the home directory of user janedoe, such as /home/janedoe).26
Used in URLs on the World Wide Web, it often denotes a personal website on a Unix-based server. For example, http://www.example.com/~johndoe/ might be the personal web site of John Doe. This mimics the Unix shell usage of the tilde. However, when accessed from the web, file access is usually directed to a subdirectory in the user's home directory, such as /home/''username''/public_html or /home/''username''/www.27
In URLs, the characters [[Percent-encoding|%7E]] (or %7e) may substitute for tilde if an input device lacks a tilde key.28 Thus, http://www.example.com/~johndoe/ and http://www.example.com/%7Ejohndoe/ will behave in the same manner.
Computer languages
The tilde is used in the AWK programming language as part of the pattern match operators for regular expressions:

''variable'' ~ /''regex''/ returns true if the variable is matched.
''variable'' !~ /''regex''/ returns false if the variable is matched.

A variant of this, with the plain tilde replaced with =~, was adopted in Perl, and this semi-standardization has led to the use of these operators in other programming languages, such as Ruby or the SQL variant of the database PostgreSQL.
In APL and MATLAB, tilde represents the monadic logical function NOT.
In the C, C++ and C# programming languages, the tilde character is used as bitwise NOT operator, following the notation in logic (an ! causes a logical NOT, instead). In C++ and C#, the tilde is also used as the first character in a class's method name (where the rest of the name must be the same name as the class) to indicate a destructor – a special method which is called at the end of the object's life.
In the CSS stylesheet language, the tilde is used for the indirect adjacent combinator as part of a selector.
In the D programming language, the tilde is used as an array concatenation operator, as well as to indicate an object destructor and bitwise not operator. Tilde operator can be overloaded for user types, and binary tilde operator is mostly used to merging two objects, or adding some objects to set of objects. It was introduced because plus operator can have different meaning in many situations. For example what to do with "120" + "14" ? Is this a string "134" (addition of two numbers), or "12014" (concatenation of strings) or something else? D disallows + operator for arrays (and strings), and provides separate operator for concatenation (similarly PHP programming language solved this problem by using dot operator for concatenation, and + for number addition, which will also work on strings containing numbers).
In Eiffel, the tilde is used for object comparison. If a and b denote objects, the boolean expression a ~ b has value true if and only if these objects are equal, as defined by the applicable version of the library routine is_equal, which by default denotes field-by-field object equality but can be redefined in any class to support a specific notion of equality. If a and b are references, the object equality expression a ~ b is to be contrasted with a = b which denotes reference equality. Unlike the call a.is_equal (b), the expression a ~ b is type-safe even in the presence of covariance.
In the Groovy programming language the tilde character is used as an operator mapped to the bitwiseNegate() method.29 Given a String the method will produce a java.util.regex.Pattern. Given an integer it will negate the integer bitwise like in different C variants. =~ and ==~ can in Groovy be used to match a regular expression.3031
In Haskell, the tilde is used in type constraints to indicate type equality.32 Also, in pattern-matching, the tilde is used to indicate a lazy pattern match.33
In the Inform programming language, the tilde is used to indicate a quotation mark inside a quoted string.
In "text mode" of the LaTeX typesetting language a tilde diacritic can be obtained using, e.g., \~{n}, yielding "ñ". A stand-alone tilde can be obtained by using \textasciitilde or \string~. In "math mode" a tilde diacritic can be written as, e.g., \tilde{x}. For a wider tilde \widetilde can be used. The \sim command produce a tilde-like binary relation symbol that is often used in mathematical expressions, and the double-tilde ≈ is obtained with \approx. The url package also supports entering tildes directly, e.g., \url{http://server/~name}. In both text and math mode, a tilde on its own (~) renders a white space with no line breaking.
In MediaWiki syntax, four tildes are used as a shortcut for a user's signature.
In Common Lisp, the tilde is used as the prefix for format specifiers in format strings.34 In Max/MSP, a tilde is used to denote objects that process at the computer's sampling rate, i.e. mainly those that deal with sound.
In Standard ML, the tilde is used as the prefix for negative numbers and as the unary negation operator.
In OCaml, the tilde is used to specify the label for a labeled parameter.
In Microsoft's SQL Server Transact-SQL (T-SQL) language, the tilde is a unary Bitwise NOT operator.
In JavaScript, the tilde is used as a unary bitwise complement (or bitwise negation) operation (~number). Because JavaScript internally uses floats and the bitwise complement only works on integers, numbers are stripped of their decimal part before applying the operation. This has also given rise to using two tildes ~~number as a shorthand for the mathematical floor function (numbers are stripped of their decimal part and changed into their complement, and then back. The net result is thus only the removal of the decimal part).
Backup filenames
The dominant Unix convention for naming backup copies of files is appending a tilde to the original file name. It originated with the Emacs text editor and was adopted by many other editors and some command-line tools.
Emacs also introduced an elaborate numbered backup scheme, with files named filename.~1~, filename.~2~ and so on. It didn't catch on, probably because version control software does this better.
Microsoft filenames
The tilde was part of Microsoft's filename mangling scheme when it extended the FAT file system standard to support long filenames for Microsoft Windows. Programs written prior to this development could only access filenames in the so-called 8.3 format—the filenames consisted of a maximum of eight characters from a restricted character set (e.g. no spaces), followed by a period, followed by three more characters. In order to permit these legacy programs to access files in the FAT file system, each file had to be given two names—one long, more descriptive one, and one that conformed to the 8.3 format. This was accomplished with a name-mangling scheme in which the first six characters of the filename are followed by a tilde and a digit. For example, "Program Files" might become "PROGRA~1".
The tilde symbol is also often used to prefix hidden temporary files that are created when a document is opened in Windows. For example, when a document "Document1.doc" is opened in Word, a file called "~$cument1.doc" is created in the same directory. This file contains information about which user has the file open, to prevent multiple users from attempting to change a document at the same time.
Games
In many games, the tilde key (on U.S. English keyboards) is used to open the console. This is true for games such as Battlefield 3, Half-Life, Halo CE, Quake, Half-Life 2, Soldier of Fortune II: Double Helix, Unreal, Counter-Strike, Crysis, Morrowind, Oblivion, Skyrim, Fallout: New Vegas, Fallout 3, RuneScape, and others based on the Quake engine or Source engine.
It is sometimes used in Rogue-like games to represent water or snakes.
Other uses
Computer programmers use the tilde in various ways and sometimes call the symbol (as opposed to the diacritic) a squiggle, squiggly, or twiddle. According to the Jargon File, other synonyms sometimes used in programming include not, approx, wiggle, enyay (after eñe) and (humorously) sqiggle . It is used in many languages as a binary inversion operator, swapping a number's binary 1's and 0's for example ~18 (binary ~1010) is equal to 9 (binary 0101).
In Perl 6, "~~" is used instead of "=~".
Juggling notation
In the juggling notation system Beatmap, tilde can be added to either "hand" in a pair of fields to say "cross the arms with this hand on top". Mills Mess is thus represented as (~2x,1)(1,2x)(2x,~1)*.35
Keyboards
Where a tilde is on the keyboard depends on the computer's language settings according to the following chart. On many keyboards it is primarily available through a dead key that makes it possible to produce a variety of precomposed characters with the diacritic. In that case, a single tilde can typically be inserted with the dead key followed by the space bar, or alternatively by striking the dead key twice in a row.
To insert a tilde with the dead key, it is often necessary to simultaneously hold down the Alt Gr key. On the keyboard layouts that include an Alt Gr key, it typically takes the place of the right-hand Alt key. With a Macintosh either of the Alt/Option keys function similarly.
In the US and European Windows systems, the Alt code for a single tilde is 126.
For Mac use option+'n' key




Keyboard

Insert a single tilde (~)

Insert a precomposed character with tilde (e.g. ã)





Arabic (Saudi)




Croatian

+



Danish

followed by 

followed by the relevant letter



Dvorak

 followed by , or  followed by 

 followed by the relevant letter, or  followed by the relevant letter



English (Australia)




English (Canada)




English (UK)





English (US)


followed by the relevant letter



Faroese

followed by 

followed by the relevant letter



Finnish

followed by , or 

followed by the relevant letter



French (Canada)

followed by , or 

followed by the relevant letter



French (France)

followed by , or 
  (on Mac OS X)

followed by the relevant letter



French (Switzerland)

followed by , or 

followed by the relevant letter



German (Germany)




German (Switzerland)

followed by , or 

followed by the relevant letter



Hebrew (Israel)


followed by the relevant letter



Hindi (India)

+ the key to the left of 



Hungarian

+



Icelandic

(the same key as )



Italian

(on Mac OS X)  (on Linux)



Norwegian

followed by , or . On Mac: , or  followed by .

followed by the relevant letter. On Mac:  followed by the relevant letter.



Polish

followed by , or 

The dead key is not generally used for inserting characters with tilde; when followed by {a|c|e|l|n|o|s|x|z}, it results in {ą|ć|ę|ł|ń|ó|ś|ź|ż} instead.



Portuguese

followed by 

followed by the relevant letter



Slovak

+



Spanish (Spain)

followed by , or 

followed by the relevant letter



Spanish (Latin America)




Swedish

followed by , or 

followed by the relevant letter



Turkish

followed by , or 

followed by the relevant letter



See also

Circumflex
Tittle

References
External links


.

.

"
Category:Alphabetic diacritics Category:Punctuation Category:Typographical symbols Category:Greek alphabet Category:Logic symbols Category:Mathematical symbols



tilde in the American Heritage dictionary
Several more or less common informal names are used for the tilde that usually describe the shape, including squiggly, squiggle(s), and flourish.










Lithuanian Standards Board (LST), proposal for a zigazag diacritic.
.
.
.


.
.
.




.
.
.
"Groovy operator overloading overview"
.
.
.
"Haskell Wiki: Lazy Pattern Match"






