


Direct limit




Direct limit

In mathematics, a direct limit (also called inductive limit) is a colimit of a "directed family of objects". We will first give the definition for algebraic structures like groups and modules, and then the general definition, which can be used in any category.
Formal definition
Algebraic objects
In this section objects are understood to be sets with a given algebraic structure such as groups, rings, modules (over a fixed ring), algebras (over a fixed field), etc. With this in mind, homomorphisms are understood in the corresponding setting (group homomorphisms, etc.).
Start with the definition of a direct system of objects and homomorphisms. Let 
 
 
 
  be a directed set. Let 
 
 
 
  be a family of objects indexed by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be a homomorphism for all 
 
 
 
  with the following properties:



 
  is the identity of 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .

Then the pair 
 
 
 
  is called a direct system over 
 
 
 
 .
The underlying set of the direct limit, 
 
 
 
 , of the direct system 
 
 
 
  is defined as the disjoint union of the 
 
 
 
 's modulo a certain equivalence relation

 
 :


 
  Here, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  if there is some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Heuristically, two elements in the disjoint union are equivalent if and only if they "eventually become equal" in the direct system. An equivalent formulation that highlights the duality to the inverse limit is that an element is equivalent to all its images under the maps of the directed system, i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
One naturally obtains from this definition canonical morphisms

 
  sending each element to its equivalence class. The algebraic operations on 
 
 
 
  are defined via these maps in the obvious manner.
An important property is that taking direct limits in the category of modules is an exact functor.
Direct limit over a direct system in a category
The direct limit can be defined in an arbitrary category

 
  by means of a universal property. Let 
 
 
 
  be a direct system of objects and morphisms in 
 
 
 
  (same definition as above). The direct limit of this system is an object 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  together with morphisms 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . The pair 
 
 
 
  must be universal in the sense that for any other such pair 
 
 
 
  there exists a unique morphism 
 
 
 
  making the diagram

(Figure)
Direct limit category.svg


commute for all i, j. The direct limit is often denoted


 
  with the direct system 
 
 
 
  being understood.
Unlike for algebraic objects, the direct limit may not exist in an arbitrary category. If it does, however, it is unique in a strong sense: given another direct limit X′ there exists a unique isomorphism X′ → X commuting with the canonical morphisms.
We note that a direct system in a category 
 
 
 
  admits an alternative description in terms of functors. Any directed poset 
 
 
 
  can be considered as a small category

 
  where the morphisms consist of arrows 
 
 
if and only if

 
 . A direct system is then just a covariant functor

 
 . In this case a direct limit is a colimit.
Examples

A collection of subsets 
 
 
 
  of a set M can be partially ordered by inclusion. If the collection is directed, its direct limit is the union 
 
 
 
 .
Let I be any directed set with a greatest element m. The direct limit of any corresponding direct system is isomorphic to Xm and the canonical morphism φm: Xm → X is an isomorphism.
Let p be a prime number. Consider the direct system composed of the groups Z/pnZ and the homomorphisms Z/pnZ → Z/pn+1Z induced by multiplication by p. The direct limit of this system consists of all the roots of unity of order some power of p, and is called the Prüfer group Z(p∞).
Let F be a C-valued sheaf on a topological space X. Fix a point x in X. The open neighborhoods of x form a directed poset ordered by inclusion (U ≤ V if and only if U contains V). The corresponding direct system is (F(U), rU,V) where r is the restriction map. The direct limit of this system is called the stalk of F at x, denoted Fx. For each neighborhood U of x, the canonical morphism F(U) → Fx associates to a section s of F over U an element sx of the stalk Fx called the germ of s at x.
Direct limits in the category of topological spaces are given by placing the final topology on the underlying set-theoretic direct limit.
Direct limits are linked to inverse limits via





Consider a sequence {An, φn} where An is a C*-algebra and φn : An → An + 1 is a *-homomorphism. The C*-analog of the direct limit construction gives a C*-algebra satisfying the universal property above.

Related constructions and generalizations
The categorical dual of the direct limit is called the inverse limit (or projective limit). More general concepts are the limits and colimits of category theory. The terminology is somewhat confusing: direct limits are colimits while inverse limits are limits.
See also

Inverse, or projective limit

References


.

.

"
Category:Limits (category theory) Category:Abstract algebra


