


Multilinear map




Multilinear map

In linear algebra, a multilinear map is a function of several variables that is linear separately in each variable. More precisely, a multilinear map is a function


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are vector spaces (or modules over a commutative ring), with the following property: for each 
 
 
 
 
 , if all of the variables but 
 
 
 
  are held constant, then 
 
 
 
  is a linear function of 
 
 
 
 .1
A multilinear map of one variable is a linear map, and of two variables is a bilinear map. More generally, a multilinear map of k variables is called a k-linear map. If the codomain of a multilinear map is the field of scalars, it is called a multilinear form. Multilinear maps and multilinear forms are fundamental objects of study in multilinear algebra.
If all variables belong to the same space, one can consider symmetric, antisymmetric and alternating k-linear maps. The latter coincide if the underlying ring (or field) has a characteristic different from two, else the former two coincide.
Examples

Any bilinear map is a multilinear map. For example, any inner product on a vector space is a multilinear map, as is the cross product of vectors in 
 
 
 
 .
The determinant of a matrix is an antisymmetric multilinear function of the columns (or rows) of a square matrix.
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a Ck function, then the 
 
 
 
 th derivative of 
 
 
 
  at each point 
 
 
 
  in its domain can be viewed as a symmetric

 
 -linear function 
 
 
 
 
 .
The tensor-to-vector projection in multilinear subspace learning is a multilinear map as well.

Coordinate representation
Let


 
  be a multilinear map between finite-dimensional vector spaces, where 
 
 
 
  has dimension 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  has dimension 
 
 
 
 
 . If we choose a basis

 
  for each 
 
 
 
  and a basis 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  (using bold for vectors), then we can define a collection of scalars 
 
 
 
 
  by


 
  Then the scalars 
 
 
 
  completely determine the multilinear function 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if


 
  for 
 
 
 
 
 , then



Example
Let's take a trilinear function:



 
 , i = 1,2,3, and 
 
 
 
 . Basis of all 
 
 
 
 
  is equal
 
 
 
 . Then denote:


 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . In other words, the constant 
 
 
 
  means a function value at one of 8 possible combinations of basis vectors, one per each 
 
 
 
 
 : 
 
 
 
 .
Each vector 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as a linear combination of the basis vectors:



The function value at an arbitrary collection of 3 vectors 
 
 
 
  can be expressed:


 
 .


 
 .
Relation to tensor products
There is a natural one-to-one correspondence between multilinear maps


 
  and linear maps


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the tensor product of 
 
 
 
 . The relation between the functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  is given by the formula



Multilinear functions on n×n matrices
One can consider multilinear functions, on an n×n matrix over a commutative ring K with identity, as a function of the rows (or equivalently the columns) of the matrix. Let A be such a matrix and 
 
 
 
 , 1 ≤ i ≤ n be the rows of A. Then the multilinear function D can be written as



satisfying



If we let 
 
 
 
 
  represent the jth row of the identity matrix we can express each row 
 
 
 
  as the sum



Using the multilinearity of D we rewrite D(A) as



Continuing this substitution for each 
 
 
 
  we get, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n




where, since in our case 
 
 
:


\sum_{1\le k_i \le n} = \sum_{1\le k_1 \le n} \ldots \sum_{1\le k_i \le n} \ldots \sum_{1\le k_n \le n} \, 


as a series of nested summations.
 

Therefore, D(A) is uniquely determined by how 
 
 
 
  operates on 
 
 
 
 .
Example
In the case of 2×2 matrices we get



Where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . If we restrict D to be an alternating function then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Letting 
 
 
 
  we get the determinant function on 2×2 matrices:



Properties

A multilinear map has a value of zero whenever one of its arguments is zero.

See also

Algebraic form
Multilinear form
Homogeneous polynomial
Homogeneous function
Tensors
Multilinear projection
Multilinear subspace learning

References


"
Category:Multilinear algebra



Lang. Algebra. Springer; 3rd edition (January 8, 2002)




