


Stream function




Stream function

 The stream function is defined for incompressible (divergence-free) flows in two dimensions – as well as in three dimensions with axisymmetry. The flow velocity components can then be expressed as the derivatives of the scalar stream function. The stream function can be used to plot streamlines, which represent the trajectories of particles in a steady flow. The two-dimensional Lagrange stream function was introduced by Joseph Louis Lagrange in 1781.1 The Stokes stream function is for axisymmetrical three-dimensional flow, and is named after George Gabriel Stokes.2
Considering the particular case of fluid dynamics, the difference between the stream function values at any two points gives the volumetric flow rate (or volumetric flux) through a line connecting the two points.
Since streamlines are tangent to the flow velocity vector of the flow, the value of the stream function must be constant along a streamline. The usefulness of the stream function lies in the fact that the flow velocity components in the x- and y- directions at a given point are given by the partial derivatives of the stream function at that point. A stream function may be defined for any flow of dimensions greater than or equal to two, however the two-dimensional case is generally the easiest to visualize and derive.
For two-dimensional potential flow, streamlines are perpendicular to equipotential lines. Taken together with the velocity potential, the stream function may be used to derive a complex potential. In other words, the stream function accounts for the solenoidal part of a two-dimensional Helmholtz decomposition, while the velocity potential accounts for the irrotational part.
Two-dimensional stream function
Definitions
 Lamb and Batchelor define the stream function 
 
 
 
  – in the point 
 
 
 
  with two-dimensional coordinates 
 
 
 
  and as a function of time 
 
 
 
 
  – for an incompressible flow by:3



So the stream function 
 
 
 
  is the volume flux through the curve 
 
 
 
 , that is: the integral of the dot product of the flow velocity vector 
 
 
 
  and the normal

 
 
  to the curve element 
 
 
 
  The point 
 
 
 
  is a reference point defining where the stream function is zero: a shift of 
 
 
 
  results in adding a constant to the stream function 
 
 

An infinitesimal shift 
 
 
 
 
  of the position 
 
 
 
  results in a stream function shift:



which is an exact differential provided



This is the condition of zero divergence resulting from flow incompressibility. Since



the flow velocity components have to be


 
   and  
 
 

in relation to the stream function 
 
 

Definition by use of a vector potential
The sign of the stream function depends on the definition used.
One way is to define the stream function 
 
 
 
  for a two-dimensional flow such that the flow velocity can be expressed through the vector potential





Where 
 
 
 
  if the flow velocity vector 
 
 
 
 .
In Cartesian coordinate system this is equivalent to


 
  Where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the flow velocity components in the cartesian 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  coordinate directions, respectively.
Alternative definition (opposite sign)
Another definition (used more widely in meteorology and oceanography than the above) is


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is a unit vector in the 
 
 
 
  direction and the subscripts indicate partial derivatives.
Note that this definition has the opposite sign to that given above (
 
 
 
 ), so we have


 
  in Cartesian coordinates.
All formulations of the stream function constrain the velocity to satisfy the two-dimensional continuity equation exactly:



The last two definitions of stream function are related through the vector calculus identity



Note that 
 
 
 
  in this two-dimensional flow.
Derivation of the two-dimensional stream function
Consider two points A and B in two-dimensional plane flow. If the distance between these two points is very small: δn, and a stream of flow passes between these points with an average velocity, q perpendicular to the line AB, the volume flow rate per unit thickness, δΨ is given by:



As δn → 0, rearranging this expression, we get:



Now consider two-dimensional plane flow with reference to a coordinate system. Suppose an observer looks along an arbitrary axis in the direction of increase and sees flow crossing the axis from left to right. A sign convention is adopted such that the flow velocity is positive.
Flow in Cartesian coordinates
By observing the flow into an elemental square in an x-y Cartesian coordinate system, we have:






where u is the flow velocity parallel to and in the direction of the x-axis, and v is the flow velocity parallel to and in the direction of the y-axis. Thus, as δn → 0 and by rearranging, we have:






Flow in polar coordinates
By observing the flow into an elemental square in an r–θ polar coordinate system, we have:






where vr is the radial flow velocity component (parallel to the r-axis), and vθ is the tangential flow velocity component (parallel to the θ-axis). Thus, as  and , by rearranging we have:






Continuity: the derivation
Consider two-dimensional plane flow within a Cartesian coordinate system. Continuity states that if we consider incompressible flow into an elemental square, the flow into that small element must equal the flow out of that element.
The total flow into the element is given by:



The total flow out of the element is given by:



Thus we have:






and simplifying to:



Substituting the expressions of the stream function into this equation, we have:



Vorticity
The stream function can be found from vorticity using the following Poisson's equation:


 
  or



where the vorticity vector 
 
 
 
  – defined as the curl of the flow velocity vector 
 
 
 
  – for this two-dimensional flow has 
 
 
 
  i.e. only the 
 
 
 
 -component 
 
 
 
  can be non-zero.
Proof that a constant value for the stream function corresponds to a streamline
Consider two-dimensional plane flow within a Cartesian coordinate system. Consider two infinitesimally close points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . From calculus we have that






Say 
 
 
 
  takes the same value, say 
 
 
 
 , at the two points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is tangent to the curve 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  and



implying that the vector 
 
 
 
  is normal to the curve 
 
 
 
 . If we can show that everywhere 
 
 
 
 , using the formula for 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 , then we will have proved the result. This easily follows,



References
Inline
Other








"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Fluid dynamics





 Reprinted in: 
 and 




