


Bowen ratio




Bowen ratio

In meteorology and hydrology, the Bowen ratio is used to describe the type of heat transfer in a water body. Heat transfer can either occur as sensible heat (differences in temperature without evapotranspiration) or latent heat (the energy required during a change of state, without a change in temperature). The Bowen ratio is the mathematical method generally used to calculate heat lost (or gained) in a substance; it is the ratio of energy fluxes from one state to another by sensible and latent heating respectively. It is calculated by the equation:


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is sensible heating and 
 
 
 
  is latent heating. The quantity was named by Harald Sverdrup after Ira Sprague Bowen (1898–1973), an astrophysicist whose theoretical work on evaporation to air from water bodies made first use of it, and it is used most commonly in meteorology and hydrology. In this context, when the magnitude of 
 
 
 
  is less than one, a greater proportion of the available energy at the surface is passed to the atmosphere as latent heat than as sensible heat, and the converse is true for values of 
 
 
 
  greater than one. As 
 
 
 
 , however, 
 
 
 
  becomes unbounded making the Bowen ratio a poor choice of variable for use in formulae, especially for arid surfaces. For this reason the evaporative fraction is sometimes a more appropriate choice of variable representing the relative contributions of the turbulent energy fluxes to the surface energy budget.
The Bowen ratio is related to the evaporative fraction, 
 
 
 
 , through the equation,


 
 .
The Bowen ratio is an indicator of the type of surface. The Bowen ratio, 
 
 
 
 , is less than one over surfaces with abundant water supplies.




Type of surface

Range of Bowen ratios





Deserts

>10.0



Semi-arid landscapes

2.0-6.0



Temperate forests and grasslands

0.4-0.8



Tropical rainforests

0.1-0.3



Tropical oceans

<0.1



See also

Meteorology
Hydrology
Latent heat
Sensible heat

References

Bowen, I.S., 1926: The ratio of heat losses by conduction and by evaporation from any water surface. Physical Review, 27, pp 779–787.
Lewis, J.M., 1995: The Story behind the Bowen Ratio. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 76, pp 2433–2443. [http://ams.allenpress.com/amsonline/?request=get-abstract&issn;;=1520-0477&volume;=076&issue;=12&page;=2433]
Sturman, A.P., & Tapper, N.J., 1996: The Weather and Climate of Australia and New Zealand, pp 309-310.

External links

National Science Digital Library - Bowen Ratio
The Story behind the Bowen Ratio

"
Category:Ratios Category:Thermodynamics Category:Atmospheric thermodynamics


