


Conjugate transpose




Conjugate transpose

In mathematics, the conjugate transpose or Hermitian transpose of an m-by-n matrix 

 with complex entries is the n-by-m matrix 

* obtained from 

 by taking the transpose and then taking the complex conjugate of each entry (i.e., negating their imaginary parts but not their real parts). The conjugate transpose is formally defined by


 
  where the subscripts denote the i,j-th entry, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n and 1 ≤ j ≤ m, and the overbar denotes a scalar complex conjugate. (The complex conjugate of 
 
 
 
 , where a and b are reals, is 
 
 
 
 .)
This definition can also be written as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the transpose and 
 
 
 
  denotes the matrix with complex conjugated entries.
Other names for the conjugate transpose of a matrix are Hermitian conjugate, bedaggered matrix, adjoint matrix or transjugate. The conjugate transpose of a matrix 

 can be denoted by any of these symbols:



 
  or 
 
 
 
 , commonly used in linear algebra


 
  (sometimes pronounced as "

 dagger"), universally used in quantum mechanics


 
 , although this symbol is more commonly used for the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse

In some contexts, 
 
 
 
  denotes the matrix with complex conjugated entries, and the conjugate transpose is then denoted by 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
Example
If


 
  then



Basic remarks
A square matrix 
 
 
 
  with entries 
 
 
 
  is called

Hermitian or self-adjoint if , i.e., 
 
 
 
  .
skew Hermitian or antihermitian if , i.e., 
 
 
 
  .
normal if .
unitary if .

Even if 
 
 
 
  is not square, the two matrices  and  are both Hermitian and in fact positive semi-definite matrices.
The conjugate transpose "adjoint" matrix  should not be confused with the adjugate

 
 , which is also sometimes called "adjoint".
Finding the conjugate transpose of a matrix 
 
 
 
  with real entries reduces to finding the transpose of 
 
 
 
 , as the conjugate of a real number is the number itself.
Motivation
The conjugate transpose can be motivated by noting that complex numbers can be usefully represented by 2×2 real matrices, obeying matrix addition and multiplication:



That is, denoting each complex number z by the real 2×2 matrix of the linear transformation on the Argand diagram (viewed as the real vector space 
 
 
 
 ) affected by complex z-multiplication on 
 
 
 
 .
An m-by-n matrix of complex numbers could therefore equally well be represented by a 2m-by-2n matrix of real numbers. The conjugate transpose therefore arises very naturally as the result of simply transposing such a matrix, when viewed back again as n-by-m matrix made up of complex numbers.
Properties of the conjugate transpose

 for any two matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the same dimensions.
 for any complex number 
 
 
 
  and any matrix 
 
 
 
 . Here,  refers to the complex conjugate of 
 
 
 
 .
 for any m-by-n matrix 
 
 
 
  and any n-by-p matrix 
 
 
 
 . Note that the order of the factors is reversed.
 for any matrix 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a square matrix, then  and .


 
  is invertible if and only if  is invertible, and in that case .
The eigenvalues of  are the complex conjugates of the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
 .


 
  for any m-by-n matrix 
 
 
 
 , any vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and any vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Here, 
 
 
 
  denotes the standard complex inner product on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

Generalizations
The last property given above shows that if one views 
 
 
 
  as a linear transformation from Euclidean Hilbert space  to , then the matrix  corresponds to the adjoint operator of 
 
 
 
 . The concept of adjoint operators between Hilbert spaces can thus be seen as a generalization of the conjugate transpose of matrices with respect to an orthonormal basis.
Another generalization is available: suppose 
 
 
 
  is a linear map from a complex vector space

 
  to another, 
 
 
 
 , then the complex conjugate linear map as well as the transposed linear map are defined, and we may thus take the conjugate transpose of 
 
 
 
  to be the complex conjugate of the transpose of 
 
 
 
 . It maps the conjugate dual of 
 
 
 
  to the conjugate dual of 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Hermitian conjugate
Adjugate matrix

External links





"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Matrices


