


Subsequence




Subsequence

In mathematics, a subsequence is a sequence that can be derived from another sequence by deleting some elements without changing the order of the remaining elements. For example, the sequence 
 
 
 
  is a subsequence of 
 
 
 
 . They should not be confused with substring which is 
 
 
 
  for above string and which is a refinement of subsequence.
Common subsequence
Given two sequences X and Y, a sequence G is said to be a common subsequence of X and Y, if G is a subsequence of both X and Y. For example, if


 
  and



then a common subsequence of X and Y could be



This would not be the longest common subsequence, since G only has length 3, and the common subsequence 
 
 
 
  has length 4. The longest common subsequence of X and Y is 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
Subsequences have applications to computer science,1 especially in the discipline of bioinformatics, where computers are used to compare, analyze, and store DNA strands.
Take two strands of DNA, say:

ORG1 = ACGGTGTCGTGCTATGCTGATGCTGACTTATATGCTA
  and
 
ORG2 = CGTTCGGCTATCGTACGTTCTATTCTATGATTTCTAA.
 

Subsequences are used to determine how similar the two strands of DNA are, using the DNA bases: adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine.
Theorems

Every infinite sequence of real numbers has an infinite monotone subsequence (This is a lemma used in the proof of the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem).
Every bounded infinite sequence in Rn has a convergent subsequence (This is the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem).
For every integers r and s, every finite sequence of length at least (r − 1)(s − 1) + 1 contains a monotonically increasing subsequence of length r or a monotonically decreasing subsequence of length s (This is the Erdős–Szekeres theorem).

See also

Subsequential limit - the limit of some subsequence.
Limit superior and limit inferior
Longest increasing subsequence problem

Notes


"
Category:Elementary mathematics Category:Sequences and series



In computer science, string is often used as a synonym for sequence, but it is important to note that substring and subsequence are not synonyms. Substrings are consecutive parts of a string, while subsequences need not be. This means that a substring of a string is always a subsequence of the string, but a subsequence of a string is not always a substring of the string, see: ↩




