


Fractional calculus




Fractional calculus

Fractional calculus is a branch of mathematical analysis that studies the possibility of taking real number powers or complex number powers of the differentiation operator



and the integration operator J. (Usually J is used instead of I to avoid confusion with other I-like glyphs and identities.)
In this context, the term powers refers to iterative application of a linear operator acting on a function, in some analogy to function composition acting on a variable, e.g.,  f(f(x))}}. For example, one may ask the question of meaningfully interpreting


 
  as an analog of the functional square root for the differentiation operator (an operator half iterated), i.e., an expression for some linear operator that when applied twice to any function will have the same effect as differentiation.
More generally, one can look at the question of defining the linear functional


 
  for real-number values of a in such a way that when a takes an integer value, n, the usual power of n-fold differentiation is recovered for n > 0, and the −nth power of J when n a will form a continuous semigroup with parameter a, inside which the original discrete semigroup of Dn for integer n can be recovered as a subgroup. Continuous semigroups are prevalent in mathematics, and have an interesting theory. Notice here that fraction is then a misnomer for the exponent a, since it need not be rational; the use of the term fractional calculus is merely conventional.
Fractional differential equations (also known as extraordinary differential equations) are a generalization of differential equations through the application of fractional calculus.
Nature of the fractional derivative
An important point is that the fractional derivative at a point x is a local property only when a is an integer; in non-integer cases we cannot say that the fractional derivative at x of a function f depends only on values of f very near x, in the way that integer-power derivatives certainly do. Therefore it is expected that the theory involves some sort of boundary conditions, involving information on the function further out. To use a metaphor, the fractional derivative requires some peripheral vision.
As far as the existence of such a theory is concerned, the foundations of the subject were laid by Liouville in a paper from 1832. The fractional derivative of a function to order a is often now defined by means of the Fourier or Mellin integral transforms.1
Heuristics
A fairly natural question to ask is whether there exists a linear operator H, or half-derivative, such that


 
 .
It turns out that there is such an operator, and indeed for any a > 0, there exists an operator P such that



or to put it another way, the definition of dny/dxn can be extended to all real values of n.
Let f(x) be a function defined for x > 0. Form the definite integral from 0 to x. Call this


 
 .
Repeating this process gives



and this can be extended arbitrarily.
The Cauchy formula for repeated integration, namely



leads in a straightforward way to a generalization for real n.
Using the gamma function to remove the discrete nature of the factorial function gives us a natural candidate for fractional applications of the integral operator.



This is in fact a well-defined operator.
It is straightforward to show that the J operator satisfies









Proof







 
 
  where in the last step we exchanged the order of integration and pulled out the f(s) factor from the t integration. Changing variables to r defined by t = s + (x − s)r,


 
  The inner integral is the beta function which satisfies the following property:


 
  Substituting back into the equation


 
  Interchanging α and β shows that the order in which the J operator is applied is irrelevant and completes the proof.





This relationship is called the semigroup property of fractional differintegral operators. Unfortunately the comparable process for the derivative operator D is significantly more complex, but it can be shown that D is neither commutative nor additive in general.
Fractional derivative of a basic power function
(Figure)
The half derivative (purple curve) of the function f(x) = x (blue curve) together with the first derivative (red curve).

(Figure)
The animation shows the derivative operator oscillating between the antiderivative (α=−1: y=
 
 
 
 ⋅x2) and the derivative (α=+1: y=1) of the simple power function y = x continuously.

Let us assume that f(x) is a monomial of the form



The first derivative is as usual



Repeating this gives the more general result that



Which, after replacing the factorials with the gamma function, leads us to



For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we obtain the half-derivative of the function 
 
 
 
  as



Repeating this process yields



which is indeed the expected result of



For negative integer power k, the gamma function is undefined and we have to use the following relation:2


 
  for 
 
 

This extension of the above differential operator need not be constrained only to real powers. For example, the (1 + i)th derivative of the (1 − i)th derivative yields the 2nd derivative. Also notice that setting negative values for a yields integrals.
For a general function f(x) and 0 D^{\alpha}f(x)=\frac{1}{\Gamma(1-\alpha)}\frac{d}{dx}\int_{0}^{x}\frac{f(t)}{(x-t)^{\alpha}}dt
For arbitrary α, since the gamma function is undefined for arguments whose real part is a negative integer and whose imaginary part is zero, it is necessary to apply the fractional derivative after the integer derivative has been performed. For example,



Laplace transform
We can also come at the question via the Laplace transform. Noting that


 
  and


 
  etc., we assert


 
 . For example


 
  as expected. Indeed, given the convolution rule


 
  and shorthanding p(x) = xα−1 for clarity, we find that


 
 
  which is what Cauchy gave us above.
Laplace transforms "work" on relatively few functions, but they are often useful for solving fractional differential equations.
Fractional integrals
Riemann–Liouville fractional integral
The classical form of fractional calculus is given by the Riemann–Liouville integral, which is essentially what has been described above. The theory for periodic functions (therefore including the 'boundary condition' of repeating after a period) is the Weyl integral. It is defined on Fourier series, and requires the constant Fourier coefficient to vanish (thus, it applies to functions on the unit circle whose integrals evaluate to 0).



By contrast the Grünwald–Letnikov derivative starts with the derivative instead of the integral.
Hadamard fractional integral
The Hadamard fractional integral is introduced by J. Hadamard 3 and is given by the following formula,



Fractional derivatives
Not like classical Newtonian derivatives, a fractional derivative is defined via a fractional integral.
Riemann–Liouville fractional derivative
The corresponding derivative is calculated using Lagrange's rule for differential operators. Computing n-th order derivative over the integral of order (n − α), the α order derivative is obtained. It is important to remark that n is the nearest integer bigger than α.



Caputo fractional derivative
There is another option for computing fractional derivatives; the Caputo fractional derivative. It was introduced by M. Caputo in his 1967 paper.4 In contrast to the Riemann Liouville fractional derivative, when solving differential equations using Caputo's definition, it is not necessary to define the fractional order initial conditions. Caputo's definition is illustrated as follows.



The following list summaries the fractional derivatives defined in the literature.5
Other types
Classical fractional derivatives include:

Grünwald–Letnikov derivative
Sonin–Letnikov derivative
Liouville derivative
Caputo derivative
Hadamard derivative
Marchaud derivative
Riesz derivative
Riesz-Miller derivative
Miller–Ross derivative
Weyl derivative
Erdélyi–Kober derivative

New fractional derivatives include:

Machado derivative
Chen-Machado derivative
Udita derivative
Coimbra derivative
Caputo-Katugampola derivative
Hilfer derivative
Davidson derivative
Chen derivative

Review Articles E.C. Oliveira, J.A. Tenreiro Machado "A Review of Definitions for Fractional Derivatives and Integral" Mathematical Problems in Engineering Volume 2014 (2014), Article ID 238459
M.D. Ortigueira, J.A. Tenreiro Machado, What is a fractional derivative? Journal ofComputationalPhysics 293 (2015) 4–13
V.E. Tarasov "No violation of the Leibniz rule. No fractional derivative." Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation. Vol.18. No.11. (2013) pp.2945-2948. arXiv:1402.7161
Generalizations
Erdélyi–Kober operator
The Erdélyi–Kober operator is an integral operator introduced by Arthur Erdélyi (1940).6 and Hermann Kober (1940)7 and is given by



which generalizes the Riemann-Liouville fractional integral and the Weyl integral.
Further generalizations
A recent generalization introduced by Udita Katugampola (2011) is the following, which generalizes the Riemann-Liouville fractional integral and the Hadamard fractional integral. It is given by,89



Even though the integral operator in question is a close resemblance of the famous Erdélyi–Kober operator, it is not possible to obtain the Hadamard fractional integral as a direct consequence of the Erdélyi–Kober operator. Also, there is a Udita-type fractional derivative, which generalizes the Riemann-Liouville and the Hadamard fractional derivatives.10 As with the case of fractional integrals, the same is not true for the Erdélyi–Kober operator.11
Functional calculus
In the context of functional analysis, functions f(D) more general than powers are studied in the functional calculus of spectral theory. The theory of pseudo-differential operators also allows one to consider powers of D. The operators arising are examples of singular integral operators; and the generalisation of the classical theory to higher dimensions is called the theory of Riesz potentials. So there are a number of contemporary theories available, within which fractional calculus can be discussed. See also Erdélyi–Kober operator, important in special function theory , .
Applications
Fractional conservation of mass
As described by Wheatcraft and Meerschaert (2008),12 a fractional conservation of mass equation is needed to model fluid flow when the control volume is not large enough compared to the scale of heterogeneity and when the flux within the control volume is non-linear. In the referenced paper, the fractional conservation of mass equation for fluid flow is:



Groundwater flow problem
In 2013-2014 Atangana et al. described some groundwater flow problems using the concept of derivative with fractional order.1314 In these works, The classical Darcy law is generalized by regarding the water flow as a function of a non-integer order derivative of the piezometric head. This generalized law and the law of conservation of mass are then used to derive a new equation for groundwater flow.
Fractional advection dispersion equation
This equation has been shown useful for modeling contaminant flow in heterogenous porous media.151617 Atangana and Kilicman extended fractional advection dispersion equation to variable order fractional advection dispersion equation. In their work, the hydrodynamic dispersion equation was generalized using the concept of variational order derivative. The modified equation was numerically solved via the Crank-Nicholson scheme. The stability and convergence of the scheme in this case were presented. The numerical simulations showed that, the modified equation is more reliable in predicting the movement of pollution in the deformable aquifers, than the constant fractional and integer derivatives18
Time-space fractional diffusion equation models
Anomalous diffusion processes in complex media can be well characterized by using fractional-order diffusion equation models.1920 The time derivative term is corresponding to long-time heavy tail decay and the spatial derivative for diffusion nonlocality. The time-space fractional diffusion governing equation can be written as



A simple extension of fractional derivative is the variable-order fractional derivative, the α, β are changed into α(x, t), β(x, t). Its applications in anomalous diffusion modeling can be found in reference.2122
Structural damping models
Fractional derivatives are used to model viscoelastic damping in certain types of materials like polymers.23
Acoustical wave equations for complex media
The propagation of acoustical waves in complex media, e.g. biological tissue, commonly implies attenuation obeying a frequency power-law. This kind of phenomenon may be described using a causal wave equation which incorporates fractional time derivatives:



See also 24 and the references therein. Such models are linked to the commonly recognized hypothesis that multiple relaxation phenomena give rise to the attenuation measured in complex media. This link is further described in 25 and in the survey paper,26 as well as the acoustic attenuation article. See 27 for a recent paper which compares fractional wave equations which model power-law attenuation.
Fractional Schrödinger equation in quantum theory
The fractional Schrödinger equation, a fundamental equation of fractional quantum mechanics, has the following form:28



where the solution of the equation is the wavefunction ψ(r, t) - the quantum mechanical probability amplitude for the particle to have a given position vector r at any given time t, and ħ is the reduced Planck constant. The potential energy function V(r, t) depends on the system.
Further,  }} is the Laplace operator, and Dα is a scale constant with physical dimension [Dα] = erg1 − α·cmα·sec−α, (at α = 2, D2 = 1/2m for a particle of mass m), and the operator (−ħ2Δ)α/2 is the 3-dimensional fractional quantum Riesz derivative defined by



The index α in the fractional Schrödinger equation is the Lévy index, 1 Katugampola, U.N., A New Approach To Generalized Fractional Derivatives, Bull. Math. Anal. App. Vol 6, Issue 4, 15 October 2014, pages 1–15
See also

Acoustic attenuation
Differintegral
Differential equation
Fractional dynamics
Fractional Fourier transform
Erdelyi–Kober operator
Riemann–Liouville integral
Weyl integral
Neopolarogram
Fractional Schrödinger equation
Autoregressive fractionally integrated moving average

Notes
Further reading
Books
















Article regarding the history of fractional calculus







External links

one click to calculate fractional calculus
Eric W. Weisstein. "Fractional Differential Equation." From MathWorld — A Wolfram Web Resource.
MathWorld - Fractional calculus
MathWorld - Fractional derivative
Fractional Calculus at MathPages
Specialized journal: Fractional Calculus and Applied Analysis
Specialized journal: Fractional Differential Equations (FDE)
Specialized journal: [http://naturalspublishing.com/show.asp?JorID=48&pgid;;=0 Progress in Fractional Differentiation and Applications]
Specialized journal: Communications in Fractional Calculus (ISSN 2218-3892)
Specialized journal: Journal of Fractional Calculus and Applications (JFCA)
www.nasatech.com
Igor Podlubny's collection of related books, articles, links, software, etc.
GigaHedron - Richard Herrmann's collection of books, articles, preprints, etc.
s.dugowson.free.fr
History, Definitions, and Applications for the Engineer (PDF), by Adam Loverro, University of Notre Dame
Fractional Calculus Modelling
Introductory Notes on Fractional Calculus
Power Law & Fractional Dynamics
The CRONE (R) Toolbox, a Matlab and Simulink Toolbox dedicated to fractional calculus, which is freely downloadable
1

"
 



For the history of the subject, see the thesis (in French): Stéphane Dugowson, Les différentielles métaphysiques (histoire et philosophie de la généralisation de l'ordre de dérivation), Thèse, Université Paris Nord (1994)

Hadamard, J., Essai sur l'étude des fonctions données par leur développement de Taylor, Journal of pure and applied mathematics, vol. 4, no. 8, pp. 101–186, 1892.

Katugampola, U.N., A New Approach To Generalized Fractional Derivatives, Bull. Math. Anal. App. Vol 6, Issue 4, 15 October 2014, pages 1–15


Katugampola, U.N., A New Approach To Generalized Fractional Derivatives, Bull. Math. Anal. App. Vol 6, Issue 4, 15 October 2014, pages 1-15
Katugampola, U.N., New Approach To A Generalized Fractional Integral, Appl. Math. Comput. Vol 218, Issue 3, 1 October 2011, pages 860–865
Katugampola, U.N., A New Approach To Generalized Fractional Derivatives, Bull. Math. Anal. App. Vol 6, Issue 4, 15 October 2014, pages 1-15
Katugampola, U.N., A New Approach To Generalized Fractional Derivatives, Bull. Math. Anal. App. Vol 6, Issue 4, 15 October 2014, pages 1-15
Wheatcraft, S., Meerschaert, M., (2008). "Fractional Conservation of Mass." Advances in Water Resources 31, 1377–1381.


Benson, D., Wheatcraft, S., Meerschaert, M., (2000). "Application of a fractional advection-dispersion equation." Water Resources Res 36, 1403–1412.
Benson, D., Wheatcraft, S., Meerschaert, M., (2000). "The fractional-order governing equation of Lévy motion." Water Resources Res 36, 1413–1423.
Benson, D., Schumer, R., Wheatcraft, S., Meerschaert, M., (2001). "Fractional dispersion, Lévy motion, and the MADE tracer tests." Transport Porous Media 42, 211–240.

Metzler, R., Klafter, J., (2000). "The random walk's guide to anomalous diffusion: a fractional dynamics approach." Phys. Rep., 339, 1-77.
F. Mainardi, Y. Luchko, G. Pagnini, "The fundamental solution of the space-time fractional diffusion equation", Fractional Calculus and Applied Analysis, Vol. 4, No 2 (2001). 153-192 arXiv:cond-mat/0702419

R. Gorenflo, F. Mainardi, "Fractional Diffusion Processes: Probability Distributions and Continuous Time Random Walk", Springer Lecture Notes in Physics, No 621, Berlin 2003, pp. 148-166 arXiv:0709.3990
Fractional Calculus and Waves in Linear Viscoelasticity: An Introduction to Mathematical Models. by F. Mainardi, Imperial College Press, 2010.
S. Holm and S. P. Näsholm, "A causal and fractional all-frequency wave equation for lossy media," Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 130, Issue 4, pp. 2195–2201 (October 2011)
S. P. Näsholm and S. Holm, "Linking multiple relaxation, power-law attenuation, and fractional wave equations," Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 130, Issue 5, pp. 3038-3045 (November 2011).
S. P. Näsholm and S. Holm, "On a Fractional Zener Elastic Wave Equation," Fract. Calc. Appl. Anal. Vol. 16, No 1 (2013), pp. 26-50, DOI: 10.2478/s13540-013--0003-1 Link to e-print
Holm S., Näsholm, S. P., "Comparison of Fractional Wave Equations for Power Law Attenuation in Ultrasound and Elastography," Ultrasound Med. Biol., 40(4), pp. 695-703, DOI: 10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2013.09.033 Link to e-print
N. Laskin, (2002), Fractional Schrödinger equation, Physical Review E66, 056108 7 pages.'' (also available online: http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0206098)




