


Fock space




Fock space

The Fock space is an algebraic construction used in quantum mechanics to construct the quantum states space of a variable or unknown number of identical particles from a single particle Hilbert space

 
 . It is named after V. A. Fock who first introduced it in his paper Konfigurationsraum und zweite Quantelung.12
Informally, a Fock space is the sum of a set of Hilbert spaces representing zero particle states, one particle states, two particle states, and so on. If the identical particles are bosons, the 
 
 
 
 -particle states are vectors in a symmetrized tensor product of 
 
 
 
  single-particle Hilbert spaces 
 
 
 
 . If the identical particles are fermions, the 
 
 
 
 -particle states are vectors in an antisymmetrized tensor product of 
 
 
 
  single-particle Hilbert spaces 
 
 
 
 . A general state in Fock space is a linear combination of n-particle states, one for each n.
Technically, the Fock space is (the Hilbert space completion of) the direct sum of the symmetric or antisymmetric tensors in the tensor powers of a single-particle Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 ,



Here 
 
 
 
  is the operator which symmetrizes or antisymmetrizes a tensor, depending on whether the Hilbert space describes particles obeying bosonic

 
  or fermionic

 
  statistics, and the overline represents the completion of the space. The bosonic (resp. fermionic) Fock space can alternatively be constructed as (the Hilbert space completion of) the symmetric tensors

 
  (resp. alternating tensors

 
 ). For every basis for 
 
 
 
  there is a natural basis of the Fock space, the Fock states.
Definition
Fock space is the (Hilbert) direct sum of tensor products of copies of a single-particle Hilbert space 
 
 




Here 
 
 
 
 , the complex scalars, consists of the states corresponding to no particles, 
 
 
 
  the states of one particle, 
 
 
 
  the states of two identical particles etc.
A typical state in 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  where


 
  is a vector of length 1, called the vacuum state and 
 
 
 
  is a complex coefficient,


 
  is a state in the single particle Hilbert space,


 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a complex coefficient

etc.
 

The convergence of this infinite sum is important if 
 
 
 
  is to be a Hilbert space. Technically we require 
 
 
 
  to be the Hilbert space completion of the algebraic direct sum. It consists of all infinite tuples

 
  such that the norm, defined by the inner product is finite


 
  where the 
 
 
 
  particle norm is defined by


 
  i.e. the restriction of the norm on the tensor product


For two states


 
 , and


 
  the inner product on 
 
 
 
  is then defined as


 
  where we use the inner products on each of the 
 
 
 
 -particle Hilbert spaces. Note that, in particular the 
 
 
 
  particle subspaces are orthogonal for different 
 
 
 
 
 .
Pure states, indistinguishable particles, and a useful basis for Fock space
A pure state of the Fock space is a state of the form



which describes a collection of 
 
 
 
  particles, one of which has quantum state 
 
 
 
 , another 
 
 
 
  and so on up to the 
 
 
th particle, where each 
 
 
 
  is any state from the single particle Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 . Here juxtaposition is symmetric respectively antisymmetric multiplication in the symmetric and antisymmetric tensor algebra. The general state in a Fock space is a linear combination of pure states. A state that cannot be written as a product of pure states is called an entangled state.
When we speak of one particle in state 
 
 
, it must be borne in mind that in quantum mechanics identical particles are indistinguishable. In the same Fock space all particles are identical (to describe many species of particles, take the tensor product of as many different Fock spaces as there are species of particles under consideration). It is one of the most powerful features of this formalism that states are implicitly properly symmetrized. For instance, if the above state 
 
 
 
  is fermionic, it will be 0 if two (or more) of the 
 
 
 
 
  are equal because the anti symmetric (exterior) product 
 
 
 
 . This is a mathematical formulation of the Pauli exclusion principle that no two (or more) fermions can be in the same quantum state. Also, the product of orthonormal states is properly orthonormal by construction (although possibly 0 in the Fermi case when two states are equal).
A useful and convenient basis for a Fock space is the occupancy number basis. Given the choice of a basis 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , we can denote the state with 
 
 
 
  particles in state 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  particles in state 
 
 
 
 , ..., 
 
 
 
  particles in state 
 
 
 
 , and no particles in the remaining states, by defining



where each 
 
 
 
  takes the value 0 or 1 for fermionic particles and 0, 1, 2, ... for bosonic particles. Note that trailing zeroes may be dropped without changing the state. Such a state is called a Fock state. When the 
 
 
 
  are understood as the steady states of a free field, the Fock states describe an assembly of non-interacting particles in definite numbers. The most general Fock state is a linear superposition of pure states.
Two operators of great importance are the creation and annihilation operators, which upon acting on a Fock state add (respectively remove) a particle in the ascribed quantum state. They are denoted 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively, with the quantum state 
 
 
 
 
  the particle which is "added" by (symmetric or exterior) multiplication with 
 
 
 
  respectively "removed" by (even or odd) interior product with 
 
 
 
  which is the adjoint of 
 
 
 
 . It is often convenient to work with states of the basis of 
 
 
 
  so that these operators remove and add exactly one particle in the given basis state. These operators also serve as a basis for more general operators acting on the Fock space, for instance the number operator giving the number of particles in a specific state 
 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Wave Function Interpretation
Often the one particle space 
 
 
 
  is given as 
 
 
 
 , the space of square-integrable functions on a space 
 
 
 
  with measure

 
 
  (strictly speaking, the equivalence classes of square integrable functions where functions are equivalent if they differ on a set of measure zero). The typical example is the free particle with 
 
 
 
  the space of square integrable functions on three-dimensional space. The Fock spaces then have a natural interpretation as symmetric or anti-symmetric square integrable functions as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  etc. Consider the space of tuples of points which is the disjoint union


 
 .
It has a natural measure 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . The even Fock space 
 
 
 
  can then be identified with the space of symmetric functions in 
 
 
 
  whereas odd Fock space 
 
 
 
  can be identified with the space of anti-symmetric functions. The identification follows directly from the isometric mapping





 
 .
Given wave functions 
 
 
 
 , the Slater determinant


 
  is an antisymmetric function on 
 
 
 
 . It can thus be naturally interpreted as an element of 
 
 
 
 -particle section of the odd Fock space. The normalisation is chosen such that 
 
 
 
  if the functions 
 
 
 
  are orthonormal. There is a similar "Slater permanent" with the determinant replaced with the permanent which gives elements of 
 
 
 
 -sector of the even Fock space.
Relation to Bargmann-Fock space
Define a space 
 
 
3 of complex holomorphic functions convergent with respect to a Gaussian measure:


 
 , where


 
 . Then defining a space 
 
 
 
  as the amalgamation of spaces 
 
 
 
  over the integers 
 
 
 
 , Bargmann in 1961 showed 4 5 that 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to a bosonic Fock space.
See also

Fock state
Tensor algebra
Boson
Fermion
Holomorphic Fock space
Creation and annihilation operators
Slater determinant
Wick's theorem
Noncommutative geometry
Grand canonical ensemble - thermal distribution over Fock space.

References


External links

Feynman diagrams and Wick products associated with q-Fock space - noncommutative analysis, Edward G. Effros and Mihai Popa, Department of Mathematics, UCLA
R. Geroch, Mathematical Physics, Chicago University Press, Chapter 21.

"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum field theory



V. Fock, Z. Phys. 75 (1932), 622-647↩
M.C. Reed, B. Simon, "Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics, Volume II", Academic Press 1975. Page 328.↩
↩
↩
↩




