


Eigenfunction




Eigenfunction

 In mathematics, an eigenfunction of a linear operator, 
 
 
 
 , defined on some function space, is any non-zero function

 
  in that space that returns from the operator exactly as is, except for a multiplicative scaling factor. More precisely, one has



for some scalar, 
 
 
 
 
 , the corresponding eigenvalue. The solution of the differential eigenvalue problem also depends on any boundary conditions required of 
 
 
 
 . In each case there are only certain eigenvalues  λn (n {{=}} 1, 2, 3, ...)}} that admit a corresponding solution for   fn }} (with each  belonging to the eigenvalue ) when combined with the boundary conditions. Eigenfunctions are used to analyze 
 
 
 
 .
For example,  ekx}} is an eigenfunction for the differential operator



for any value of 
 
 
 
 , with corresponding eigenvalue  k2}}. Similarly, the functions 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , have eigenvalue  -k2}}. If a boundary condition is applied to this system (e.g., 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ), then even fewer pairs of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues satisfy both the definition of an eigenfunction, and the boundary conditions.
Specifically, in the study of signals and systems, the eigenfunction of a system is the signal 
 
 
 
  which when input into the system, produces a response 
 
 
 
 
  with the complex constant 
 
 
 
 .1
Examples
Derivative operator
A widely used class of linear operators acting on function spaces are the differential operators on function spaces. As an example, on the space  of infinitely differentiable real functions of a real argument 
 
 
 
 , the process of differentiation is a linear operator since



The eigenvalue equation for a linear differential operator 
 
 
 
  in  is then a differential equation



The functions that satisfy this equation are commonly called eigenfunctions. For the derivative operator 
 
 
 
 , an eigenfunction is a function that, when differentiated, yields a constant times the original function. That is,



for all 
 
 
 
 . This equation can be solved for any value of 
 
 
 
 . The solution is an exponential function



The derivative operator is defined also for complex-valued functions of a complex argument. In the complex version of the space , the eigenvalue equation has a solution for any complex constant 
 
 
 
 . The spectrum of the operator 
 
 
 
  is therefore the whole complex plane. This is an example of a continuous spectrum.
Applications
Vibrating strings
 Let 
 
 
 
  denote the sideways displacement of a stressed elastic chord, such as the vibrating strings of a string instrument, as a function of the position 
 
 
 
  along the string and of time 
 
 
 
 
 . From the laws of mechanics, applied to infinitesimal portions of the string, one can deduce that the function 
 
 
 
  satisfies the partial differential equation



which is called the (one-dimensional) wave equation. Here 
 
 
 
  is a constant that depends on the tension and mass of the string.
This problem is amenable to the method of separation of variables. If we assume that 
 
 
 
  can be written as the product of the form 
 
 
 
 
 , we can form a pair of ordinary differential equations:



Each of these is an eigenvalue equation, for eigenvalues 
 
 
 
  and , respectively. For any values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the equations are satisfied by the functions






where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are arbitrary real constants. If we impose boundary conditions (that the ends of the string are fixed with 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , for example) we can constrain the eigenvalues. For those boundary conditions, we find 
 
 
 
 , and so the phase angle 
 
 
 
  and



Thus, the constant 
 
 
 
 
  is constrained to take one of the values  }}, where 
 
 
 
  is any integer. Thus, the clamped string supports a family of standing waves of the form



From the point of view of our musical instrument, the frequency  is the frequency of the 
 
 
 
 -th harmonic, which is called the 
 
 
 
 -th overtone.
Quantum mechanics
Eigenfunctions play an important role in many branches of physics. An important example is quantum mechanics, where the Schrödinger equation



with



has solutions of the form



where  are eigenfunctions of the operator 
 
 
 
  with eigenvalues . The fact that only certain eigenvalues  with associated eigenfunctions  satisfy Schrödinger's equation leads to a natural basis for quantum mechanics and the periodic table of the elements, with each  an allowable energy state of the system. The success of this equation in explaining the spectral characteristics of hydrogen is considered one of the greatest triumphs of 20th century physics.
Since the Hamiltonian operator 
 
 
 
  is a Hermitian Operator, its eigenfunctions are orthogonal functions. This is not necessarily the case for eigenfunctions of other operators (such as the example 
 
 
 
 
  mentioned above). Orthogonal functions  1, 2, ...)}} have the property that



where  is the complex conjugate of .
whenever 
 
 
 
 , in which case the set  is said to be orthogonal. Also, it is linearly independent.
See also

Eigenvalue, eigenvector and eigenspace
Hilbert–Schmidt theorem
Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations
Fixed point combinator
Fourier transform eigenfunctions

Notes
References

Methods of Mathematical Physics by R. Courant, D. Hilbert ISBN 0-471-50447-5 (Volume 1 Paperback) ISBN 0-471-50439-4 (Volume 2 Paperback) ISBN 0-471-17990-6 (Hardback)

External links

More images (non-GPL) at Atom in a Box

de:Eigenfunktion zh:本徵函數"
Category:Functional analysis



Bernd Girod, Rudolf Rabenstein, Alexander Stenger, Signals and systems, 2nd ed., Wiley, 2001, ISBN 0-471-98800-6 p. 49




