


Lists of integrals




Lists of integrals

Integration is the basic operation in integral calculus. While differentiation has easy rules by which the derivative of a complicated function can be found by differentiating its simpler component functions, integration does not, so tables of known integrals are often useful. This page lists some of the most common antiderivatives.
Historical development of integrals
A compilation of a list of integrals (Integraltafeln) and techniques of integral calculus was published by the German mathematician Meyer Hirsch in 1810. These tables were republished in the United Kingdom in 1823. More extensive tables were compiled in 1858 by the Dutch mathematician David de Bierens de Haan. A new edition was published in 1862. These tables, which contain mainly integrals of elementary functions, remained in use until the middle of the 20th century. They were then replaced by the much more extensive tables of Gradshteyn and Ryzhik. In Gradshteyn and Ryzhik, integrals originating from the book by de Bierens are denoted by BI.
Not all closed-form expressions have closed-form antiderivatives; this study forms the subject of differential Galois theory, which was initially developed by Joseph Liouville in the 1830s and 1840s, leading to Liouville's theorem which classifies which expressions have closed form antiderivatives. A simple example of a function without a closed form antiderivative is e−x2, whose antiderivative is (up to constants) the error function.
Since 1968 there is the Risch algorithm for determining indefinite integrals that can be expressed in term of elementary functions, typically using a computer algebra system. Integrals that cannot be expressed using elementary functions can be manipulated symbolically using general functions such as the Meijer G-function.
Lists of integrals
More detail may be found on the following pages for the lists of integrals:

List of integrals of rational functions
List of integrals of irrational functions
List of integrals of trigonometric functions
List of integrals of inverse trigonometric functions
List of integrals of hyperbolic functions
List of integrals of inverse hyperbolic functions
List of integrals of exponential functions
List of integrals of logarithmic functions
List of integrals of Gaussian functions

Gradshteyn, Ryzhik, Jeffrey, Zwillinger's Table of Integrals, Series, and Products contains a large collection of results. An even larger, multivolume table is the Integrals and Series by Prudnikov, Brychkov, and Marichev (with volumes 1–3 listing integrals and series of elementary and special functions, volume 4–5 are tables of Laplace transforms). More compact collections can be found in e.g. Brychkov, Marichev, Prudnikov's Tables of Indefinite Integrals, or as chapters in Zwillinger's CRC Standard Mathematical Tables and Formulae, Bronstein and Semendyayev's Handbook of Mathematics (Springer) and Oxford Users' Guide to Mathematics (Oxford Univ. Press), and other mathematical handbooks.
Other useful resources include Abramowitz and Stegun and the Bateman Manuscript Project. Both works contain many identities concerning specific integrals, which are organized with the most relevant topic instead of being collected into a separate table. Two volumes of the Bateman Manuscript are specific to integral transforms.
There are several web sites which have tables of integrals and integrals on demand. Wolfram Alpha can show results, and for some simpler expressions, also the intermediate steps of the integration. Wolfram Research also operates another online service, the Wolfram Mathematica Online Integrator.
Integrals of simple functions
C is used for an arbitrary constant of integration that can only be determined if something about the value of the integral at some point is known. Thus each function has an infinite number of antiderivatives.
These formulas only state in another form the assertions in the table of derivatives.
Integrals with a singularity
When there is a singularity in the function being integrated such that the antiderivative becomes undefined or at some point (the singularity), then C does not need to be the same on both sides of the singularity. The forms below normally assume the Cauchy principal value around a singularity in the value of C but this is not in general necessary. For instance in








there is a singularity at 0 and the antiderivative becomes infinite there. If the integral above would be used to compute a definite integral between -1 and 1, one would get the wrong answer 0. This however is the Cauchy principal value of the integral around the singularity. If the integration is done in the complex plane the result depends on the path around the origin, in this case the singularity contributes −i

 
  when using a path above the origin and i

 
  for a path below the origin. A function on the real line could use a completely different value of C on either side of the origin as in:



Rational functions

More integrals: List of integrals of rational functions


These rational functions have a non-integrable singularity at 0 for a ≤ −1.





 
  (Cavalieri's quadrature formula)








More generally,1





\ln \left|x \right| + C^+ & x > 0 \end{cases}



Exponential functions

More integrals: List of integrals of exponential functions











Logarithms

More integrals: List of integrals of logarithmic functions








Trigonometric functions

More integrals: List of integrals of trigonometric functions



















(See Integral of the secant function. This result was a well-known conjecture in the 17th century.)
 


























(see integral of secant cubed)
 









Inverse trigonometric functions

More integrals: List of integrals of inverse trigonometric functions




















Hyperbolic functions

More integrals: List of integrals of hyperbolic functions




















Inverse hyperbolic functions

More integrals: List of integrals of inverse hyperbolic functions




















Products of functions proportional to their second derivatives












Absolute-value functions
Let f be a function which has at most one root on each interval on which it is defined, and g an antiderivative of f that is zero at each root of f (such an antiderivative exists if and only if the condition on f is satisfied), then


 
  where sgn(x) is the sign function, which takes the values -1, 0, 1 when x is respectively negative, zero or positive. This gives the following formulas (where a≠0):





 
  when 
 
 
 
  for some integer n.


 
  when 
 
 
 
  for some integer n.


 
  when 
 
 
 
 
  for some integer n.


 
  when 
 
 
 
  for some integer n.
If the function f does not has any continuous anti-derivative which takes the value zero at the zeros of f (this is the case for the sine and the cosine functions), then 
 
 
 
  is an anti-derivative of f on every interval on which f is not zero, but may be discontinuous at the points where f(x)=0. For having a continuous anti-derivative, one has thus to add a well chosen step function. If we also use the fact that the absolute values of sine and cosine are periodic with period 
 
 
 
 , then we get:






Special functions
Ci, Si: Trigonometric integrals, Ei: Exponential integral, li: Logarithmic integral function, erf: Error function


















Definite integrals lacking closed-form antiderivatives
There are some functions whose antiderivatives cannot be expressed in closed form. However, the values of the definite integrals of some of these functions over some common intervals can be calculated. A few useful integrals are given below.


 
  (see also Gamma function)


 
  for 
 
 
 
 
  (the Gaussian integral)


 
  for 
 
 



 
  for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is 1, 2, 3, ... and !! is the double factorial.


 
  when 
 
 



 
  for 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 



 
  (see also Bernoulli number)








 
  (see sinc function and Sine integral)





 
  (if 
 
 
 
  is an even integer and 
 
 
 
 )


 
  (if 
 
 
 
  is an odd integer and 
 
 
 
 )


 
  (for 
 
 
 
  integers with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , see also Binomial coefficient)


 
  (for 
 
 
 
  real and 
 
 
 
  non-negative integer, see also Symmetry)


 
  (for 
 
 
 
  integers with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , see also Binomial coefficient)


 
  (for 
 
 
 
  integers with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , see also Binomial coefficient)


 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is the exponential function , and 
 
 
 
 )


 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is the Gamma function)


 
  (for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , see Beta function)


 
  (where  is the modified Bessel function of the first kind)





 
  (for 
 
 
 
  , this is related to the probability density function of the Student's t-distribution)
If the function f has bounded variation on the interval [a,b], then the method of exhaustion provides a formula for the integral:






The "sophomore's dream"



attributed to Johann Bernoulli.
See also

Incomplete gamma function
Indefinite sum
List of limits
List of mathematical series
Symbolic integration

References

M. Abramowitz and I.A. Stegun, editors. Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables.


I.S. Gradshteyn (И.С. Градштейн), I.M. Ryzhik (И.М. Рыжик); Alan Jeffrey, Daniel Zwillinger, editors. Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, seventh edition. Academic Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-12-373637-6. Errata. (Several previous editions as well.)


A.P. Prudnikov (А.П. Прудников), Yu.A. Brychkov (Ю.А. Брычков), O.I. Marichev (О.И. Маричев). Integrals and Series. First edition (Russian), volume 1–5, Nauka, 1981−1986. First edition (English, translated from the Russian by N.M. Queen), volume 1–5, Gordon & Breach Science Publishers/CRC Press, 1988–1992, ISBN 2-88124-097-6. Second revised edition (Russian), volume 1–3, Fiziko-Matematicheskaya Literatura, 2003.


Yu.A. Brychkov (Ю.А. Брычков), Handbook of Special Functions: Derivatives, Integrals, Series and Other Formulas. Russian edition, Fiziko-Matematicheskaya Literatura, 2006. English edition, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, 2008, ISBN 1-58488-956-X.


Daniel Zwillinger. CRC Standard Mathematical Tables and Formulae, 31st edition. Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, 2002. ISBN 1-58488-291-3. (Many earlier editions as well.)

Historical

Meyer Hirsch, Integraltafeln, oder, Sammlung von Integralformeln (Duncker und Humblot, Berlin, 1810)
Meyer Hirsch, Integral Tables, Or, A Collection of Integral Formulae (Baynes and son, London, 1823) [English translation of Integraltafeln]
David Bierens de Haan, Nouvelles Tables d'Intégrales définies (Engels, Leiden, 1862)
Benjamin O. Pierce A short table of integrals - revised edition (Ginn & co., Boston, 1899)

External links
Tables of integrals

Paul's Online Math Notes
A. Dieckmann, Table of Integrals (Elliptic Functions, Square Roots, Inverse Tangents and More Exotic Functions): Indefinite Integrals Definite Integrals
Math Major: A Table of Integrals

Derived integrals of exponential and logarithmic functions
Rule-based Mathematics Precisely defined indefinite integration rules covering a wide class of integrands


Derivations

V. H. Moll, The Integrals in Gradshteyn and Ryzhik

Online service

Integration examples for Wolfram Alpha

Open source programs

wxmaxima gui for Symbolic and numeric resolution of many mathematical problems

"
* Integrals Integrals



"Reader Survey: log|x| + C", Tom Leinster, ''The n-category Café'', March 19, 2012↩




