


Channel capacity




Channel capacity

In electrical engineering, computer science and information theory, channel capacity is the tight upper bound on the rate at which information can be reliably transmitted over a communications channel. By the noisy-channel coding theorem, the channel capacity of a given channel is the limiting information rate (in units of information per unit time) that can be achieved with arbitrarily small error probability.12
Information theory, developed by Claude E. Shannon during World War II, defines the notion of channel capacity and provides a mathematical model by which one can compute it. The key result states that the capacity of the channel, as defined above, is given by the maximum of the mutual information between the input and output of the channel, where the maximization is with respect to the input distribution.3
Formal definition
(Figure)
Comm Channel.svg

Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the random variables representing the input and output of the channel, respectively. Let 
 
 
 
  be the conditional distribution function of 
 
 
 
  given 
 
 
 
 , which is an inherent fixed property of the communications channel. Then the choice of the marginal distribution

 
  completely determines the joint distribution

 
  due to the identity



which, in turn, induces a mutual information

 
 . The channel capacity is defined as



where the supremum is taken over all possible choices of 
 
 
 
 .
Shannon capacity of a graph
If G is an undirected graph, it can be used to define a communications channel in which the symbols are the graph vertices, and two codewords may be confused with each other if their symbols in each position are equal or adjacent. The computational complexity of finding the Shannon capacity of such a channel remains open, but it can be upper bounded by another important graph invariant, the Lovász number.4
Noisy-channel coding theorem
The noisy-channel coding theorem states that for any ε > 0 and for any transmission rate R less than the channel capacity C, there is an encoding and decoding scheme transmitting data at rate R whose error probability is less than ε, for a sufficiently large block length. Also, for any rate greater than the channel capacity, the probability of error at the receiver goes to one as the block length goes to infinity.
Example application
An application of the channel capacity concept to an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with B Hz bandwidth and signal-to-noise ratio S/N is the Shannon–Hartley theorem:



C is measured in bits per second if the logarithm is taken in base 2, or nats per second if the natural logarithm is used, assuming B is in hertz; the signal and noise powers S and N are measured in watts or volts2, so the signal-to-noise ratio here is expressed as a power ratio, not in decibels (dB); since figures are often cited in dB, a conversion may be needed. For example, 30 dB is a power ratio of 
 
 
 
 . '''
Channel capacity in wireless communications
This section5 focuses on the single-antenna, point-to-point scenario. For channel capacity in systems with multiple antennas, see the article on MIMO.
AWGN channel
If the average received power is 
 
 
 
  [W] and the noise power spectral density is 
 
 
 
  [W/Hz], the AWGN channel capacity is


 
  [bits/s],
where 
 
 
 
  is the received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). This result is known as the Shannon–Hartley theorem.6
When the SNR is large (SNR >> 0 dB), the capacity 
 
 
 
  is logarithmic in power and approximately linear in bandwidth. This is called the bandwidth-limited regime.
When the SNR is small (SNR C\approx \frac{\bar{P}}{N_0} \log_2 e is linear in power but insensitive to bandwidth. This is called the power-limited regime.
The bandwidth-limited regime and power-limited regime are illustrated in the figure.
(Figure)
AWGN channel capacity with the power-limited regime and bandwidth-limited regime indicated. Here, 
 
 
 
 .

Frequency-selective channel
The capacity of the frequency-selective channel is given by so-called water filling power allocation,



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the gain of subchannel 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  chosen to meet the power constraint.
Slow-fading channel
In a slow-fading channel, where the coherence time is greater than the latency requirement, there is no definite capacity as the maximum rate of reliable communications supported by the channel, 
 
 
 
 , depends on the random channel gain 
 
 
 
 , which is unknown to the transmitter. If the transmitter encodes data at rate 
 
 
 
  [bits/s/Hz], there is a non-zero probability that the decoding error probability cannot be made arbitrarily small,


 
  such that the outage probability 
 
 
 
  is less than 
 
 
 
 . This value is known as the 
 
 
 
 -outage capacity.
Fast-fading channel
In a fast-fading channel, where the latency requirement is greater than the coherence time and the codeword length spans many coherence periods, one can average over many independent channel fades by coding over a large number of coherence time intervals. Thus, it is possible to achieve a reliable rate of communication of $\mathbb{E}(\log_2 (1+|h|^2 SNR))$ [bits/s/Hz] and it is meaningful to speak of this value as the capacity of the fast-fading channel.
See also

Bandwidth (computing)
Bandwidth (signal processing)
Bit rate
Code rate
Error exponent
Nyquist rate
Negentropy
Redundancy
Sender, Encoder, Decoder, Receiver
Shannon–Hartley theorem
Spectral efficiency
Throughput

Advanced Communication Topics

MIMO
Cooperative diversity

External links


AWGN Channel Capacity with various constraints on the channel input (interactive demonstration)

References
"
Category:Information theory Category:Telecommunication theory Category:Television terminology






.






