


Four-force




Four-force

In the special theory of relativity four-force is a four-vector that replaces the classical force.
In Special Relativity
The four-force is the four-vector defined as the change in four-momentum over the particle's own time:


 
 .
For a particle of constant invariant mass m > 0, 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the four-velocity, so we can relate the four-force with the four-acceleration

 
 
 as in Newton's second law:


 
 .
Here



and


 
 .
where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are 3-vectors describing the velocity and the momentum of the particle and the force acting on it respectively.
In General Relativity
In general relativity the relation between four-force, and four-acceleration remains the same, but the elements of the four-force are related to the elements of the four-momentum through a covariant derivative with respect to proper time.



In addition, we can formulate force using the concept of coordinate transformations between different coordinate systems. Assume that we know the correct expression for force in a coordinate system at which the particle is momentarily at rest. Then we can perform a transformation to another system to get the corresponding expression of force.1 In special relativity the transformation will be a Lorentz transformation between coordinate systems moving with a relative constant velocity whereas in general relativity it will be a general coordinate transformation.
Consider the four-force 
 
 
 
  acting on a particle of mass 
 
 
 
  which is momentarily at rest in a coordinate system. The relativistic force 
 
 
 
 
  in another coordinate system moving with constant velocity 
 
 
 
 , relative to the other one, is obtained using a Lorentz transformation:




where 
 
 
 
 .
In general relativity, the expression for force becomes



with covariant derivative

 
 . The equation of motion becomes



where 
 
 
 
  is the Christoffel symbol. If there is no external force, this becomes the equation for geodesics in the curved space-time. The second term in the above equation, plays the role of a gravitational force. If 
 
 
 
  is the correct expression for force in a freely falling frame 
 
 
 
 
 , we can use the then the equivalence principle to write the four-force in an arbitrary coordinate 
 
 
 
 :



Examples
In special relativity, Lorentz 4-force (4-force acting to charged particle situated in electromagnetic field) can be expressed as:


 
 ,
where



 
  is electromagnetic tensor,


 
 
  is 4-velocity, and


 
  - electric charge.

See also

four-vector
four-velocity
four-acceleration
four-momentum

References



"
Category:Minkowski spacetime Category:Theory of relativity Category:Force



↩




