


Bernoulli polynomials




Bernoulli polynomials

In mathematics, the Bernoulli polynomials occur in the study of many special functions and in particular the Riemann zeta function and the Hurwitz zeta function. This is in large part because they are an Appell sequence, i.e. a Sheffer sequence for the ordinary derivative operator. Unlike orthogonal polynomials, the Bernoulli polynomials are remarkable in that the number of crossings of the x-axis in the unit interval does not go up as the degree of the polynomials goes up. In the limit of large degree, the Bernoulli polynomials, appropriately scaled, approach the sine and cosine functions. 
Representations
The Bernoulli polynomials Bn admit a variety of different representations. Which among them should be taken to be the definition may depend on one's purposes.
Explicit formula



for n ≥ 0, where bk are the Bernoulli numbers.
Generating functions
The generating function for the Bernoulli polynomials is



The generating function for the Euler polynomials is



Representation by a differential operator
The Bernoulli polynomials are also given by



where D = d/dx is differentiation with respect to x and the fraction is expanded as a formal power series. It follows that


 
  cf. integrals below.
Representation by an integral operator
The Bernoulli polynomials are the unique polynomials determined by



The integral transform



on polynomials f, simply amounts to


 
 
  This can be used to produce the inversion formulae below.
Another explicit formula
An explicit formula for the Bernoulli polynomials is given by



Note the remarkable similarity to the globally convergent series expression for the Hurwitz zeta function. Indeed, one has



where ζ(s, q) is the Hurwitz zeta; thus, in a certain sense, the Hurwitz zeta generalizes the Bernoulli polynomials to non-integer values of n.
The inner sum may be understood to be the nth forward difference of xm; that is,



where Δ is the forward difference operator. Thus, one may write



This formula may be derived from an identity appearing above as follows. Since the forward difference operator Δ equals


 
  where D is differentiation with respect to x, we have, from the Mercator series



As long as this operates on an mth-degree polynomial such as xm, one may let n go from 0 only up to m.
An integral representation for the Bernoulli polynomials is given by the Nörlund–Rice integral, which follows from the expression as a finite difference.
An explicit formula for the Euler polynomials is given by



This may also be written in terms of the Euler numbers Ek as



Sums of pth powers
We have



(assuming 00=1). See Faulhaber's formula for more on this.
The Bernoulli and Euler numbers
The Bernoulli numbers are given by 
 
 

This definition gives 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
An alternate convention defines the Bernoulli numbers as 
 
 

The two conventions differ only for 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
 .
The Euler numbers are given by 
 
 

Explicit expressions for low degrees
The first few Bernoulli polynomials are:





















The first few Euler polynomials are





















Maximum and minimum
At higher n, the amount of variation in Bn(x) between x = 0 and x = 1 gets large. For instance,



which shows that the value at x = 0 (and at x = 1) is −3617/510 ≈ −7.09, while at x = 1/2, the value is 118518239/3342336 ≈ +7.09. D.H. Lehmer1 showed that the maximum value of Bn(x) between 0 and 1 obeys



unless n is 2 modulo 4, in which case



(where 
 
 
 
  is the Riemann zeta function), while the minimum obeys



unless n is 0 modulo 4, in which case



These limits are quite close to the actual maximum and minimum, and Lehmer gives more accurate limits as well.
Differences and derivatives
The Bernoulli and Euler polynomials obey many relations from umbral calculus:






(Δ is the forward difference operator).
These polynomial sequences are Appell sequences:






Translations






These identities are also equivalent to saying that these polynomial sequences are Appell sequences. (Hermite polynomials are another example.)
Symmetries















Zhi-Wei Sun and Hao Pan 2 established the following surprising symmetry relation: If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then



where



Fourier series
The Fourier series of the Bernoulli polynomials is also a Dirichlet series, given by the expansion


 
  Note the simple large n limit to suitably scaled trigonometric functions.
This is a special case of the analogous form for the Hurwitz zeta function



This expansion is valid only for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 when n ≥ 2 and is valid for 0 C_\nu(x) = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac {\cos((2k+1)\pi x)} {(2k+1)^\nu}
and



for 
 
 
 
 , the Euler polynomial has the Fourier series



and



Note that the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are odd and even, respectively:



and



They are related to the Legendre chi function

 
  as



and



Inversion
The Bernoulli and Euler polynomials may be inverted to express the monomial in terms of the polynomials.
Specifically, evidently from the above section on #Representation by an integral operator, it follows that



and



Relation to falling factorial
The Bernoulli polynomials may be expanded in terms of the falling factorial

 
  as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and



denotes the Stirling number of the second kind. The above may be inverted to express the falling factorial in terms of the Bernoulli polynomials:



where



denotes the Stirling number of the first kind.
Multiplication theorems
The multiplication theorems were given by Joseph Ludwig Raabe in 1851:
For a natural number 
 
 
 
 ,









Integrals
Indefinite integrals






Definite integrals






Periodic Bernoulli polynomials
A periodic Bernoulli polynomial  is a Bernoulli polynomial evaluated at the fractional part of the argument 
 
 
 
 . These functions are used to provide the remainder term in the Euler–Maclaurin formula relating sums to integrals. The first polynomial is a sawtooth function.
Strictly these functions are not polynomials at all and more properly should be termed the periodic Bernoulli functions.
The following properties are of interest, valid for all 
 
 
 
 :



See also

Bernoulli numbers
Stirling polynomial

References



Milton Abramowitz and Irene A. Stegun, eds. Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, (1972) Dover, New York. (See Chapter 23)



(See chapter 12.11)







(Reviews relationship to the Hurwitz zeta function and Lerch transcendent.)




"
Category:Special functions Category:Number theory Category:Polynomials



D.H. Lehmer, "On the Maxima and Minima of Bernoulli Polynomials", American Mathematical Monthly, volume 47, pages 533–538 (1940)





