


Generalized Fourier series




Generalized Fourier series

In mathematical analysis, many generalizations of Fourier series have proved to be useful. They are all special cases of decompositions over an orthonormal basis of an inner product space. Here we consider that of square-integrable functions defined on an interval of the real line, which is important, among others, for interpolation theory.
Definition
Consider a set of square-integrable functions with values in 
 
 
 
 ,



which are pairwise orthogonal for the inner product



where w(x) is a weight function, and 
 
 
 
  represents complex conjugation, i.e. 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
The generalized Fourier series of a square-integrable function f: [a, b] → 
 
 
 
 , with respect to Φ, is then



where the coefficients are given by



If Φ is a complete set, i.e., an orthonormal basis of the space of all square-integrable functions on [a, b], as opposed to a smaller orthonormal set, the relation 
 
 
 
  becomes equality in the L² sense, more precisely modulo |·|w (not necessarily pointwise, nor almost everywhere).
Example (Fourier–Legendre series)
The Legendre polynomials are solutions to the Sturm–Liouville problem



and because of Sturm-Liouville theory, these polynomials are eigenfunctions of the problem and are solutions orthogonal with respect to the inner product above with unit weight. So we can form a generalized Fourier series (known as a Fourier–Legendre series) involving the Legendre polynomials, and






As an example, let us calculate the Fourier–Legendre series for ƒ(x) = cos x over [−1, 1]. Now,



and a series involving these terms






which differs from cos x by approximately 0.003, about 0. It may be advantageous to use such Fourier–Legendre series since the eigenfunctions are all polynomials and hence the integrals and thus the coefficients are easier to calculate.
Coefficient theorems
Some theorems on the coefficients cn include:
Bessel's inequality



Parseval's theorem
If Φ is a complete set,



See also

Orthogonality
Orthogonal function
Eigenfunctions
Vector space
Function space
Topological vector space
Hilbert space
Banach space

"
Category:Fourier analysis


