


Weight function




Weight function
A '''weight function''' is a mathematical device used when performing a sum, integral, or average to
 give some elements more "weight" or influence on the result than other elements in the same set. The result of this application of a weight function is a weighted sum or weighted average. Weight functions occur frequently in statistics and analysis, and are closely related to the concept of a measure.  Weight functions can be employed in both discrete and continuous settings. They can be used to construct systems of calculus called "weighted calculus"1 and "meta-calculus".2
Discrete weights
General definition
In the discrete setting, a weight function 
 
 
 
  is a positive function defined on a discrete set 

, which is typically finite or countable. The weight function 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the unweighted situation in which all elements have equal weight. One can then apply this weight to various concepts.
If the function 
 
 
 
 
  is a real-valued function, then the unweighted sum of 
 
 
 
  on 

 is defined as



but given a weight function

 
 , the weighted sum or conical combination is defined as



One common application of weighted sums arises in numerical integration.
If B is a finite subset of A, one can replace the unweighted cardinality |B| of B by the weighted cardinality



If A is a finite non-empty set, one can replace the unweighted mean or average



by the weighted mean or weighted average



In this case only the relative weights are relevant.
Statistics
Weighted means are commonly used in statistics to compensate for the presence of bias. For a quantity 
 
 
 
  measured multiple independent times 
 
 
 
 
  with variance

 
 , the best estimate of the signal is obtained by averaging all the measurements with weight 
 
 
 
 , and the resulting variance is smaller than each of the independent measurements 
 
 
 
 . The maximum likelihood method weights the difference between fit and data using the same weights 
 
 
 
 .
The expected value of a random variable is the weighted average of the possible values it might take on, with the weights being the respective probabilities. More generally, the expected value of a function of a random variable is the probability-weighted average of the values the function takes on for each possible value of the random variable.
In regressions in which the dependent variable is assumed to be affected by both current and lagged (past) values of the independent variable, a distributed lag function is estimated, this function being a weighted average of the current and various lagged independent variable values. Similarly, a moving average model specifies an evolving variable as a weighted average of current and various lagged values of a random variable.
Mechanics
The terminology weight function arises from mechanics: if one has a collection of 

 objects on a lever, with weights 
 
 
 
  (where weight is now interpreted in the physical sense) and locations 
 
 
 
 , then the lever will be in balance if the fulcrum of the lever is at the center of mass



which is also the weighted average of the positions 
 
 
 
 .
Continuous weights
In the continuous setting, a weight is a positive measure such as 

 on some domain 

,which is typically a subset of a Euclidean space

 
 , for instance 

 could be an interval

 
 . Here 

 is Lebesgue measure and 
 
 
 
  is a non-negative measurable function. In this context, the weight function 

 is sometimes referred to as a density.
General definition
If 
 
 
 
  is a real-valued function, then the unweighted integral



can be generalized to the weighted integral



Note that one may need to require 

 to be absolutely integrable with respect to the weight 

 in order for this integral to be finite.
Weighted volume
If E is a subset of 
 
 
 
 , then the volume vol(E) of E can be generalized to the weighted volume



Weighted average
If 
 
 
 
 
  has finite non-zero weighted volume, then we can replace the unweighted average



by the weighted average



Inner product
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two functions, one can generalize the unweighted inner product



to a weighted inner product



See the entry on Orthogonality for more details.
See also

Center of mass
Numerical integration
Orthogonality
Weighted mean
Kernel (statistics)
Measure (mathematics)

References
"
Category:Mathematical analysis Category:Measure theory Category:Combinatorial optimization Category:Functional analysis Category:Types of functions



Jane Grossman, Michael Grossman, Robert Katz. [http://books.google.com/books?as_brr=0&q;;=%22The+First+Systems+of+Weighted+Differential+and+Integral+Calculus%E2%80%8E%22&btnG;=Search+Books,The First Systems of Weighted Differential and Integral Calculus], ISBN 0-9771170-1-4, 1980.↩
Jane Grossman.[http://books.google.com/books?q=%22Non-Newtonian+Calculus%22&btnG;;=Search+Books&as;_brr=0, Meta-Calculus: Differential and Integral], ISBN 0-9771170-2-2, 1981.↩




