


Abel's theorem




Abel's theorem

In mathematics, Abel's theorem for power series relates a limit of a power series to the sum of its coefficients. It is named after Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel.
Theorem
Let a = {ak: k ≥ 0} be any sequence of real or complex numbers and let



be the power series with coefficients a. Suppose that the series 
 
 
 
  converges. Then



where the variable z is supposed to be real, or, more generally, to lie within any Stolz angle, that is, a region of the open unit disk where



for some M. Without this restriction, the limit may fail to exist: for example, the power series


 
  converges to 0 at z=1, but is unbounded near any point of the form eπi/3n, so the value at z=1 is not the limit as z tends to 1 in the whole open disk.
Note that 
 
 
 
  is continuous on the real closed interval [0, t] for t G_a(z) is continuous on [0, 1].
Remarks
As an immediate consequence of this theorem, if z is any nonzero complex number for which the series 
 
 
 
  converges, then it follows that



in which the limit is taken from below.
The theorem can also be generalized to account for infinite sums. If



then the limit from below 
 
 
 
  will tend to infinity as well. However, if the series is only known to be divergent, the theorem fails; take for example, the power series for 
 
 
 
 . The series is equal to 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 , but 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
The utility of Abel's theorem is that it allows us to find the limit of a power series as its argument (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) approaches 1 from below, even in cases where the radius of convergence, 
 
 
 
 , of the power series is equal to 1 and we cannot be sure whether the limit should be finite or not. See e.g. the binomial series. Abel's theorem allows us to evaluate many series in closed form. For example, when 
 
 
 
 , we obtain 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , by integrating the uniformly convergent geometric power series term by term on 
 
 
 
 ; thus the series 
 
 
 
  converges to 
 
 
 
  by Abel's theorem. Similarly, 
 
 
 
  converges to 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is called the generating function of the sequence 
 
 
 
 . Abel's theorem is frequently useful in dealing with generating functions of real-valued and non-negative sequences, such as probability-generating functions. In particular, it is useful in the theory of Galton–Watson processes.
Outline of proof
After subtracting a constant from 
 
 
 
 , we may assume that 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 . Then substituting 
 
 
 
  and performing a simple manipulation of the series results in



Given 
 
 
 
 , pick n large enough so that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and note that



when z lies within the given Stolz angle. Whenever z is sufficiently close to 1 we have



so that 
 
 
 
  when z is both sufficiently close to 1 and within the Stolz angle.
Related concepts
Converses to a theorem like Abel's are called Tauberian theorems: There is no exact converse, but results conditional on some hypothesis. The field of divergent series, and their summation methods, contains many theorems of abelian type and of tauberian type.
See also

Summation by parts
Abel's summation formula
Nachbin resummation

Further reading


- Ahlfors called it Abel's limit theorem.

External links


(a more general look at Abelian theorems of this type)



"
Category:Theorems in real analysis Category:Theorems in complex analysis Category:Mathematical series Category:Niels Henrik Abel Category:Summability methods


