


Markov's inequality




Markov's inequality

 In probability theory, Markov's inequality gives an upper bound for the probability that a non-negative function of a random variable is greater than or equal to some positive constant. It is named after the Russian mathematician Andrey Markov, although it appeared earlier in the work of Pafnuty Chebyshev (Markov's teacher), and many sources, especially in analysis, refer to it as Chebyshev's inequality (sometimes, calling it the first Chebyshev inequality, while referring to the Chebyshev's inequality as the second Chebyshev's inequality) or Bienaymé's inequality.
Markov's inequality (and other similar inequalities) relate probabilities to expectations, and provide (frequently loose but still useful) bounds for the cumulative distribution function of a random variable.
An example of an application of Markov's inequality is the fact that (assuming incomes are non-negative) no more than 1/5 of the population can have more than 5 times the average income.
Statement
If 
 
 
 
  is any nonnegative integrable random variable and 
 
 
 
 , then



In the language of measure theory, Markov's inequality states that if 
 
 
 
  is a measure space, 
 
 
 
  is a measurable extended real-valued function, and 
 
 
 
 , then



(This measure theoretic definition may sometimes be referred to as Chebyshev's inequality .1)
Extended version for monotonically increasing functions
If 
 
 
 
  is a monotonically increasing function from the nonnegative reals to the nonnegative reals, 
 
 
 
  is a random variable, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , then



Proofs
We separate the case in which the measure space is a probability space from the more general case because the probability case is more accessible for the general reader.
Proof In the language of probability theory
For any event E, let IE be the indicator random variable of E, that is, IE = 1 if E occurs and IE = 0 otherwise.
Using this notation, we have I(X ≥ a) = 1 if the event X ≥ a occurs, and I(X ≥ a) = 0 if X  0,



which is clear if we consider the two possible values of I(X ≥ a). If X (X ≥ a) = 0, and so aI(X ≥ a) = 0 ≤ X. Otherwise, we have X ≥ a, for which I(X ≥ a) = 1 and so aI(X ≥ a) = a ≤ X.
Since 
 
 
 
  is a monotonically increasing function, taking expectation of both sides of an inequality cannot reverse it. Therefore



Now, using linearity of expectations, the left side of this inequality is the same as



Thus we have



and since a > 0, we can divide both sides by a.
In the language of measure theory
We may assume that the function 
 
 
 
  is non-negative, since only its absolute value enters in the equation. Now, consider the real-valued function s on X given by



Then 
 
 
 
 . By the definition of the Lebesgue integral



and since 
 
 
 
 , both sides can be divided by 
 
 
 
 , obtaining



Q.E.D.
Corollaries
Chebyshev's inequality
Chebyshev's inequality uses the variance to bound the probability that a random variable deviates far from the mean. Specifically:



for any a>0. Here Var(X) is the variance of X, defined as:



Chebyshev's inequality follows from Markov's inequality by considering the random variable



and the constant



for which Markov's inequality reads



This argument can be summarized (where "MI" indicates use of Markov's inequality):



Other corollaries

The "monotonic" result can be demonstrated by:
 
 






The result that, for a nonnegative random variable 
 
 
 
 , the quantile function of 
 
 
 
  satisfies:
 
 



the proof using
 






Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a self-adjoint matrix-valued random variable and 
 
 
 
 . Then
 
 :

\mathbb{P}(M \npreceq a \cdot I) \leq \frac{\mathrm{tr}\left( E(M) \right)}{n a}. 
#:can be shown in a similar manner.
See also

McDiarmid's inequality
Bernstein inequalities (probability theory)
Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality
Chernoff bound
Concentration inequality

References
External links

The formal proof of Markov's inequality in the Mizar system.

"
Category:Probabilistic inequalities Category:Articles containing proofs



E.M. Stein, R. Shakarchi, "Real Analysis, Measure Theory, Integration, & Hilbert Spaces", vol. 3, 1st ed., 2005, p.91↩




