


Probability-generating function




Probability-generating function

In probability theory, the probability generating function of a discrete random variable is a power series representation (the generating function) of the probability mass function of the random variable. Probability generating functions are often employed for their succinct description of the sequence of probabilities Pr(X = i) in the probability mass function for a random variable X, and to make available the well-developed theory of power series with non-negative coefficients.
Definition
Univariate case
If X is a discrete random variable taking values in the non-negative integers {0,1, ...}, then the probability generating function of X is defined as 1


 
  where p is the probability mass function of X. Note that the subscripted notations GX and pX are often used to emphasize that these pertain to a particular random variable X, and to its distribution. The power series converges absolutely at least for all complex numbers z with |z| ≤ 1; in many examples the radius of convergence is larger.
Multivariate case
If  (X1,...,Xd )}} is a discrete random variable taking values in the d-dimensional non-negative integer lattice {0,1, ...}d, then the probability generating function of X is defined as


 
  where p is the probability mass function of X. The power series converges absolutely at least for all complex vectors  (z1,...,zd ) ∈ ℂd}} with .
Properties
Power series
Probability generating functions obey all the rules of power series with non-negative coefficients. In particular, G(1−) = 1, where G(1−) = limz→1G(z) from below, since the probabilities must sum to one. So the radius of convergence of any probability generating function must be at least 1, by Abel's theorem for power series with non-negative coefficients.
Probabilities and expectations
The following properties allow the derivation of various basic quantities related to X:
1. The probability mass function of X is recovered by taking derivatives of G



2. It follows from Property 1 that if random variables X and Y have probability generating functions that are equal, GX = GY, then pX = pY. That is, if X and Y have identical probability generating functions, then they have identical distributions.
3. The normalization of the probability density function can be expressed in terms of the generating function by



The expectation of X is given by



More generally, the kth factorial moment, 
 
 
 
  of X is given by



So the variance of X is given by



4. 
 
 
 
 
  where X is a random variable, 
 
 
 
  is the probability generating function (of X) and 
 
 
 
  is the moment-generating function (of X) .
Functions of independent random variables
Probability generating functions are particularly useful for dealing with functions of independent random variables. For example:

If X1, X2, ..., Xn is a sequence of independent (and not necessarily identically distributed) random variables, and










where the ai are constants, then the probability generating function is given by
 










For example, if
 










then the probability generating function, GSn(z), is given by
 










It also follows that the probability generating function of the difference of two independent random variables S = X1 − X2 is
 










Suppose that N is also an independent, discrete random variable taking values on the non-negative integers, with probability generating function GN. If the X1, X2, ..., XN are independent and identically distributed with common probability generating function GX, then










This can be seen, using the law of total expectation, as follows:
 










This last fact is useful in the study of Galton–Watson processes.
 


Suppose again that N is also an independent, discrete random variable taking values on the non-negative integers, with probability generating function GN and probability density 
 
 
 
 
 . If the X1, X2, ..., XN are independent, but not identically distributed random variables, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the probability generating function of 
 
 
 
 , then










For identically distributed Xi this simplifies to the identity stated before. The general case is sometimes useful to obtain a decomposition of SN by means of generating functions.
 

Examples

The probability generating function of a constant random variable, i.e. one with Pr(X = c) = 1, is










The probability generating function of a binomial random variable, the number of successes in n trials, with probability p of success in each trial, is










Note that this is the n-fold product of the probability generating function of a Bernoulli random variable with parameter p.
 


The probability generating function of a negative binomial random variable on {0,1,2 ...}, the number of failures until the rth success with probability of success in each trial p, is










(Convergence for 
 
 
 
 ).
 


Note that this is the r-fold product of the probability generating function of a geometric random variable with parameter 1−p on {0,1,2 ...}.
 


The probability generating function of a Poisson random variable with rate parameter λ is









Related concepts
The probability generating function is an example of a generating function of a sequence: see also formal power series. It is equivalent to, and sometimes called, the z-transform of the probability mass function.
Other generating functions of random variables include the moment-generating function, the characteristic function and the cumulant generating function.
Notes
References

Johnson, N.L.; Kotz, S.; Kemp, A.W. (1993) Univariate Discrete distributions (2nd edition). Wiley. ISBN 0-471-54897-9 (Section 1.B9)

"
Category:Theory of probability distributions Category:Generating functions



http://www.am.qub.ac.uk/users/g.gribakin/sor/Chap3.pdf↩




