


Summation by parts




Summation by parts

In mathematics, summation by parts transforms the summation of products of sequences into other summations, often simplifying the computation or (especially) estimation of certain types of sums. The summation by parts formula is sometimes called Abel's lemma or Abel transformation.
Statement
Suppose 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two sequences. Then,



Using the forward difference operator

 
 , it can be stated more succinctly as



Note that summation by parts is an analogue to the integration by parts formula,



Note also that although applications almost always deal with convergence of sequences, the statement is purely algebraic and will work in any field. It will also work when one sequence is in a vector space, and the other is in the relevant field of scalars.
Newton series
The formula is sometimes given in one of these - slightly different - forms



which represent a special case (
 
 
 
 ) of the more general rule



both result from iterated application of the initial formula. The auxiliary quantities are Newton series:


 
  and






A remarkable, particular (
 
 
 
 ) result is the noteworthy identity



Here, 
 
 
 
 
  is the binomial coefficient.
Method
For two given sequences 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , one wants to study the sum of the following series:


If we define 
 
 
 
 
   then for every 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   and






Finally  
 
 

This process, called an Abel transformation, can be used to prove several criteria of convergence for 
 
 
 
  .
Similarity with an integration by parts
The formula for an integration by parts is 
 
 

 Beside the boundary conditions, we notice that the first integral contains two multiplied functions, one which is integrated in the final integral ( 
 
 
 
  becomes 
 
 
 
  ) and one which is differentiated ( 
 
 
 
 
  becomes 
 
 
 
  ).
The process of the Abel transformation is similar, since one of the two initial sequences is summed ( 
 
 
 
  becomes 
 
 
 
  ) and the other one is differenced ( 
 
 
 
  becomes 
 
 
 
 
  ).
Applications

It is used to prove Kronecker's lemma, which in turn, is used to prove a version of the strong law of large numbers under variance constraints.


Summation by parts is frequently used to prove Abel's theorem.


If 
 
 
 
  is a convergent series, and 
 
 
 
  a bounded monotone sequence, then 
 
 
 
  remains a convergent series.

The Cauchy criterion gives


 
 
  where a is the limit of 
 
 
 
 
 . As 
 
 
 
  is convergent, 
 
 
 
  is bounded independently of 
 
 
 
 , say by 
 
 
 
 . As 
 
 
 
 
  go to zero, so go the first two terms. The third term goes to zero by the Cauchy criterion for 
 
 
 
 . The remaining sum is bounded by



by the monotonicity of 
 
 
 
 , and also goes to zero as 
 
 
 
 .

Using the same proof as above, one shows that


if the partial sums 
 
 
 
 
  form a bounded sequence independently of 
 
 
 
  ;
if 
 
 
 
  (so that the sum 
 
 
 
  goes to zero as 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity) ; and
if 
 
 


then 
 
 
 
  is a convergent series.
In both cases, the sum of the series satisfies: 
 
 

See also

Convergent series
Divergent series
Integration by parts
Cesàro summation
Abel's theorem
Abel sum formula

References



"
Category:Summability methods Category:Real analysis Category:Lemmas


