


Woodin cardinal




Woodin cardinal

In set theory, a Woodin cardinal (named for W. Hugh Woodin) is a cardinal number λ such that for all functions

f : λ → λ
 

there exists a cardinal κ j(f)(κ) ⊆ M.
An equivalent definition is this: λ is Woodin if and only if λ is strongly inaccessible and for all 
 
 
 
  there exists a 
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
 -strong.


 
  being 
A Woodin cardinal is preceded by a stationary set of measurable cardinals, and thus it is a Mahlo cardinal. However, the first Woodin cardinal is not even weakly compact.
Consequences
Woodin cardinals are important in descriptive set theory. By a result1 of Martin and Steel, existence of infinitely many Woodin cardinals implies projective determinacy, which in turn implies that every projective set is measurable, has the Baire property (differs from an open set by a meager set, that is, a set which is a countable union of nowhere dense sets), and the perfect set property (is either countable or contains a perfect subset).
The consistency of the existence of Woodin cardinals can be proved using determinacy hypotheses. Working in ZF+AD+DC one can prove that 
 
 
 
  is Woodin in the class of hereditarily ordinal-definable sets. 
 
 
 
  is the first ordinal onto which the continuum cannot be mapped by an ordinal-definable surjection (see Θ (set theory)).
Shelah proved that if the existence of a Woodin cardinal is consistent then it is consistent that the nonstationary ideal on ω1 is 
 
 
 
 -saturated. Woodin also proved the equiconsistency of the existence of infinitely many Woodin cardinals and the existence of an 
 
 
 
 -dense ideal over 
 
 
 
 .
Hyper-Woodin cardinals
A cardinal κ is called hyper-Woodin if there exists a normal measure U on κ such that for every set S, the set

{λ < κ | λ is <κ-S-strong}
 

is in U.
λ is <κ-S-strong if and only if for each δ j(S) \cap H_\delta = S \cap H_\delta.
The name alludes to the classical result that a cardinal is Woodin if and only if for every set S, the set

{λ < κ | λ is <κ-S-strong}
 

is a stationary set
The measure U will contain the set of all Shelah cardinals below κ.
Weakly hyper-Woodin cardinals
A cardinal κ is called weakly hyper-Woodin if for every set S there exists a normal measure U on κ such that the set {λ = δ, and 
 
 

The name alludes to the classic result that a cardinal is Woodin if for every set S, the set {λ 
Further reading




For proofs of the two results listed in consequences see Handbook of Set Theory (Eds. Foreman, Kanamori, Magidor) (to appear). Drafts of some chapters are available.
Ernest Schimmerling, Woodin cardinals, Shelah cardinals and the Mitchell-Steel core model, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 130/11, pp. 3385–3391, 2002, online




"
Category:Large cardinals Category:Determinacy



A Proof of Projective Determinacy




