   Weakly compact cardinal      Weakly compact cardinal   In mathematics , a weakly compact cardinal is a certain kind of cardinal number introduced by ; weakly compact cardinals are large cardinals , meaning that their existence can not be proven from the standard axioms of set theory .  Formally, a cardinal κ is defined to be weakly compact if it is uncountable and for every function f : [κ] 2 → {0, 1} there is a set of cardinality κ that is homogeneous for f . In this context, [κ] 2 means the set of 2-element subsets of κ, and a subset S of κ is homogeneous for f  if and only if either all of [ S ] 2 maps to 0 or all of it maps to 1.  The name "weakly compact" refers to the fact that if a cardinal is weakly compact then a certain related infinitary language satisfies a version of the compactness theorem; see below.  Weakly compact cardinals are Mahlo cardinals , and the set of Mahlo cardinals less than a given weakly compact cardinal is stationary.  Some authors use a weaker definition of weakly compact cardinals, such as one of the conditions below with the condition of inaccessibility dropped.  Equivalent formulations  The following are equivalent for any uncountable cardinal κ:   κ is weakly compact.  for every λ<κ, natural number n ≥ 2, and function f: [κ] n → λ, there is a set of cardinality κ that is homogeneous for f.  κ is inaccessible and has the tree property , that is, every tree of height κ has either a level of size κ or a branch of size κ.  Every linear order of cardinality κ has an ascending or a descending sequence of order type κ.  κ is    Π  1  1     subscript   superscript  normal-Π  1   1    \Pi^{1}_{1}   - indescribable .  κ has the extension property. In other words, for all U ⊂ V κ there exists a transitive set X with κ ∈ X , and a subset S ⊂ X , such that ( V κ , ∈, U ) is an elementary substructure of ( X , ∈, S ). Here, U and S are regarded as unary predicates .  For every set S of cardinality κ of subsets of κ, there is a non-trivial κ-complete filter that decides S.  κ is κ- unfoldable .  κ is inaccessible and the infinitary language  L κ,κ satisfies the weak compactness theorem.  κ is inaccessible and the infinitary language  L κ,ω satisfies the weak compactness theorem.   A language L κ,κ is said to satisfy the weak compactness theorem if whenever Σ is a set of sentences of cardinality at most κ and every subset with less than κ elements has a model, then Σ has a model. Strongly compact cardinals are defined in a similar way without the restriction on the cardinality of the set of sentences.  See also   list of large cardinal properties   References       "  Category:Large cardinals   