


Concave function




Concave function

In mathematics, a concave function is the negative of a convex function. A concave function is also synonymously called concave downwards, concave down, convex upwards, convex cap or upper convex.
Definition
A real-valued function f on an interval (or, more generally, a convex set in vector space) is said to be concave if, for any x and y in the interval and for any t in [0,1],



A function is called strictly concave if


 
  for any t in (0,1) and x ≠ y.
For a function f:R→R, this definition merely states that for every z between x and y, the point (z, f(z) ) on the graph of f is above the straight line joining the points (x, f(x) ) and (y, f(y) ).
(Figure)
ConcaveDef.png

A function f(x) is quasiconcave if the upper contour sets of the function 
 
 
 
  are convex sets.
Properties
A function f(x) is concave over a convex set if and only if the function −f(x) is a convex function over the set.
A differentiable function f is concave on an interval if its derivative function f ′ is monotonically decreasing on that interval: a concave function has a decreasing slope. ("Decreasing" here means non-increasing, rather than strictly decreasing, and thus allows zero slopes.)
For a twice-differentiable function f, if the second derivative, f ′′(x), is positive (or, if the acceleration is positive), then the graph is convex; if f ′′(x) is negative, then the graph is concave. Points where concavity changes are inflection points.
If a convex (i.e., concave upward) function has a "bottom", any point at the bottom is a minimal extremum. If a concave (i.e., concave downward) function has an "apex", any point at the apex is a maximal extremum.
If f(x) is twice-differentiable, then f(x) is concave if and only if f ′′(x) is non-positive. If its second derivative is negative then it is strictly concave, but the opposite is not true, as shown by f(x) = -x4.
If f is concave and differentiable, then it is bounded above by its first-order Taylor approximation:



A continuous function on C is concave if and only if for any x and y in C



If a function f is concave, and f(0) ≥ 0, then f is subadditive. Proof:

since f is concave, let y = 0, 
 
 



\ge \frac{a}{a+b} f(a+b) + \frac{b}{a+b} f(a+b) = f(a+b)
Examples

The functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are concave on their domains, as their second derivatives 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are always negative.
Any affine function

 
  is both (non-strictly) concave and convex.
The sine function is concave on the interval 
 
 
 
 .
The function 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the determinant of a nonnegative-definite matrix B, is concave.1
Practical example: rays bending in computation of radiowave attenuation in the atmosphere.

See also

Concave polygon
Convex function
Jensen's inequality
Logarithmically concave function
Quasiconcave function

Notes
References





"
Category:Types of functions Category:Convex analysis



↩




