


Inequality (mathematics)




Inequality (mathematics)


Not to be confused with Inequation. "Less than", "Greater than", and "More than" redirect here. For the use of the "" signs as punctuation, see Bracket. For the UK insurance brand "More Th>n", see RSA Insurance Group.


(Figure)
The feasible regions of linear programming are defined by a set of inequalities.

In mathematics, an inequality is a relation that holds between two values when they are different (see also: equality).

The notation a ≠ b means that a is not equal to b.

It does not say that one is greater than the other, or even that they can be compared in size.
If the values in question are elements of an ordered set, such as the integers or the real numbers, they can be compared in size.

The notation a < b means that a is less than b.
The notation a > b means that a is greater than b.

In either case, a is not equal to b. These relations are known as strict inequalities. The notation a ) and (in the case of applying a function) monotonic functions are limited to strictly monotonic functions.
Transitivity
The transitive property of inequality states:

For any real numbers a, b, c:
 
If a ≥ b and b ≥ c, then a ≥ c.
If a ≤ b and b ≤ c, then a ≤ c.

If either of the premises is a strict inequality, then the conclusion is a strict inequality.
 
E.g. if a ≥ b and b > c, then a > c

An equality is of course a special case of a non-strict inequality.
 
E.g. if a = b and b > c, then a > c


Converse
The relations ≤ and ≥ are each other's converse:

For any real numbers a and b:
 
If a ≤ b, then b ≥ a.
If a ≥ b, then b ≤ a.


Addition and subtraction
 The properties that deal with multiplication and division state:

For any real numbers, a, b and non-zero c:
 
If c is positive, then multiplying or dividing by c does not change the inequality:
 
If a ≥ b and c > 0, then ac ≥ bc and a/c ≥ b/c.
If a ≤ b and c > 0, then ac ≤ bc and a/c ≤ b/c.

If c is negative, then multiplying or dividing by c inverts the inequality:
 
If a ≥ b and c < 0, then ac ≤ bc and a/c ≤ b/c.
If a ≤ b and c < 0, then ac ≥ bc and a/c ≥ b/c.



More generally, this applies for an ordered field, see below.
Additive inverse
The properties for the additive inverse state:

For any real numbers a and b, negation inverts the inequality:
 
If a ≤ b, then −a ≥ −b.
If a ≥ b, then −a ≤ −b.


Multiplicative inverse
The properties for the multiplicative inverse state:

For any non-zero real numbers a and b that are both positive or both negative:
 
If a ≤ b, then 1/a ≥ 1/b.
If a ≥ b, then 1/a ≤ 1/b.



If one of a and b is positive and the other is negative, then:
 
If a < b, then 1/a < 1/b.
If a > b, then 1/a > 1/b.


These can also be written in chained notation as:

For any non-zero real numbers a and b:
 
If 0  0.
If a ≤ b  1/a ≥ 1/b.
If a < 0 < b, then 1/a < 0 < 1/b.
If 0 > a ≥ b, then 1/a ≤ 1/b < 0.
If a ≥ b > 0, then 0 < 1/a ≤ 1/b.
If a > 0 > b, then 1/a > 0 > 1/b.


Applying a function to both sides
 Any monotonically increasing function may be applied to both sides of an inequality (provided they are in the domain of that function) and it will still hold. Applying a monotonically decreasing function to both sides of an inequality means the opposite inequality now holds. The rules for the additive inverse, and the multiplicative inverse for positive numbers, are both examples of applying a monotonically decreasing function.
If the inequality is strict (a b) and the function is strictly monotonic, then the inequality remains strict. If only one of these conditions is strict, then the resultant inequality is non-strict. The rules for additive and multiplicative inverses are both examples of applying a strictly monotonically decreasing function.
As an example, consider the application of the natural logarithm to both sides of an inequality when a and b are positive real numbers:

a ≤ b ⇔ ln(a) ≤ ln(b).
 
a < b ⇔ ln(a) < ln(b).
 

This is true because the natural logarithm is a strictly increasing function.
Ordered fields
If (F, +, ×) is a field and ≤ is a total order on F, then (F, +, ×, ≤) is called an ordered field if and only if:

a ≤ b implies a + c ≤ b + c;
0 ≤ a and 0 ≤ b implies 0 ≤ a × b.

Note that both (Q, +, ×, ≤) and (R, +, ×, ≤) are ordered fields, but ≤ cannot be defined in order to make (C, +, ×, ≤) an ordered field, because −1 is the square of i and would therefore be positive.
The non-strict inequalities ≤ and ≥ on real numbers are total orders. The strict inequalities  on real numbers are strict total orders.
Chained notation
The notation a 1 ≤ a2 ≤ ... ≤ an means that ai ≤ ai+1 for i = 1, 2, ..., n − 1. By transitivity, this condition is equivalent to ai ≤ aj for any 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n.
When solving inequalities using chained notation, it is possible and sometimes necessary to evaluate the terms independently. For instance to solve the inequality 4x 1, a2, …, an we have  where








 
   

(harmonic mean),







(geometric mean),







(arithmetic mean),







(quadratic mean).





Power inequalities
A "power inequality" is an inequality containing ab terms, where a and b are real positive numbers or variable expressions. They often appear in mathematical olympiads exercises.
Examples

For any real x,










If x > 0, then










If x ≥ 1, then










If x, y, z > 0, then










For any real distinct numbers a and b,










If x, y > 0 and 0 < p < 1, then










If x, y, z > 0, then










If a, b > 0, then








This inequality was solved by I.Ilani in JSTOR,AMM,Vol.97,No.1,1990.
 


If a, b > 0, then








This inequality was solved by S.Manyama in AJMAA,Vol.7,Issue 2,No.1,2010 and by V.Cirtoaje in JNSA,Vol.4,Issue 2,130-137,2011.
 


If a, b, c > 0, then










If a, b > 0, then








This result was generalized by R. Ozols in 2002 who proved that if a1, ..., an > 0, then
 
 



(result is published in Latvian popular-scientific quarterly The Starry Sky, see references).
 

Well-known inequalities
Mathematicians often use inequalities to bound quantities for which exact formulas cannot be computed easily. Some inequalities are used so often that they have names: 

Azuma's inequality
Bernoulli's inequality
Boole's inequality
Cauchy–Schwarz inequality
Chebyshev's inequality
Chernoff's inequality
Cramér–Rao inequality
Hoeffding's inequality
Hölder's inequality
Inequality of arithmetic and geometric means
Jensen's inequality
Kolmogorov's inequality
Markov's inequality
Minkowski inequality
Nesbitt's inequality
Pedoe's inequality
Poincaré inequality
Samuelson's inequality
Triangle inequality

Complex numbers and inequalities
The set of complex numbers

 
  with its operations of addition and multiplication is a field, but it is impossible to define any relation ≤ so that 
 
 
 
  becomes an ordered field. To make 
 
 
 
  an ordered field, it would have to satisfy the following two properties:

if a ≤ b then a + c ≤ b + c
if 0 ≤ a and 0 ≤ b then 0 ≤ a b

Because ≤ is a total order, for any number a, either 0 ≤ a or a ≤ 0 (in which case the first property above implies that 0 ≤ 
 
 
 
 ). In either case 0 ≤ a2; this means that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ; so 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , which means 
 
 
 
 ; contradiction.
However, an operation ≤ can be defined so as to satisfy only the first property (namely, "if a ≤ b then a + c ≤ b + c"). Sometimes the lexicographical order definition is used:

a ≤ b if 
 
 
 
  Re(b) or (
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  ≤ 
 
 
 
 )

It can easily be proven that for this definition a ≤ b implies a + c ≤ b + c.
Vector inequalities
Inequality relationships similar to those defined above can also be defined for column vector. If we let the vectors 
 
 
 
  (meaning that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real numbers for 
 
 
 
 ), we can define the following relationships.



 
  if 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 



 
  if 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 



 
  if 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 



 
  if 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 


Similarly, we can define relationships for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . We note that this notation is consistent with that used by Matthias Ehrgott in Multicriteria Optimization (see References).
The property of Trichotomy (as stated above) is not valid for vector relationships. For example, when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , there exists no valid inequality relationship between these two vectors. Also, a multiplicative inverse would need to be defined on a vector before this property could be considered. However, for the rest of the aforementioned properties, a parallel property for vector inequalities exists.
General Existence Theorems
For a general system of polynomial inequalities, one can find a condition for a solution to exist. Firstly, any system of polynomial inequalities can be reduced to a system of quadratic inequalities by increasing the number of variables and equations (for example by setting a square of a variable equal to a new variable). A single quadratic polynomial inequality in n-1 variables can be written as:



where X is a vector of the variables 
 
 
 
  and A is a matrix. This has a solution, for example, when there is at least one positive element on the main diagonal of A.
Systems of inequalities can be written in terms of matrices A, B, C, etc. and the conditions for existence of solutions can be written as complicated expressions in terms of these matrices. The solution for two polynomial inequalities in two variables tells us whether two conic section regions overlap or are inside each other. The general solution is not known but such a solution could be theoretically used to solve such unsolved problems as the kissing number problem. However, the conditions would be so complicated as to require a great deal of computing time or clever algorithms.
See also

Binary relation
Bracket (mathematics), for the use of similar ‹ and › signs as brackets
Fourier-Motzkin elimination
Inclusion (set theory)
Inequation
Interval (mathematics)
List of inequalities
List of triangle inequalities
Partially ordered set
Relational operators, used in programming languages to denote inequality

Notes
References












External links


Graph of Inequalities by Ed Pegg, Jr., Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
AoPS Wiki entry about Inequalities

"
  Category:Elementary algebra


