


Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula




Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula

In mathematics, the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula is the solution to


 log(eX eY)}}




for possibly noncommutative

 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the Lie algebra of a Lie group. This formula tightly links Lie groups to Lie algebras by expressing the logarithm of the product of two Lie group elements as a Lie algebra element using only Lie algebraic operations. The solution on this form, whenever defined, means that multiplication in the group can be expressed entirely in Lie algebraic terms. The solution on another form is straightforward to obtain; one just substitutes the power series for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the equation and rearranges.1 The point is to express the solution in Lie algebraic terms. This occupied the time of several prominent mathematicians.
The formula is named after Henry Frederick Baker, John Edward Campbell, and Felix Hausdorff who discovered its qualitative form, i.e. that only commutators and commutators of commutators, ad infinitum, are needed to express the solution. This qualitative form is what is used in the most important applications, such as the relatively accessible proofs of the Lie correspondence and in quantum field theory. It was first noted in print by Campbell2 (1897); elaborated by Henri Poincaré3 (1899) and Baker (1902);4 and systematized geometrically, and linked to the Jacobi identity by Hausdorff (1906).5 The first actual explicit formula, with all numerical coefficients, is due to Eugene Dynkin (1947).6
The Campbell–Baker–Hausdorff formula: existence
The Campbell–Baker–Hausdorff formula implies that if X and Y are in some Lie algebra

 
  defined over any field of characteristic 0, then




 
 ,
 



can, possibly with conditions on 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 ,7 be written as a formal infinite sum of elements of 
 
 
 
 . For many applications, one does not need an explicit expression for this infinite sum, but merely assurance of its existence, like, for instance, in this8 construction of a Lie group representation from a Lie algebra representation. Existence can be seen as follows.
The ring


 R[[X,Y]]}}




of all non-commuting formal power series in non-commuting variables X and Y has a ring homomorphism Δ from S to the completion of




 
 ,
 



called the coproduct, such that








and likewise for Y. (The definition of the coproduct is extended recursively by the rule 
 
 
 
 ).
This has the following properties:

exp is an isomorphism (of sets) from the elements of S with constant term 0 to the elements with constant term 1, with inverse log


 
  is grouplike (this means 
 
 
 
 ) if and only if s is primitive (this means 
 
 
 
 ).
The grouplike elements form a group under multiplication.
The primitive elements are exactly the formal infinite sums of elements of the Lie algebra generated by X and Y. (Friedrichs' theorem 9)

The existence of the Campbell–Baker–Hausdorff formula can now be seen as follows:10 The elements X and Y are primitive, so exp(X) and exp(Y) are group like; so their product 
 
 
 
  is also group like; so its logarithm 
 
 
 
  is primitive; and hence can be written as an infinite sum of elements of the Lie algebra generated by X and Y.
The universal enveloping algebra of the free Lie algebra generated by X and Y is isomorphic to the algebra of all non-commuting polynomials in X and Y. In common with all universal enveloping algebras, it has a natural structure of a Hopf algebra, with a coproduct Δ. The ring S used above is just a completion of this Hopf algebra.
An alternative, remarkably direct and concise, recursive proof that all homogeneous polynomials in 
 
 
 
  are in the Lie algebra is due to Eichler.11
An explicit Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula
Specifically, let G be a Lie group with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . Let








be the exponential map. The following general combinatorial formula was introduced by Eugene Dynkin (1947),12 13



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are non-negative integers, and the following notation has been used:



This term is zero if 
 
 
 
  or if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .14
The first few terms are well-known, with all higher-order terms involving [X,Y] and commutator nestings thereof (thus in the Lie algebra):
The above lists all summands of order 5 or lower (i.e. those containing 5 or fewer X's and Y's). Note the X ↔ Y (anti-)/symmetry in alternating orders of the expansion, since 
 
 
 
 . A complete elementary proof of this formula can be found here.
Selected tractable cases
There is no expression in closed form for an arbitrary Lie algebra, though there are exceptional tractable cases, as well as efficient algorithms for working out the expansion in applications.
For example, if 
 
 
 
  vanishes, then the above formula reduces to 
 
 
 
 . If the commutator 
 
 
 
  is a scalar (central, cf. the nilpotent Heisenberg group), then all but the first three terms on the right-hand side of the above vanish. This is the degenerate case utilized routinely in quantum mechanics, as illustrated below.
Other forms of the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula, emphasizing expansion in terms of the element 
 
 
 
  (and utilizing the linear adjoint endomorphism notation, ), might serve well:


 
  as is evident from the integral formula below. (The coefficients of the nested commutators linear in 
 
 
 
  are normalized Bernoulli numbers, outlined below.)
Thus, when the commutator happens to be 
 
 
 
 , for some non-zero s, this formula reduces to just 
 
 
 
 , which then leads to braiding identities such as


 
  or adjoint dilation,



There are numerous such well-known expressions applied routinely in physics.1516 A popular integral formula is17


 
  involving the generating function for the Bernoulli numbers,


 
  utilized by Poincaré and Hausdorff.Recall


 
  , for the Bernoulli numbers, B0 = 1, B1 = 1/2, B2 = 1/6, B4 = −1/30, ...
Matrix Lie group illustration
For a matrix Lie group 
 
 
 
  the Lie algebra is the tangent space of the identity I, and the commutator is simply [X, Y] = XY − YX; the exponential map is the standard exponential map of matrices,



When one solves for Z in



using the series expansions for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  one obtains a simpler formula:


18 The first, second, third, and fourth order terms are:




















The Zassenhaus formula
A related combinatoric expansion that is useful in dual19 applications is


 
  where the exponents of higher order in t are likewise nested commutators, i.e., homogeneous Lie polynomials.20 These exponents,  in  Πn exp(tn Cn)}}, follow recursively by application of the above BCH expansion.
As a corollary of this, the Suzuki–Trotter decomposition follows directly.
An important lemma
Let 
 
 
 
  be a matrix Lie group and 
 
 
 
  its corresponding Lie algebra. Let  be the linear operator on 
 
 
 
  defined by  [X,Y] {{=}} XY − YX}} for some fixed 
 
 
 
 . (The adjoint endomorphism encountered above.) Denote with  for fixed 
 
 
 
  the linear transformation of 
 
 
 
  given by  AYA−1}}.
A standard combinatorial lemma which is utilized21 in producing the above explicit expansions is given by


 
  so, explicitly,



This formula can be proved by evaluation of the derivative with respect to 
 
 
 
  of , solution of the resulting differential equation and evaluation at s = 1,


 
  or


22

A direct application of this identity

For 
 
 
 
  central, i.e., commuting with both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  Consequently, for , it follows that


 
  whose solution is


 
  hence the degenerate form already covered above,



More generally, for non-central 
 
 
 
  , the following braiding identity further follows readily,



Application in quantum mechanics
A degenerate form of the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula is useful in Quantum mechanics and especially quantum optics, where X and Y are Hilbert space operators, generating the Heisenberg group.
A typical example is the annihilation and creation operators, 
 
 
 
  and . Their commutator  −I}} is central, that is, it commutes with both 
 
 
 
  and . As indicated above, the expansion then collapses to the semi-trivial degenerate form:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is just a complex number.
This example illustrates the resolution of the displacement operator, , into exponentials of annihilation and creation operators and scalars.23
This degenerate Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula then displays the product of two displacement operators as another displacement operator (up to a phase factor), with the resultant displacement equal to the sum of the two displacements,


 
  since the Heisenberg group they provide a representation of is nilpotent. The degenerate Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula is frequently used in quantum field theory as well.24
See also

Magnus expansion
Stone–von Neumann theorem
Logarithm of a matrix
Matrix exponential
Golden–Thompson inequality
Lie product formula (Trotter product formula)
Derivative of the exponential map

Notes
References


Bibliography


L. Corwin & F.P Greenleaf, Representation of nilpotent Lie groups and their applications, Part 1: Basic theory and examples, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1990, ISBN 0-521-36034-X.



J.-P. Serre, Lie algebras and Lie groups, Benjamin, 1965.
Wilfried Schmid (1982). "Poincaré and Lie groups", Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 6 175−186.
Shlomo Sternberg (2004) Lie Algebras, Orange Grove Books, ISBN 978-1616100520 free, online

External links

C.K. Zachos, Crib Notes on CBH expansions 
MathWorld page

"
Category:Lie groups Category:Mathematical physics Category:Combinatorics Category:Exponentials



 See equation (2) in section 1.3.
J. Campbell, Proc Lond Math Soc 28 (1897) 381–390; ibid 29 (1898) 14–32.
H. Poincaré, Compt Rend Acad Sci Paris 128 (1899) 1065–1069; Camb Philos Trans 18 (1899) 220–255.
H. Baker, Proc Lond Math Soc (1) 34 (1902) 347–360; ibid (1) 35 (1903) 333–374; ibid (Ser 2) 3 (1905) 24–47.
F. Hausdorff, "Die symbolische Exponentialformel in der Gruppentheorie", Ber Verh Saechs Akad Wiss Leipzig 58 (1906) 19–48.
 p. 23
For an explicit set of convergence criteria, see Matrix Lie group illustration below.
 Formulae 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 modified for physics convention are used.
N. Jacobson, Lie Algebras, John Wiley & Sons, 1966.

Eichler, M. (1968). "A new proof of the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula", J. Math. Soc. Japan 20, 23-25. online open access.


A.A. Sagle & R.E. Walde, "Introduction to Lie Groups and Lie Algebras", Academic Press, New York, 1973. ISBN 0-12-614550-4.


W. Miller, Symmetry Groups and their Applications, Academic Press, New York, 1972, pp 159–161. ISBN 0-12-497460-0
 Equation (2) Section 1.3. For matrix Lie algebras over the fields 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the convergence criterion is that the log series converges for both sides of  eXeY}}. This is guaranteed whenever $| | X | | + | | Y | |  in the Hilbert-Schmidt norm. Convergence may occur on a larger domain. See  p. 24.



 p. 15
L. Mandel, E. Wolf Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (Cambridge 1995).
 See pp 27-29 for a detailed proof of the above lemma.




