


Introduction to gauge theory




Introduction to gauge theory

A gauge theory is a type of theory in physics. Modern physical theories, such as the theory of electromagnetism, describe the nature of reality in terms of fields, e.g., the electromagnetic field, the gravitational field, and fields for the electron and all other elementary particles. A general feature of these field theories is that the fundamental fields cannot be directly measured; however, there are observable quantities that can be measured experimentally, such as charges, energies, and velocities. In field theories, different configurations of the unobservable fields can result in identical observable quantities. A transformation from one such field configuration to another is called a gauge transformation;12 the lack of change in the measurable quantities, despite the field being transformed, is a property called gauge invariance. Since any kind of invariance under a field transformation is considered a symmetry, gauge invariance is sometimes called gauge symmetry. Generally, any theory that has the property of gauge invariance is considered a gauge theory.
For example, in electromagnetism the electric and magnetic fields, E and B, are observable, while the potentials V ("voltage") and A (the vector potential) are not.3 Under a gauge transformation in which a constant is added to V, no observable change occurs in E or B.
With the advent of quantum mechanics in the 1920s, and with successive advances in quantum field theory, the importance of gauge transformations has steadily grown. Gauge theories constrain the laws of physics, because all the changes induced by a gauge transformation have to cancel each other out when written in terms of observable quantities. Over the course of the 20th century, physicists gradually realized that all forces (fundamental interactions) arise from the constraints imposed by local gauge symmetries, in which case the transformations vary from point to point in space and time. Perturbative quantum field theory (usually employed for scattering theory) describes forces in terms of force-mediating particles called gauge bosons. The nature of these particles is determined by the nature of the gauge transformations. The culmination of these efforts is the Standard Model, a quantum field theory explaining all of the fundamental interactions except gravity.
History and importance
The earliest field theory having a gauge symmetry was Maxwell's formulation of electrodynamics in 1864–65 ("A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field"). The importance of this symmetry remained unnoticed in the earliest formulations. Similarly unnoticed, Hilbert had derived Einstein's equations of general relativity by postulating a symmetry under any change of coordinates. Later Hermann Weyl, in an attempt to unify general relativity and electromagnetism, conjectured (incorrectly, as it turned out) that invariance under the change of scale or "gauge" (a term inspired by the various track gauges of railroads) might also be a local symmetry of general relativity. Although Weyl's choice of the gauge was incorrect, the name "gauge" stuck to the approach. After the development of quantum mechanics, Weyl, Fock and London modified their gauge choice by replacing the scale factor with a change of wave phase, and applying it successfully to electromagnetism. Gauge symmetry was generalized mathematically in 1954 by Chen Ning Yang and Robert Mills in an attempt to describe the strong nuclear forces. This idea, dubbed Yang–Mills theory, later found application in the quantum field theory of the weak force, and its unification with electromagnetism in the electroweak theory.
The importance of gauge theories for physics stems from their tremendous success in providing a unified framework to describe the quantum-mechanical behavior of electromagnetism, the weak force and the strong force. This gauge theory, known as the Standard Model, accurately describes experimental predictions regarding three of the four fundamental forces of nature.
In classical physics
Electromagnetism
Historically, the first example of gauge symmetry to be discovered was classical electromagnetism. A static electric field can be described in terms of an electric potential (voltage) that is defined at every point in space, and in practical work it is conventional to take the Earth as a physical reference that defines the zero level of the potential, or ground. But only differences in potential are physically measurable, which is the reason that a voltmeter must have two probes, and can only report the voltage difference between them. Thus one could choose to define all voltage differences relative to some other standard, rather than the Earth, resulting in the addition of a constant offset.4 If the potential 
 
 
 
  is a solution to Maxwell's equations then, after this gauge transformation, the new potential 
 
 
 
  is also a solution to Maxwell's equations and no experiment can distinguish between these two solutions. In other words the laws of physics governing electricity and magnetism (that is, Maxwell equations) are invariant under gauge transformation.5 That is, Maxwell's equations have a gauge symmetry.
Generalizing from static electricity to electromagnetism, we have a second potential, the magnetic vector potential A, which can also undergo gauge transformations. These transformations may be local. That is, rather than adding a constant onto V, one can add a function that takes on different values at different points in space and time. If A is also changed in certain corresponding ways, then the same E and B fields result. The detailed mathematical relationship between the fields E and B and the potentials V and A is given in the article Gauge fixing, along with the precise statement of the nature of the gauge transformation. The relevant point here is that the fields remain the same under the gauge transformation, and therefore Maxwell's equations are still satisfied.
Gauge symmetry is closely related to charge conservation. Suppose that there existed some process by which one could violate conservation of charge, at least temporarily, by creating a charge q at a certain point in space, 1, moving it to some other point 2, and then destroying it. We might imagine that this process was consistent with conservation of energy. We could posit a rule stating that creating the charge required an input of energy E1=qV1 and destroying it released E2=qV2, which would seem natural since qV measures the extra energy stored in the electric field because of the existence of a charge at a certain point. (There may also be energy associated, e.g., with the rest mass of the particle, but that is not relevant to the present argument.) Conservation of energy would be satisfied, because the net energy released by creation and destruction of the particle, qV2-qV1, would be equal to the work done in moving the particle from 1 to 2, qV2-qV1. But although this scenario salvages conservation of energy, it violates gauge symmetry. Gauge symmetry requires that the laws of physics be invariant under the transformation 
 
 
 
 , which implies that no experiment should be able to measure the absolute potential, without reference to some external standard such as an electrical ground. But the proposed rules E1=qV1 and E2=qV2 for the energies of creation and destruction would allow an experimenter to determine the absolute potential, simply by checking how much energy input was required in order to create the charge q at a particular point in space. The conclusion is that if gauge symmetry holds, and energy is conserved, then charge must be conserved.6
(Figure)
The Cartesian coordinate grid on this square has been distorted by a coordinate transformation, so that there is a nonlinear relationship between the old (x,y) coordinates and the new ones. Einstein's equations of general relativity are still valid in the new coordinate system. Such changes of coordinate system are the gauge transformations of general relativity.

General relativity
As discussed above, the gauge transformations for classical (i.e., non-quantum mechanical) general relativity are arbitrary coordinate transformations.7 (Technically, the transformations must be invertible, and both the transformation and its inverse must be smooth, in the sense of being differentiable an arbitrary number of times.)
An example of a symmetry in a physical theory: translation invariance
Some global symmetries under changes of coordinate predate both general relativity and the concept of a gauge. For example, translation invariance was introduced in the era of Galileo, who eliminated the Aristotelian concept that various places in space, such as the earth and the heavens, obeyed different physical rules.
Suppose, for example, that one observer examines the properties of a hydrogen atom on Earth, the other—on the Moon (or any other place in the universe), the observer will find that their hydrogen atoms exhibit completely identical properties. Again, if one observer had examined a hydrogen atom today and the other—100 years ago (or any other time in the past or in the future), the two experiments would again produce completely identical results. The invariance of the properties of a hydrogen atom with respect to the time and place where these properties were investigated is called translation invariance.
Recalling our two observers from different ages: the time in their experiments is shifted by 100 years. If the time when the older observer did the experiment was t, the time of the modern experiment is t+100 years. Both observers discover the same laws of physics. Because light from hydrogen atoms in distant galaxies may reach the earth after having traveled across space for billions of years, in effect one can do such observations covering periods of time almost all the way back to the Big Bang, and they show that the laws of physics have always been the same.
In other words, if in the theory we change the time t to t+100 years (or indeed any other time shift) the theoretical predictions do not change.8
Another example of a symmetry: the invariance of Einstein's field equation under arbitrary coordinate transformations
In Einstein's general relativity, coordinates like x, y, z, and t are not only "relative" in the global sense of translations like 
 
 
 
 , rotations, etc., but become completely arbitrary, so that for example one can define an entirely new timelike coordinate according to some arbitrary rule such as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  has units of time, and yet Einstein's equations will have the same form.910
Invariance of the form of an equation under an arbitrary coordinate transformation is customarily referred to as general covariance and equations with this property are referred to as written in the covariant form. General covariance is a special case of gauge invariance.
Maxwell's equations can also be expressed in a generally covariant form, which is as invariant under general coordinate transformation as Einstein's field equation.
In quantum mechanics
Quantum electrodynamics
Until the advent of quantum mechanics, the only well known example of gauge symmetry was in electromagnetism, and the general significance of the concept was not fully understood. For example, it was not clear whether it was the fields E and B or the potentials V and A that were the fundamental quantities; if the former, then the gauge transformations could be considered as nothing more than a mathematical trick.
Aharonov–Bohm experiment
(Figure)
Double-slit diffraction and interference pattern

In quantum mechanics a particle, such as an electron, is also described as a wave. For example, if the double-slit experiment is performed with electrons, then a wave-like interference pattern is observed. The electron has the highest probability of being detected at locations where the parts of the wave passing through the two slits are in phase with one another, resulting in constructive interference. The frequency of the electron wave is related to the kinetic energy of an individual electron particle via the quantum-mechanical relation E = hf. If there are no electric or magnetic fields present in this experiment, then the electron's energy is constant, and, for example, there will be a high probability of detecting the electron along the central axis of the experiment, where by symmetry the two parts of the wave are in phase.
But now suppose that the electrons in the experiment are subject to electric or magnetic fields. For example, if an electric field was imposed on one side of the axis but not on the other, the results of the experiment would be affected. The part of the electron wave passing through that side oscillates at a different rate, since its energy has had −eV added to it, where −e is the charge of the electron and V the electrical potential. The results of the experiment will be different, because phase relationships between the two parts of the electron wave have changed, and therefore the locations of constructive and destructive interference will be shifted to one side or the other. It is the electric potential that occurs here, not the electric field, and this is a manifestation of the fact that it is the potentials and not the fields that are of fundamental significance in quantum mechanics.
(Figure)
Schematic of double-slit experiment in which Aharonov–Bohm effect can be observed: electrons pass through two slits, interfering at an observation screen, with the interference pattern shifted when a magnetic field B is turned on in the cylindrical solenoid, marked in blue on the diagram.

Explanation with potentials
It is even possible to have cases in which an experiment's results differ when the potentials are changed, even if no charged particle is ever exposed to a different field. One such example is the Aharonov–Bohm effect, shown in the figure.11 In this example, turning on the solenoid only causes a magnetic field B to exist within the solenoid. But the solenoid has been positioned so that the electron cannot possibly pass through its interior. If one believed that the fields were the fundamental quantities, then one would expect that the results of the experiment would be unchanged. In reality, the results are different, because turning on the solenoid changed the vector potential A in the region that the electrons do pass through. Now that it has been established that it is the potentials V and A that are fundamental, and not the fields E and B, we can see that the gauge transformations, which change V and A, have real physical significance, rather than being merely mathematical artifacts.
Gauge invariance: the results of the experiments are independent of the choice of the gauge for the potentials
Note that in these experiments, the only quantity that affects the result is the difference in phase between the two parts of the electron wave. Suppose we imagine the two parts of the electron wave as tiny clocks, each with a single hand that sweeps around in a circle, keeping track of its own phase. Although this cartoon ignores some technical details, it retains the physical phenomena that are important here.12 If both clocks are sped up by the same amount, the phase relationship between them is unchanged, and the results of experiments are the same. Not only that, but it is not even necessary to change the speed of each clock by a fixed amount. We could change the angle of the hand on each clock by a varying amount θ, where θ could depend on both the position in space and on time. This would have no effect on the result of the experiment, since the final observation of the location of the electron occurs at a single place and time, so that the phase shift in each electron's "clock" would be the same, and the two effects would cancel out. This is another example of a gauge transformation: it is local, and it does not change the results of experiments.
Summary
In summary, gauge symmetry attains its full importance in the context of quantum mechanics. In the application of quantum mechanics to electromagnetism, i.e., quantum electrodynamics, gauge symmetry applies to both electromagnetic waves and electron waves. These two gauge symmetries are in fact intimately related. If a gauge transformation θ is applied to the electron waves, for example, then one must also apply a corresponding transformation to the potentials that describe the electromagnetic waves.13 Gauge symmetry is required in order to make quantum electrodynamics a renormalizable theory, i.e., one in which the calculated predictions of all physically measurable quantities are finite.
Types of gauge symmetries
The description of the electrons in the subsection above as little clocks is in effect a statement of the mathematical rules according to which the phases of electrons are to be added and subtracted: they are to be treated as ordinary numbers, except that in the case where the result of the calculation falls outside the range of 0≤θ
Further reading
These books are intended for general readers and employ the barest minimum of mathematics.

't Hooft, Gerard:''' "Gauge Theories of the Force between Elementary Particles," Scientific American, 242(6):104-138 (June 1980).
"Press Release: The 1999 Nobel Prize in Physics". Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB 2013. Web. 20 Aug 2013. 
Schumm, Bruce (2004) Deep Down Things. Johns Hopkins University Press. A serious attempt by a physicist to explain gauge theory and the Standard Model.
Feynman, Richard (2006) QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter. Princeton University Press. A nontechnical description of quantum field theory (not specifically about gauge theory).

Related information
cs:Kalibrační invariance de:Eichtheorie el:Θεωρία βαθμίδας es:Teoría de campo de gauge fr:Théorie de jauge id:Teori ukuran it:Teoria di gauge he:תורת כיול hu:Mértéktérelmélet pt:Teoria de gauge ru:Калибровочная инвариантность sl:Umeritvena transformacija fi:Mittakenttäteoria sv:Gaugeteori uk:Калібрувальна інваріантність zh-yue:規範場論 zh:规范场论"
Category:Concepts in physics   Category:Quantum chromodynamics Category:Differential topology Category:Symmetry



Donald H. Perkins (1982) Introduction to High-Energy Physics. Addison-Wesley: 22.↩
Roger Penrose (2004) The Road to Reality, p. 451. For an alternative formulation in terms of symmetries of the Lagrangian density, see p. 489. Also see J. D. Jackson (1975) Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd ed. Wiley and Sons: 176.↩
For an argument that V and A are more fundamental, see Feynman, Leighton, and Sands, The Feynman Lectures, Addison Wesley Longman, 1970, II-15-7,8,12, but this is partly a matter of personal preference.↩
Edward Purcell (1963) Electricity and Magnetism. McGraw-Hill: 38.↩
J.D. Jackson (1975) Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd ed. Wiley and Sons: 176.↩
Donald H. Perkins (1982) Introduction to High-Energy Physics. Addison-Wesley: 92.↩
Robert M. Wald (1984) General Relativity. University of Chicago Press: 260.↩
Charles Misner, Kip Thorne, and John A. Wheeler (1973) Gravitation. W. H. Freeman: 68.↩

Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler (1973) Gravitation. W. H. Freeman: 967.↩
Feynman, Leighton, and Sands (1970) The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Addison Wesley, vol. II, chpt. 15, section 5.↩
Richard Feynman (1985) QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter. Princeton University Press.↩
Donald H. Perkins (1982) Introduction to High-Energy Physics. Addison-Wesley: 332.↩




