


Dirac spinor




Dirac spinor

In quantum field theory, the Dirac spinor is the bispinor in the plane-wave solution


 
  of the free Dirac equation,


 
  where (in the units 
 
 
 
 )


 
  is a relativistic spin-1/2 field,


 
  is the Dirac spinor related to a plane-wave with wave-vector

 
 ,


 
 ,


 
  is the four-wave-vector of the plane wave, where 
 
 
 
  is arbitrary,


 
  are the four-coordinates in a given inertial frame of reference.
The Dirac spinor for the positive-frequency solution can be written as


 
  where


 
  is an arbitrary two-spinor,


 
  are the Pauli matrices,


 
  is the positive square root 
 
 

Derivation from Dirac equation
The Dirac equation has the form



In order to derive the form of the four-spinor 
 
 
 
  we have to first note the value of the matrices α and β:


 
  These two 4×4 matrices are related to the Dirac gamma matrices. Note that 0 and I are 2×2 matrices here.
The next step is to look for solutions of the form


 
 , while at the same time splitting ω into two two-spinors:


 
 .
Results
Using all of the above information to plug into the Dirac equation results in


 
 .
This matrix equation is really two coupled equations:






Solve the 2nd equation for 
 
 
 
  and one obtains


 
 .
Solve the 1st equation for 
 
 
 
  and one finds


 
 . This solution is useful for showing the relation between anti-particle and particle.
Details
Two-spinors
The most convenient definitions for the two-spinors are:



and



Pauli matrices
The Pauli matrices are



Using these, one can calculate:



Four-spinors
For particles
Particles are defined as having positive energy. The normalization for the four-spinor ω is chosen so that 
 
 
 
  . These spinors are denoted as u:


 
  where s = 1 or 2 (spin "up" or "down")
Explicitly,



For anti-particles
Anti-particles having positive energy 
 
 
 
  are defined as particles having negative energy and propagating backward in time. Hence changing the sign of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the four-spinor for particles will give the four-spinor for anti-particles:



Here we choose the 
 
 
 
  solutions. Explicitly,



Completeness relations
The completeness relations for the four-spinors u and v are






where


 
       (see Feynman slash notation)



Dirac spinors and the Dirac algebra
The Dirac matrices are a set of four 4×4 matrices that are used as spin and charge operators.
Conventions
There are several choices of signature and representation that are in common use in the physics literature. The Dirac matrices are typically written as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  runs from 0 to 3. In this notation, 0 corresponds to time, and 1 through 3 correspond to x, y, and z.
The + − − − signature is sometimes called the west coast metric, while the − + + + is the east coast metric. At this time the + − − − signature is in more common use, and our example will use this signature. To switch from one example to the other, multiply all 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 .
After choosing the signature, there are many ways of constructing a representation in the 4×4 matrices, and many are in common use. In order to make this example as general as possible we will not specify a representation until the final step. At that time we will substitute in the "chiral" or "Weyl" representation as used in the popular graduate textbook An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory by Michael E. Peskin and Daniel V. Schroeder.
Construction of Dirac spinor with a given spin direction and charge
First we choose a spin direction for our electron or positron. As with the example of the Pauli algebra discussed above, the spin direction is defined by a unit vector in 3 dimensions, (a, b, c). Following the convention of Peskin & Schroeder, the spin operator for spin in the (a, b, c) direction is defined as the dot product of (a, b, c) with the vector






Note that the above is a root of unity, that is, it squares to 1. Consequently, we can make a projection operator from it that projects out the sub-algebra of the Dirac algebra that has spin oriented in the (a, b, c) direction:



Now we must choose a charge, +1 (positron) or −1 (electron). Following the conventions of Peskin & Schroeder, the operator for charge is 
 
 
 
 , that is, electron states will take an eigenvalue of −1 with respect to this operator while positron states will take an eigenvalue of +1.
Note that 
 
 
 
  is also a square root of unity. Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  commutes with 
 
 
 
 . They form a complete set of commuting operators for the Dirac algebra. Continuing with our example, we look for a representation of an electron with spin in the (a, b, c) direction. Turning 
 
 
 
  into a projection operator for charge = −1, we have



The projection operator for the spinor we seek is therefore the product of the two projection operators we've found:



The above projection operator, when applied to any spinor, will give that part of the spinor that corresponds to the electron state we seek. So we can apply it to a spinor with the value 1 in one of its components, and 0 in the others, which gives a column of the matrix. Continuing the example, we put (a, b, c) = (0, 0, 1) and have



and so our desired projection operator is



The 4×4 gamma matrices used in the Weyl representation are






for k = 1, 2, 3 and where 
 
 
 
  are the usual 2×2 Pauli matrices. Substituting these in for P gives



Our answer is any non-zero column of the above matrix. The division by two is just a normalization. The first and third columns give the same result:



More generally, for electrons and positrons with spin oriented in the (a, b, c) direction, the projection operator is



where the upper signs are for the electron and the lower signs are for the positron. The corresponding spinor can be taken as any non zero column. Since 
 
 
 
  the different columns are multiples of the same spinor. The representation of the resulting spinor in the Dirac basis can be obtained using the rule given in the bispinor article.
See also

Dirac equation
Helicity basis
Spin(3,1), the double cover of SO(3,1) by a spin group

References




"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum field theory Category:Spinors Spinor


