


Representation of a Lie group




Representation of a Lie group

In mathematics and theoretical physics, the idea of a representation of a Lie group plays an important role in the study of continuous symmetry. A Lie group is defined in abstract terms as a group, which is also a differentiable manifold,1 but in applications it's often more useful to have concrete objects, like matrices, that represent each element of the group. A representation is a map that maps each (abstract) element of the Lie group to a concrete object, like a matrix, that represents the object.
Representations on a complex finite-dimensional vector space
Let us first discuss representations acting on finite-dimensional complex vector spaces. A representation of a Lie group G on a finite-dimensional complex vector space V is a smooth group homomorphism Ψ:G→Aut(V) from G to the automorphism group of V.
For n-dimensional V, the automorphism group of V is identified with a subset of the complex square matrices of order n. The automorphism group of V is given the structure of a smooth manifold using this identification. The condition that Ψ is smooth, in the definition above, means that Ψ is a smooth map from the smooth manifold G to the smooth manifold Aut(V).
If a basis for the complex vector space V is chosen, the representation can be expressed as a homomorphism into general linear group GL(n,C). This is known as a matrix representation.
Representations on a finite-dimensional vector space over an arbitrary field
A representation of a Lie group G on a vector space V (over a field K) is a smooth (i.e. respecting the differential structure) group homomorphism G→Aut(V) from G to the automorphism group of V. If a basis for the vector space V is chosen, the representation can be expressed as a homomorphism into general linear group GL(n,K). This is known as a matrix representation. Two representations of G on vector spaces V, W are equivalent if they have the same matrix representations with respect to some choices of bases for V and W.
On the Lie algebra level, there is a corresponding linear mapping from the Lie algebra of G to End(V) preserving the Lie bracket [ , ]. See representation of Lie algebras for the Lie algebra theory.
If the homomorphism is in fact a monomorphism, the representation is said to be faithful.
A unitary representation is defined in the same way, except that G maps to unitary matrices; the Lie algebra will then map to skew-hermitian matrices.
If G is a compact Lie group, every finite-dimensional representation is equivalent to a unitary one.
Representations on Hilbert spaces
A representation of a Lie group G on a complex Hilbert space V is a group homomorphism Ψ:G → B(V) from G to B(V), the group of bounded linear operators of V which have a bounded inverse, such that the map G×V → V given by (g,v) → Ψ(g)v is continuous.
This definition can handle representations on infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces. Such representations can be found in e.g. quantum mechanics, but also in Fourier analysis as shown in the following example.
Let G=R, and let the complex Hilbert space V be L2(R). We define the representation Ψ:R → B(L2(R)) by Ψ(r){f(x)} → f(r−1x).
See also Wigner's classification for representations of the Poincaré group.
Classification
If G is a semisimple group, its finite-dimensional representations can be decomposed as direct sums of irreducible representations. The irreducibles are indexed by highest weight; the allowable (dominant) highest weights satisfy a suitable positivity condition. In particular, there exists a set of fundamental weights, indexed by the vertices of the Dynkin diagram of G, such that dominant weights are simply non-negative integer linear combinations of the fundamental weights. The characters of the irreducible representations are given by the Weyl character formula.
If G is a commutative Lie group, then its irreducible representations are simply the continuous characters of G: see Pontryagin duality for this case.
A quotient representation is a quotient module of the group ring.
Formulaic examples
Let Fq be a finite field of order q and characteristic p. Let G be a finite group of Lie type, that is, G is the Fq-rational points of a connected reductive group G defined over Fq. For example, if n is a positive integer GL(n, Fq) and SL(n, Fq) are finite groups of Lie type. Let 
 
 
 
 , where In is the n×n identity matrix. Let



Then Sp(2,Fq) is a symplectic group of rank n and is a finite group of Lie type. For G = GL(n, Fq) or SL(n, Fq) (and some other examples), the standard Borel subgroup B of G is the subgroup of G consisting of the upper triangular elements in G. A standard parabolic subgroup of G is a subgroup of G which contains the standard Borel subgroup B. If P is a standard parabolic subgroup of GL(n, Fq), then there exists a partition (n1, …, nr) of n (a set of positive integers 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 ) such that 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  has the form



and



where 
 
 
 
  denotes arbitrary entries in 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Representation theory of the Lorentz group
Representation theory of Hopf algebras
Adjoint representation of a Lie group
List of Lie group topics
Symmetry in quantum mechanics

References



.

.

. The 2003 reprint corrects several typographical mistakes.

"
Category:Lie groups Category:Representation theory of Lie groups



↩




