


Anticommutativity




Anticommutativity

In mathematics, anticommutativity is the property of an operation with two or more arguments wherein swapping the position of any two arguments negates the result. Anticommutative operations are widely used in algebra, geometry, mathematical analysis and, as a consequence, in physics: they are often called antisymmetric operations.
Definition
An 
 
 
 
 -ary operation is anticommutative if swapping the order of any two arguments negates the result. For example, a binary operation ∗ is anti-commutative if for all x and y,


.


More formally, a map

 
  from the set of all n-tuples of elements in a set A (where n is a general integer) to a group

 
  is anticommutative if and only if



where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary permutation of the set (n) of the first n positive integers and 
 
 
 
  is its sign. This equality expresses the following concept:

the value of the operation is unchanged, when applied to all ordered tuples constructed by even permutation of the elements of a fixed one.
the value of the operation is the inverse of its value on a fixed tuple, when applied to all ordered tuples constructed by odd permutation to the elements of the fixed one. The need for the existence of this inverse element is the main reason for requiring the codomain

 
  of the operation to be at least a group.

Note that this is an abuse of notation, since the codomain of the operation needs only to be a group: "−1" does not have a precise meaning since a multiplication is not necessarily defined on 
 
 
 
 .
Particularly important is the case . A binary operation

 
  is anticommutative if and only if



This means that  is the inverse of the element  in 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
If the group 
 
 
 
  is such that



i.e. the only element equal to its inverse is the neutral element, then for all the ordered tuples such that 
 
 
 
  for at least two different index 
 
 




In the case 

 this means



Examples
Examples of anticommutative binary operations include:

Subtraction
Cross product
Lie bracket of a Lie algebra
Lie bracket of a Lie ring

See also

Commutativity
Commutator
Exterior algebra
Operation (mathematics)
Symmetry in mathematics
Particle statistics (for anticommutativity in physics).

References


.

External links




"
Category:Abstract algebra *Anticommutativity


