


Cube root




Cube root

 In mathematics, a cube root of a number x is a number a such that a3 = x. All real numbers (except zero) have exactly one real cube root and a pair of complex conjugate cube roots, and all nonzero complex numbers have three distinct complex cube roots. For example, the real cube root of 8, denoted 
 
 
 
  is 2, because 23 = 8, while the other cube roots of 8 are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  The three cube roots of −27i are



The cube root operation is not associative or distributive with addition or subtraction.
In some contexts, particularly when the number whose cube root is to be taken is a real number, one of the cube roots (in this particular case the real one) is referred to as the principal cube root, denoted with the radical sign 
 
 
 
  The cube root operation is associative with exponentiation and distributive with multiplication and division if considering only real numbers, but not always if considering complex numbers: for example, the cube of any cube root of 8 is 8, but the three cube roots of 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 

Formal definition
The cube roots of a number x are the numbers y which satisfy the equation



Real numbers
For any real number y, there is one real number x such that x3 = y. The cube function is increasing, so does not give the same result for two different inputs, plus it covers all real numbers. In other words, it is a bijection, or one-to-one. Then we can define an inverse function that is also one-to-one. For real numbers, we can define a unique cube root of all real numbers. If this definition is used, the cube root of a negative number is a negative number.
 If x and y are allowed to be complex, then there are three solutions (if x is non-zero) and so x has three cube roots. A real number has one real cube root and two further cube roots which form a complex conjugate pair. This can lead to some interesting results.
For instance, the cube roots of the number one are:



The last two of these roots lead to a relationship between all roots of any real or complex number. If a number is one cube root of any real or complex number, the other two cube roots can be found by multiplying that number by one or the other of the two complex cube roots of one.
Complex numbers
 
For complex numbers, the principal cube root is usually defined by



where ln(x) is the principal branch of the natural logarithm. If we write x as



where r is a non-negative real number and θ lies in the range


 
 ,
then the principal complex cube root is



This means that in polar coordinates, we are taking the cube root of the radius and dividing the polar angle by three in order to define a cube root. With this definition, the principal cube root of a negative number is a complex number, and for instance 
 
 
 
  will not be 
 
 
 
 , but rather 
 
 

This limitation can easily be avoided if we write the original complex number x in three equivalent forms, namely



The principal complex cube roots of these three forms are then respectively



In general, these three complex numbers are distinct, even though the three representations of x were the same. For example, 
 
 
 
  may then be calculated to be −2, 1 + i√3, or 1 − i√3.
In programs that are aware of the imaginary plane, the graph of the cube root of x on the real plane will not display any output for negative values of x. To also include negative roots, these programs must be explicitly instructed to only use real numbers.
Impossibility of compass-and-straightedge construction
Cube roots arise in the problem of finding an angle whose measure is one third that of a given angle (angle trisection) and in the problem of finding the edge of a cube whose volume is twice that of a cube with a given edge (doubling the cube). In 1837 Pierre Wantzel proved that neither of these can be done with a compass-and-straightedge construction.
Numerical methods
Newton's method is an iterative method that can be used to calculate the cube root. For real floating point numbers this method reduces to the following iterative algorithm to produce successively better approximations of the cube root of 
 
 
 
 :



The method is simply averaging three factors chosen such that 
 
 
 
  at each iteration.
Halley's method improves upon this with an algorithm that converges more quickly with each step, albeit consuming more multiplication operations:



With either method a poor initial approximation of 
 
 
 
  can give very poor algorithm performance, and coming up with a good initial approximation is somewhat of a black art. Some implementations manipulate the exponent bits of the floating point number; i.e. they arrive at an initial approximation by dividing the exponent by 3. This has the disadvantage of requiring knowledge of the internal representation of the floating point number, and therefore a single implementation is not guaranteed to work across all computing platforms.
Also useful is this generalized continued fraction, based on the nth root method:
If x is a good first approximation to the cube root of z and y = z − x3, then:






The second equation combines each pair of fractions from the first into a single fraction, thus doubling the speed of convergence. The advantage is that x and y are only computed once.
Appearance in solutions of third and fourth degree equations
Cubic equations, which are polynomial equations of the third degree (meaning the highest power of the unknown is 3) can always be solved for their three solutions in terms of cube roots and square roots (although simpler expressions only in terms of square roots exist for all three solutions if at least one of them is a rational number). If two of the solutions are complex numbers, then all three solution expressions involve the real cube roots of two real numbers, while if all three solutions are real numbers then each solution is expressed in terms of the complex cube roots of two complex numbers.
Quartic equations can also be solved in terms of cube roots and square roots.
History
The calculation of cube roots can be to traced back to Babylonian mathematicians from as early as 1800 BCE.1 In the fourth century BCE Plato posed the problem of doubling the cube, which required a compass-and-straightedge construction of the edge of a cube with twice the volume of a given cube; this required the construction, now known to be impossible, of the length the cube root of 2.
A method for extracting cube roots appears in The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art, a Chinese mathematical text compiled around the 2nd century BCE and commented on by Liu Hui in the 3rd century CE.2 The Greek mathematician Hero of Alexandria devised a method for calculating cube roots in the 1st century CE. His formula is again mentioned by Eutokios in a commentary on Archimedes.3 In 499 CE Aryabhata, a mathematician-astronomer from the classical age of Indian mathematics and Indian astronomy, gave a method for finding the cube root of numbers having many digits in the Aryabhatiya (section 2.5).4
See also

Methods of computing square roots
List of polynomial topics
Nth root
Square root
Nested radical
Root of unity
Shifting nth-root algorithm

References
External links

Cube root calculator reduces any number to simplest radical form
Computing the Cube Root, K. Turkowski, Apple Technical Report #KT-32, 1998. Includes C source code.



de:Kubikwurzel"
Category:Elementary special functions Category:Elementary algebra



↩
↩
↩
Aryabhatiya , Mohan Apte, Pune, India, Rajhans Publications, 2009, p.62, ISBN 978-81-7434-480-9↩




