


Cramér's conjecture




Cramér's conjecture

In number theory, Cramér's conjecture, formulated by the Swedish mathematician Harald Cramér in 1936,1 is an estimate for the size of gaps between consecutive prime numbers: intuitively, that gaps between consecutive primes are always small, and the conjecture quantifies asymptotically just how small they must be. It states that


 
  where pn denotes the nth prime number, O is big O notation, and "log" is the natural logarithm. While this is the statement explicitly conjectured by Cramér, his argument actually supports the stronger statement


 
  and this formulation is often called Cramér's conjecture in the literature.
Neither form of Cramér's conjecture has yet been proven or disproven.
Conditional proven results on prime gaps
Cramér gave a conditional proof of the much weaker statement that


 
  on the assumption of the Riemann hypothesis.2
In the other direction, E. Westzynthius proved in 1931 that prime gaps grow more than logarithmically. That is,3



Heuristic justification
Cramér's conjecture is based on a probabilistic model (essentially a heuristic) of the primes, in which one assumes that the probability of a natural number of size x being prime is 1/log x. This is known as the Cramér model of the primes. Cramér proved that in this model, the above conjecture holds true with probability one.4
Related conjectures and heuristics
 Daniel Shanks conjectured asymptotic equality of record gaps, a somewhat stronger statement than Cramér's conjecture.5
In the Cramér random model,


 
  with 
 
 
 
  However, as pointed out by Andrew Granville,6 Maier's theorem shows that the Cramér random model does not adequately describe the distribution of primes, and a refinement of Cramér's model taking into account divisibility by small primes suggests that 
 
 
 
  (), where 
 
 
 
  is the Euler–Mascheroni constant.
In the paper 7 J.H. Cadwell has proposed the formula for the maximal gaps: 
 
 
 
 
  which for large 
 
 
 
  goes into the Cramer's conjecture 
 
 
 
 .
Thomas Nicely has calculated many large prime gaps.8 He measures the quality of fit to Cramér's conjecture by measuring the ratio



He writes, “For the largest known maximal gaps, 
 
 
 
  has remained near 1.13.” However, 
 
 
 
 
  is still less than 1, and it does not provide support to Granville's refinement that c should be greater than 1.
See also

Prime number theorem
Legendre's conjecture and Andrica's conjecture, much weaker but still unproven upper bounds on prime gaps
Firoozbakht's conjecture
Maier's theorem on the numbers of primes in short intervals for which the model predicts an incorrect answer

References





External links




"
Category:Analytic number theory Category:Conjectures about prime numbers





.

.
.

.




