


Aleph number




Aleph number

 In set theory, a discipline within mathematics, the aleph numbers are a sequence of numbers used to represent the cardinality (or size) of infinite sets. They are named after the symbol used to denote them, the Hebrew letter aleph (
 
 
 
 ) (though in older mathematics books the letter aleph is sometimes printed upside down1).
The cardinality of the natural numbers is 
 
 
 
  (read aleph-naught or aleph-zero; the German term aleph-null is also sometimes used), the next larger cardinality is aleph-one 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 
  and so on. Continuing in this manner, it is possible to define a cardinal number

 
  for every ordinal number α, as described below.
The concept goes back to Georg Cantor, who defined the notion of cardinality and realized that infinite sets can have different cardinalities.
The aleph numbers differ from the infinity (∞) commonly found in algebra and calculus. Alephs measure the sizes of sets; infinity, on the other hand, is commonly defined as an extreme limit of the real number line (applied to a function or sequence that "diverges to infinity" or "increases without bound"), or an extreme point of the extended real number line.
Aleph-naught


 
  (Aleph-naught, also known as Aleph-null) is the cardinality of the set of all natural numbers, and is an infinite cardinal. The set of all finite ordinals, called ω or ω0, has cardinality 
 
 
 
 . A set has cardinality 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is countably infinite, that is, there is a bijection (one-to-one correspondence) between it and the natural numbers. Examples of such sets are

the set of all square numbers, the set of all cubic numbers, the set of all fourth powers, ...
the set of all perfect powers, the set of all prime powers,
the set of all even numbers, the set of all odd numbers,
the set of all prime numbers, the set of all composite numbers,
the set of all integers,
the set of all rational numbers,
the set of all constructible numbers (in the geometric sense),
the set of all algebraic numbers,
the set of all computable numbers,
the set of all definable numbers,
the set of all binary strings of finite length, and
the set of all finite subsets of any given countably infinite set.

These infinite ordinals: ω, ω+1, ω·2, ω2, ωω and ε0 are among the countably infinite sets.2 For example, the sequence (with ordinality ω·2) of all positive odd integers followed by all positive even integers

{1, 3, 5, 7, 9, ..., 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, ...}
 

is an ordering of the set (with cardinality 
 
 
 
 
 ) of positive integers.
If the axiom of countable choice (a weaker version of the axiom of choice) holds, then 
 
 
 
  is smaller than any other infinite cardinal.
Aleph-one


 
  is the cardinality of the set of all countable ordinal numbers, called ω1 or (sometimes) Ω. This ω1 is itself an ordinal number larger than all countable ones, so it is an uncountable set. Therefore 
 
 
 
  is distinct from 
 
 
 
 . The definition of 
 
 
 
 
  implies (in ZF, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice) that no cardinal number is between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . If the axiom of choice (AC) is used, it can be further proved that the class of cardinal numbers is totally ordered, and thus 
 
 
 
  is the second-smallest infinite cardinal number. Using AC we can show one of the most useful properties of the set ω1: any countable subset of ω1 has an upper bound in ω1. (This follows from the fact that a countable union of countable sets is countable, one of the most common applications of AC.) This fact is analogous to the situation in 
 
 
 
 : every finite set of natural numbers has a maximum which is also a natural number, and finite unions of finite sets are finite.
ω1 is actually a useful concept, if somewhat exotic-sounding. An example application is "closing" with respect to countable operations; e.g., trying to explicitly describe the σ-algebra generated by an arbitrary collection of subsets (see e. g. Borel hierarchy). This is harder than most explicit descriptions of "generation" in algebra (vector spaces, groups, etc.) because in those cases we only have to close with respect to finite operations—sums, products, and the like. The process involves defining, for each countable ordinal, via transfinite induction, a set by "throwing in" all possible countable unions and complements, and taking the union of all that over all of ω1.
Continuum hypothesis
The cardinality of the set of real numbers (cardinality of the continuum) is 
 
 
 
 
 . It cannot be determined from ZFC (Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice) where this number fits exactly in the aleph number hierarchy, but it follows from ZFC that the continuum hypothesis, CH, is equivalent to the identity



The CH states that there is no set whose cardinality is strictly between that of the integers and the real numbers. CH is independent of ZFC: it can be neither proven nor disproven within the context of that axiom system (provided that ZFC is consistent). That CH is consistent with ZFC was demonstrated by Kurt Gödel in 1940 when he showed that its negation is not a theorem of ZFC. That it is independent of ZFC was demonstrated by Paul Cohen in 1963 when he showed, conversely, that the CH itself is not a theorem of ZFC by the (then novel) method of forcing.
Aleph-ω
Conventionally the smallest infinite ordinal is denoted ω, and the cardinal number 
 
 
 
  is the least upper bound of


 
  among alephs.
Aleph-ω is the first uncountable cardinal number that can be demonstrated within Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory not to be equal to the cardinality of the set of all real numbers; for any positive integer n we can consistently assume that 
 
 
 
 , and moreover it is possible to assume 
 
 
 
 
  is as large as we like. We are only forced to avoid setting it to certain special cardinals with cofinality

 
 , meaning there is an unbounded function from 
 
 
 
  to it (see Easton's theorem).
Aleph-α for general α
To define 
 
 
 
  for arbitrary ordinal number 
 
 
 
 , we must define the successor cardinal operation, which assigns to any cardinal number ρ the next larger well-ordered cardinal ρ
 
 
 
 
  (if the axiom of choice holds, this is the next larger cardinal).
We can then define the aleph numbers as follows:






and for λ, an infinite limit ordinal,



The α-th infinite initial ordinal is written 
 
 
 
 . Its cardinality is written 
 
 
 
 
 . See initial ordinal.
In ZFC the 
 
 
 
  function is a bijection between the ordinals and the infinite cardinals.3
Fixed points of omega
For any ordinal α we have


 
  In many cases 
 
 
 
  is strictly greater than α. For example, for any successor ordinal α this holds. There are, however, some limit ordinals which are fixed points of the omega function, because of the fixed-point lemma for normal functions. The first such is the limit of the sequence



Any weakly inaccessible cardinal is also a fixed point of the aleph function.4 This can be shown in ZFC as follows. Suppose 
 
 
 
 
  is a weakly inaccessible cardinal. If 
 
 
 
  were a successor ordinal, then 
 
 
 
  would be a successor cardinal and hence not weakly inaccessible. If 
 
 
 
  were a limit ordinal less than 
 
 
 
 , then its cofinality (and thus the cofinality of 
 
 
 
 
 ) would be less than 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
  would not be regular and thus not weakly inaccessible. Thus 
 
 
 
  and consequently 
 
 
 
  which makes it a fixed point.
Role of axiom of choice
The cardinality of any infinite ordinal number is an aleph number. Every aleph is the cardinality of some ordinal. The least of these is its initial ordinal. Any set whose cardinality is an aleph is equinumerous with an ordinal and is thus well-orderable.
Each finite set is well-orderable, but does not have an aleph as its cardinality.
The assumption that the cardinality of each infinite set is an aleph number is equivalent over ZF to the existence of a well-ordering of every set, which in turn is equivalent to the axiom of choice. ZFC set theory, which includes the axiom of choice, implies that every infinite set has an aleph number as its cardinality (i.e. is equinumerous with its initial ordinal), and thus the initial ordinals of the aleph numbers serve as a class of representatives for all possible infinite cardinal numbers.
When cardinality is studied in ZF without the axiom of choice, it is no longer possible to prove that each infinite set has some aleph number as its cardinality; the sets whose cardinality is an aleph number are exactly the infinite sets that can be well-ordered. The method of Scott's trick is sometimes used as an alternative way to construct representatives for cardinal numbers in the setting of ZF.
See also

Regular cardinal

References

Notes




External links




"
Category:Cardinal numbers Category:Infinity



For example, in  the letter aleph appears both the right way up and upside down.







