


Euler–Lagrange equation




Euler–Lagrange equation

In calculus of variations, the Euler–Lagrange equation, Euler's equation,1 or Lagrange's equation (although the latter name is ambiguous—see disambiguation page), is a second-order partial differential equation whose solutions are the functions for which a given functional is stationary. It was developed by Swiss-Russian mathematician Leonhard Euler and French-Italian mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange in the 1750s.
Because a differentiable functional is stationary at its local maxima and minima, the Euler–Lagrange equation is useful for solving optimization problems in which, given some functional, one seeks the function minimizing (or maximizing) it. This is analogous to Fermat's theorem in calculus, stating that at any point where a differentiable function attains a local extremum, its derivative is zero.
In Lagrangian mechanics, because of Hamilton's principle of stationary action, the evolution of a physical system is described by the solutions to the Euler–Lagrange equation for the action of the system. In classical mechanics, it is equivalent to Newton's laws of motion, but it has the advantage that it takes the same form in any system of generalized coordinates, and it is better suited to generalizations. In classical field theory there is an analogous equation to calculate the dynamics of a field.
History
The Euler–Lagrange equation was developed in the 1750s by Euler and Lagrange in connection with their studies of the tautochrone problem. This is the problem of determining a curve on which a weighted particle will fall to a fixed point in a fixed amount of time, independent of the starting point.
Lagrange solved this problem in 1755 and sent the solution to Euler. Both further developed Lagrange's method and applied it to mechanics, which led to the formulation of Lagrangian mechanics. Their correspondence ultimately led to the calculus of variations, a term coined by Euler himself in 1766.2
Statement
The Euler–Lagrange equation is an equation satisfied by a function, q, of a real argument, t, which is a stationary point of the functional



where:



 
  is the function to be found:





such that 
 
 
 
  is differentiable, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 ;
 




 
 ; is the derivative of 
 
 
 
 
 :
 
 :

q' \colon [a, b] & \to T_{q(t)}X \\
              t & \mapsto v = q'(t)
\end{align}

TX being the tangent bundle of X defined by
 


 
  ;
 


L is a real-valued function with continuous first partial derivatives:
 
 :

L \colon [a, b] \times TX & \to \mathbb{R} \\
                        (t, x, v) & \mapsto L(t, x, v).
\end{align} The Euler–Lagrange equation, then, is given by {\mathrm{d}t}L_v(t,q(t),q'(t)) = 0. |border colour = #50C878 |background colour = #ECFCF4}} where Lx and Lv denote the partial derivatives of L with respect to the second and third arguments, respectively.
If the dimension of the space X is greater than 1, this is a system of differential equations, one for each component:









Derivation of one-dimensional Euler–Lagrange equation





The derivation of the one-dimensional Euler–Lagrange equation is one of the classic proofs in mathematics. It relies on the fundamental lemma of calculus of variations. We wish to find a function 
 
 
 
  which satisfies the boundary conditions 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and which extremizes the functional


 
  We assume that 
 
 
 
  is twice continuously differentiable.3 A weaker assumption can be used, but the proof becomes more difficult. If 
 
 
 
  extremizes the functional subject to the boundary conditions, then any slight perturbation of 
 
 
 
  that preserves the boundary values must either increase 
 
 
 
  (if 
 
 
 
  is a minimizer) or decrease 
 
 
 
  (if 
 
 
 
  is a maximizer). Let 
 
 
 
  be the result of such a perturbation 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is small and 
 
 
 
  is a differentiable function satisfying 
 
 
 
 . Then define


 
  where 
 
 
 
  . We now wish to calculate the total derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to ε.


 
  It follows from the total derivative that


 
 
  So


 
  When ε = 0 we have gε = f, Fε = F(x, f(x), f'(x)) and Jε  has an extremum value, so that


 
  The next step is to use integration by parts on the second term of the integrand, yielding


 
  Using the boundary conditions 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  Applying the fundamental lemma of calculus of variations now yields the Euler–Lagrange equation














Alternate derivation of one-dimensional Euler–Lagrange equation





Given a functional


 
  on 
 
 
 
  with the boundary conditions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , we proceed by approximating the extremal curve by a polygonal line with 
 
 
 
  segments and passing to the limit as the number of segments grows arbitrarily large. Divide the interval 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  equal segments with endpoints 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
 
 . Rather than a smooth function 
 
 
 
  we consider the polygonal line with vertices 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Accordingly, our functional becomes a real function of 
 
 
 
 
  variables given by


 
  Extremals of this new functional defined on the discrete points 
 
 
 
  correspond to points where


 
  Evaluating this partial derivative gives


 
  Dividing the above equation by 
 
 
 
 
  gives


 
  and taking the limit as 
 
 
 
  of the right-hand side of this expression yields


 
  The left hand side of the previous equation is the functional derivative

 
  of the functional 
 
 
 
 
 . A necessary condition for a differentiable functional to have an extremum on some function is that its functional derivative at that function vanishes, which is granted by the last equation.





Examples
A standard example is finding the real-valued function on the interval [a, b], such that f(a) = c and f(b) = d, the length of whose graph is as short as possible. The length of the graph of f is:


 
  the integrand function being  evaluated at .
The partial derivatives of L are:


 
  By substituting these into the Euler–Lagrange equation, we obtain


 
 
  that is, the function must have constant first derivative, and thus its graph is a straight line.
Classical mechanics
Basic method
To find the equations of motions for a given system (whose potential energy is time-independent), one only has to follow these steps:

From the kinetic energy 
 
 
 
 , and the potential energy 
 
 
 
 , compute the Lagrangian

 
 .
Compute 
 
 
 
 .
Compute 
 
 
 
  and from it, 
 
 
 
 . It is important that 
 
 
 
  be treated as a complete variable in its own right, and not as a derivative.
Equate 
 
 
 
 . This is the Euler–Lagrange equation.
Solve the differential equation obtained in the preceding step. At this point, 
 
 
 
  is treated "normally". Note that the above might be a system of equations and not simply one equation.

Particle in a conservative force field
The motion of a single particle in a conservative force field (for example, the gravitational force) can be determined by requiring the action to be stationary, by Hamilton's principle. The action for this system is


 
  where x(t) is the position of the particle at time t. The dot above is Newton's notation for the time derivative: thus ẋ(t) is the particle velocity, v(t). In the equation above, L is the Lagrangian (the kinetic energy minus the potential energy):


 
  where:

m is the mass of the particle (assumed to be constant in classical physics);
vi is the i-th component of the vector v in a Cartesian coordinate system (the same notation will be used for other vectors);
U is the potential of the conservative force.

In this case, the Lagrangian does not vary with its first argument t. (By Noether's theorem, such symmetries of the system correspond to conservation laws. In particular, the invariance of the Lagrangian with respect to time implies the conservation of energy.)
By partial differentiation of the above Lagrangian, we find:


 
  where the force is F = −∇U (the negative gradient of the potential, by definition of conservative force), and p is the momentum. By substituting these into the Euler–Lagrange equation, we obtain a system of second-order differential equations for the coordinates on the particle's trajectory,


 
  which can be solved on the interval [t0, t1], given the boundary values xi(t0) and xi(t1). In vector notation, this system reads


 
  or, using the momentum,


 
  which is Newton's second law.
Variations for several functions, several variables, and higher derivatives
Single function of single variable with higher derivatives
The stationary values of the functional


 
  can be obtained from the Euler–Lagrange equation4


 
  under fixed boundary conditions for the function itself as well as for the first 
 
 
 
  derivatives (i.e. for all 
 
 
 
 ). The endpoint values of the highest derivative 
 
 
 
 
  remain flexible.
Several functions of one variable
If the problem involves finding several functions (
 
 
 
 ) of a single independent variable (
 
 
 
 ) that define an extremum of the functional


 
  then the corresponding Euler–Lagrange equations are5



Single function of several variables
A multi-dimensional generalization comes from considering a function on n variables. If Ω is some surface, then



is extremized only if f satisfies the partial differential equation



When n = 2 and 
 
 
 
  is the energy functional, this leads to the soap-film minimal surface problem.
Several functions of several variables
If there are several unknown functions to be determined and several variables such that


 
  the system of Euler–Lagrange equations is6



Single function of two variables with higher derivatives
If there is a single unknown function f to be determined that is dependent on two variables x1 and x2 and if the functional depends on higher derivatives of f up to n-th order such that


 
 
  then the Euler–Lagrange equation is7


 
 
  which can be represented shortly as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are indices that span the number of variables, that is they go from 1 to 2. Here summation over the 
 
 
 
  indices is implied according to Einstein notation.
Several functions of several variables with higher derivatives
If there is are p unknown functions fi to be determined that are dependent on m variables x1 ... xm and if the functional depends on higher derivatives of the fi up to n-th order such that



where 
 
 
 
  are indices that span the number of variables, that is they go from 1 to m. Then the Euler–Lagrange equation is



where summation over the 
 
 
 
  is implied according to Einstein notation. This can be expressed more compactly as



Generalization to Manifolds
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth manifold, and let 
 
 
 
  denote the space of smooth functions 
 
 
 
 . Then, for functionals 
 
 
 
  of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Lagrangian, the statement 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to the statement that, for all 
 
 
 
 , each coordinate frame trivialization

 
  of a neighborhood of 
 
 
 
  yields the following 
 
 
 
  equations:



See also

Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics
Analytical mechanics
Beltrami identity
Functional derivative

Notes
References





Roubicek, T.: ''Calculus of variations. Chap.17 in: Mathematical Tools for Physicists. (Ed. M. Grinfeld) J. Wiley, Weinheim, 2014, ISBN 978-3-527-41188-7, pp.551-588.

"
Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Partial differential equations Category:Calculus of variations Category:Articles containing proofs




A short biography of Lagrange


Weinstock, R., 1952, Calculus of Variations With Applications to Physics and Engineering, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.






