


Alpha Herculis




Alpha Herculis

Alpha Herculis (α Her, α Herculis) is a multiple star system in the constellation Hercules. It has the traditional name Rasalgethi or Ras Algethi ( Head of the Kneeler), and the Flamsteed designation 64 Herculis.1 The traditional name "Head" comes from the fact that in antiquity Hercules was depicted upside down on the constellation maps.
The term ra's al-jaθiyy or Ras al Djathi was appeared in the catalogue of stars in the Calendarium of Al Achsasi al Mouakket, which was translated into Latin as Caput Ingeniculi.2
In Chinese astronomy, Rasalgethi is called 帝座, Pinyin: Dìzuò, meaning '' Emperor's Seat'', this star is marking itself and stands alone in the center of Emperor's Seat asterism, Heavenly Market enclosure (see : Chinese constellation).3 帝座 (Dìzuò) was westernized into Ti Tso by R.H. Allen, with the same meaning 4
Properties
The angular diameter of the red giant, α1 Her, has been measured with an interferometer as 34 ± 0.8 mas, or 0.034 arcseconds.5 At an estimated distance of 110 parsecs from Hipparcos,678 this corresponds to a radius of about 280 million kilometers (or 170 million miles), which is roughly  or 1.87 AU.To determine the Rasalgheti's radius in terms of solar units, the calculations begin with the formula for angular diameter as follows:



where δ equals Rasalgheti's angular diameter in arcseconds, dR the star's diameter in AU, and DR the Distance from Earth in parsecs. If we know the angular diameter and the Distance, then we can solve for dR as follows:


 
 .
To obtain Rasalgheti's radius:


 
 . Converting into Solar units, 1 AU = 149,597,871 km and the mean radius of the Sun = 696,000 km, hence the calculation:


 
  (rounded). If Rasalgheti were at the center of our Solar System its radius would extend past the orbit of Mars at 1.5 AU but not quite as far as the asteroid belt. The red giant is estimated to have started its life with about 7-8 solar masses.9 Like most type M stars near the end of their lives, Rasalgethi is experiencing a high degree of stellar mass loss creating a sparse, gaseous envelope that extends at least 90 astronomical units.10
Star system
When viewed through a telescope, this system is resolved into two components designated α1 and α2. These two components are more than 500 astronomical units apart, with an estimated orbital period of approximately 3600 years. α1 is a relatively massive red bright giant. α2 is actually a double star system with a primary yellow giant star and a secondary, yellow-white dwarf star. (These components are sometimes designated α Herculis A, Ba and Bb, respectively.)
See also

List of largest known stars
Lists of stars in the constellation Hercules
Betelgeuse mass loss
Spectral types F, G & M

Notes


References
External links

An Atlas of the Universe: Multiple Star Orbits
Upside down Hercules showing Rasalgethi as the head: Hercules

"
Category:Double stars Category:Hercules (constellation) Herculis, Alpha Herculis, 064 Category:Triple star systems Category:Stars with proper names Category:M-type bright giants Category:G-type giants Category:F-type main-sequence stars





 AEEA (Activities of Exhibition and Education in Astronomy) 天文教育資訊網 2006 年 6 月 25 日
Richard Hinckley Allen: Star Names — Their Lore and Meaning: Hercules










