


Flipped SU(5)




Flipped SU(5)

The Flipped SU(5) model is a Grand Unified Theory (GUT) theory first contemplated by Stephen Barr in 1982,1 and by Dimitri Nanopoulos and others in 1984.23 Ignatios Antoniadis, John Ellis, John Hagelin, and Nanopoulos developed the supersymmetric flipped SU(5), derived from the deeper-level superstring.4
Current efforts to explain the theoretical underpinnings for observed neutrino masses are being developed in the context of supersymmetric flipped 
 
 
 
 .5
Flipped 
 
 
 
  is not a fully unified model, because the  factor of the SM gauge group is within the 
 
 
 
  factor of the GUT group. The addition of states below Mx in this model, while solving certain threshold correction issues in string theory, makes the model merely descriptive, rather than predictive.6
The model
The flipped 
 
 
 
  model states that the gauge group is:




Fermions form three families, each consisting of the representations

 for the lepton doublet, L, and the up quarks ;
 
 for the quark doublet, Q, the down quark,  and the right-handed neutrino, 
 
 
 
 ;
 
 for the charged leptons, .
 

This assignment includes three right-handed neutrinos, which have never been observed, but are often postulated to explain the lightness of the observed neutrinos and neutrino oscillations. There is also a  and/or  called the Higgs fields which acquire a VEV, yielding the spontaneous symmetry breaking




The 
 
 
 
  representations transform under this subgroup as the reducible representation as follows:


 
  (uc and l)


 
  (q, dc and νc)


 
  (ec)


 
 .
Comparison with the standard SU(5)
The name "flipped" 
 
 
 
  arose in comparison to the "standard" 
 
 
Georgi–Glashow model, in which  and  quark are respectively assigned to the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  representation. In comparison with the standard 
 
 
 
 , the flipped 
 
 
 
  can accomplish the spontaneous symmetry breaking using Higgs fields of dimension 10, while the standard 
 
 
 
  requires both a 5- and 45-dimensional Higgs.
The sign convention for  varies from article/book to article.
The hypercharge Y/2 is a linear combination (sum) of the following:



There are also the additional fields  and  containing the electroweak Higgs doublets.
Calling the representations for example,  and  is purely a physicist's convention, not a mathematician's convention, where representations are either labelled by Young tableaux or Dynkin diagrams with numbers on their vertices, and is a standard used by GUT theorists.
Since the homotopy group



this model does not predict monopoles. See Hooft–Polyakov monopole.
(Figure)
Dimension 6 proton decay mediated by the 
 
 
 
  boson 
 
 
 
  in flipped 
 
 
 
  GUT

Spacetime
The 
 
 
 
  superspace extension of 
 
 
 
  Minkowski spacetime
Spatial symmetry


 
  SUSY over 
 
 
 
  Minkowski spacetime with R-symmetry
Gauge symmetry group

Global internal symmetry
 (matter parity) not related to  in any way for this particular model
Vector superfields
Those associated with the  gauge symmetry
Chiral superfields
As complex representations:




label

description

multiplicity

 rep

 rep







GUT Higgs field







+









GUT Higgs field







+









electroweak Higgs field







+









electroweak Higgs field







+











matter fields







-











matter fields







-











left-handed positron







-











sterile neutrino (optional)







-











singlet







+







Superpotential
A generic invariant renormalizable superpotential is a (complex)  invariant cubic polynomial in the superfields which has an 
 
 
 
 -charge of 2. It is a linear combination of the following terms:



The second column expands each term in index notation (neglecting the proper normalization coefficient). 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are the generation indices. The coupling  has coefficients which are symmetric in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In those models without the optional 
 
 
 
  sterile neutrinos, we add the nonrenormalizable couplings instead.



These couplings do break the R-symmetry.
References
"
Category:Particle physics



Barr SM. Phys.Lett. B 112 (1982) 219↩
Derendinger JP, Kim JE, and Nanopoulos DV. Phys.Lett. B 139 (1984) 170↩
Stenger, Victor J., Quantum Gods: Creation, Chaos and the Search for Cosmic Consciouness, Prometheus Books (2009) ISBN 978-1-59102-713-3 p 61.↩
Freedman DH. "The new theory of everything", Discover, 1991, pp 54–61.↩
Rizos J and Tamvakis K. Hierarchical Neutrino Masses and Mixing in Flipped-
 
 
 
 . arXiv.org > hep-ph > arXiv:0912.3997v1 (Dec. 20, 2009)↩
[http://books.google.com/books?id=p8hs0QHxk_oC&pg;;=PA194&dq;=Flipped+SU(5)&lr;=&cd;=22#v=onepage&q;=Flipped%20SU(5)&f;=false Barcow, Timothy et al, Electroweak symmetry breaking and new physics at the TeV scale World Scientific, 1996 ISBN 978-981-02-2631-2 p 194]↩




