


De Sitter space




De Sitter space

In mathematics and physics, a de Sitter space is the analog in Minkowski space, or spacetime, of a sphere in ordinary, Euclidean space. The n-dimensional de Sitter space, denoted dSn, is the Lorentzian manifold analog of an n-sphere (with its canonical Riemannian metric); it is maximally symmetric, has constant positive curvature, and is simply connected for n at least 3. The de Sitter space, as well as the anti-de Sitter space is named after Willem de Sitter (1872–1934), professor of astronomy at Leiden University and director of the Leiden Observatory. Willem de Sitter and Albert Einstein worked in the 1920s in Leiden closely together on the spacetime structure of our universe.
In the language of general relativity, de Sitter space is the maximally symmetric, vacuum solution of Einstein's field equations with a positive (repulsive) cosmological constant

 
  (corresponding to a positive vacuum energy density and negative pressure). When  (3 space dimensions plus time), it is a cosmological model for the physical universe; see de Sitter universe.
De Sitter space was discovered by Willem de Sitter, and, at the same time, independently by Tullio Levi-Civita.
More recently it has been considered as the setting for special relativity rather than using Minkowski space, since a group contraction reduces the isometry group of de Sitter space to the Poincaré group, allowing a unification of the spacetime translation subgroup and Lorentz transformation subgroup of the Poincaré group into a simple group rather than a semi-simple group. This alternate formulation of special relativity is called de Sitter relativity.
Definition
De Sitter space can be defined as a submanifold of a Minkowski space of one higher dimension. Take Minkowski space R1,n with the standard metric:


 
  De Sitter space is the submanifold described by the hyperboloid of one sheet


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is some positive constant with dimensions of length. The metric on de Sitter space is the metric induced from the ambient Minkowski metric. The induced metric is nondegenerate and has Lorentzian signature. (Note that if one replaces 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in the above definition, one obtains a hyperboloid of two sheets. The induced metric in this case is positive-definite, and each sheet is a copy of hyperbolic n-space.)
De Sitter space can also be defined as the quotient  of two indefinite orthogonal groups, which shows that it is a non-Riemannian symmetric space.
Topologically, de Sitter space is  (so that if  then de Sitter space is simply connected).
Properties
The isometry group of de Sitter space is the Lorentz group O(1,n). The metric therefore then has n(n+1)/2 independent Killing vectors and is maximally symmetric. Every maximally symmetric space has constant curvature. The Riemann curvature tensor of de Sitter is given by



De Sitter space is an Einstein manifold since the Ricci tensor is proportional to the metric:


 
  This means de Sitter space is a vacuum solution of Einstein's equation with cosmological constant given by


 
  The scalar curvature of de Sitter space is given by


 
  For the case n = 4, we have Λ = 3/α2 and R = 4Λ = 12/α2.
Static coordinates
We can introduce static coordinates

 
  for de Sitter as follows:








 
  where 
 
 
 
  gives the standard embedding the (n−2)-sphere in Rn−1. In these coordinates the de Sitter metric takes the form:



Note that there is a cosmological horizon at 
 
 
 
 .
Flat slicing
Let








 
  where 
 
 
 
 . Then in the 
 
 
 
  coordinates metric reads:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the flat metric on 
 
 
 
 's.
Open slicing
Let








 
  where 
 
 
 
  forming a 
 
 
 
  with the standard metric 
 
 
 
 . Then the metric of the de Sitter space reads


 
  where


 
  is the metric of a Euclidean hyperbolic space.
Closed slicing
Let





 
  where 
 
 
 
 s describe a 
 
 
 
 . Then the metric reads:



Changing the time variable to the conformal time via 
 
 
 
  we obtain a metric conformally equivalent to Einstein static universe:


 
  This serves to find the Penrose diagram of de Sitter space.
dS slicing
Let











 
  where 
 
 
 
 s describe a 
 
 
 
 . Then the metric reads:


 
  where


 
  is the metric of an 
 
 
 
  dimensional de Sitter space with radius of curvature 
 
 
 
  in open slicing coordinates. The hyperbolic metric is given by:



This is the analytic continuation of the open slicing coordinates under 
 
 
 
  and also switching 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  because they change their timelike/spacelike nature.
See also

Anti-de Sitter space
de Sitter universe
AdS/CFT correspondence
Hyperboloid
De Sitter–Schwarzschild metric

References









"
Category:Exact solutions in general relativity Category:Riemannian geometry


