


Wronskian




Wronskian

In mathematics, the Wronskian (or Wrońskian) is a determinant introduced by  and named by . It is used in the study of differential equations, where it can sometimes show linear independence in a set of solutions.
Definition
The Wronskian of two differentiable functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
More generally, for 
 
 
real- or complex-valued functions , which are 
 
 
 
  times differentiable on an interval

 
 , the Wronskian  as a function on 
 
 
 
  is defined by



That is, it is the determinant of the matrix constructed by placing the functions in the first row, the first derivative of each function in the second row, and so on through the 
 
 
 
 th derivative, thus forming a square matrix sometimes called a fundamental matrix.
When the functions  are solutions of a linear differential equation, the Wronskian can be found explicitly using Abel's identity, even if the functions  are not known explicitly.
The Wronskian and linear independence
If the functions  are linearly dependent, then so are the columns of the Wronskian as differentiation is a linear operation, so the Wronskian vanishes. Thus, the Wronskian can be used to show that a set of differentiable functions is linearly independent on an interval by showing that it does not vanish identically.
A common misconception is that 
 
 
 
  everywhere implies linear dependence, but  pointed out that the functions  and 
 
 
 
  have continuous derivatives and their Wronskian vanishes everywhere, yet they are not linearly dependent in any neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 . There are several extra conditions which ensure that the vanishing of the Wronskian in an interval implies linear dependence.  observed that if the functions are analytic, then the vanishing of the Wronskian in an interval implies that they are linearly dependent.  gave several other conditions for the vanishing of the Wronskian to imply linear dependence; for example, if the Wronskian of 
 
 
 
  functions is identically zero and the 
 
 
 
  Wronskians of 
 
 
 
  of them do not all vanish at any point then the functions are linearly dependent.  gave a more general condition that together with the vanishing of the Wronskian implies linear dependence.
Generalized Wronskians
For 
 
 
 
  functions of several variables, a generalized Wronskian is the determinant of an 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  matrix with entries  (with 
 
 

See also

Moore matrix, analogous to the Wronskian with differentiation replaced by the Frobenius endomorphism over a finite field.
Variation of parameters

References










"
Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Determinants Category:Science and technology in Poland


