


Riccati equation




Riccati equation

In mathematics, a Riccati equation in the narrowest sense is any first-order ordinary differential equation that is quadratic in the unknown function. In other words, it is an equation of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 
  the equation reduces to a Bernoulli equation, while if 
 
 
 
  the equation becomes a first order linear ordinary differential equation.
The equation is named after Jacopo Riccati (1676–1754).1
More generally, the term Riccati equation is used to refer to matrix equations with an analogous quadratic term, which occur in both continuous-time and discrete-time linear-quadratic-Gaussian control. The steady-state (non-dynamic) version of these is referred to as the algebraic Riccati equation.
Reduction to a second order linear equation
The non-linear Riccati equation can always be reduced to a second order linear ordinary differential equation (ODE):2 If


 
  then, wherever 
 
 
 
  is non-zero and differentiable, 
 
 
 
  satisfies a Riccati equation of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , because


 
  Substituting 
 
 
 
 , it follows that 
 
 
 
 
  satisfies the linear 2nd order ODE


 
  since


 
  so that


 
  and hence


 
  A solution of this equation will lead to a solution 
 
 
 
 
  of the original Riccati equation.
Application to the Schwarzian equation
An important application of the Riccati equation is to the 3rd order Schwarzian differential equation


 
  which occurs in the theory of conformal mapping and univalent functions. In this case the ODEs are in the complex domain and differentiation is with respect to a complex variable. (The Schwarzian derivative

 
  has the remarkable property that it is invariant under Möbius transformations, i.e. 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
  is non-zero.) The function 
 
 
 
 
  satisfies the Riccati equation


 
  By the above 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a solution of the linear ODE


 
  Since 
 
 
 
 
 , integration gives 
 
 
 
  for some constant 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand any other independent solution 
 
 
 
  of the linear ODE has constant non-zero Wronskian 
 
 
 
  which can be taken to be 
 
 
 
 
  after scaling. Thus


 
  so that the Schwarzian equation has solution 
 
 

Obtaining solutions by quadrature
The correspondence between Riccati equations and second-order linear ODEs has other consequences. For example, if one solution of a 2nd order ODE is known, then it is known that another solution can be obtained by quadrature, i.e., a simple integration. The same holds true for the Riccati equation. In fact, if one particular solution 
 
 
 
  can be found, the general solution is obtained as


 
  Substituting


 
  in the Riccati equation yields


 
  and since





 
  or


 
  which is a Bernoulli equation. The substitution that is needed to solve this Bernoulli equation is


 
  Substituting


 
  directly into the Riccati equation yields the linear equation


 
  A set of solutions to the Riccati equation is then given by


 
  where z is the general solution to the aforementioned linear equation.
See also

Linear-quadratic regulator
Algebraic Riccati equation
Matrix Riccati equation#Mathematical description of the problem and solution

References
Further reading







External links


Riccati Equation at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.
Riccati Differential Equation at Mathworld
MATLAB function for solving continuous-time algebraic Riccati equation.
SciPy has functions for solving the continuous algebraic Riccati equation and the discrete algebraic Riccati equation.

"
Category:Ordinary differential equations



Riccati, Jacopo (1724) [http://books.google.com/books?id=UjTw1w7tZsEC&pg;;=PA66#v=onepage&q;&f;=false "Animadversiones in aequationes differentiales secundi gradus"] (Observations regarding differential equations of the second order), Actorum Eruditorum, quae Lipsiae publicantur, Supplementa, 8 : 66-73. Translation of the original Latin into English: by Ian Bruce.





