


Chord (geometry)




Chord (geometry)

A chord of a circle is a straight line segment whose endpoints both lie on the circle. A secant line, or just secant, is the infinite line extension of a chord. More generally, a chord is a line segment joining two points on any curve, for instance an ellipse. A chord that passes through a circle's center point is the circle's diameter. 
Chords of an ellipse
The midpoints of a set of parallel chords of an ellipse are collinear.1
Chords in trigonometry
 Chords were used extensively in the early development of trigonometry. The first known trigonometric table, compiled by Hipparchus, tabulated the value of the chord function for every 7.5 degrees. In the second century AD, Ptolemy of Alexandria compiled a more extensive table of chords in his book on astronomy, giving the value of the chord for angles ranging from 1/2 degree to 180 degrees by increments of half a degree. The circle was of diameter 120, and the chord lengths are accurate to two base-60 digits after the integer part.
The chord function is defined geometrically as in the picture to the left. The chord of an angle is the length of the chord between two points on a unit circle separated by that angle. The chord function can be related to the modern sine function, by taking one of the points to be (1,0), and the other point to be (cos 
 
 
 
 , sin 
 
 
 
 ), and then using the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the chord length:



The last step uses the half-angle formula. Much as modern trigonometry is built on the sine function, ancient trigonometry was built on the chord function. Hipparchus is purported to have written a twelve volume work on chords, all now lost, so presumably a great deal was known about them. The chord function satisfies many identities analogous to well-known modern ones:




Name

Sine-based

Chord-based





Pythagorean











Half-angle











Apothem (a)











Angle (θ)











See also

Holditch's theorem, for a chord rotating in a convex closed curve
Circle graph

References
External links

History of Trigonometry Outline
Trigonometric functions, focusing on history
Chord (of a circle) With interactive animation

ja:円 (数学)#円の性質"
Category:Curves



Chakerian, G. D. "A Distorted View of Geometry." Ch. 7 in Mathematical Plums (R. Honsberger, editor). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America, 1979.




