


Lagrange inversion theorem




Lagrange inversion theorem

In mathematical analysis, the Lagrange inversion theorem, also known as the Lagrange–Bürmann formula, gives the Taylor series expansion of the inverse function of an analytic function.
Theorem statement
Suppose z is defined as a function of w by an equation of the form



where f is analytic at a point a and f '(a) ≠ 0. Then it is possible to invert or solve the equation for w:



on a neighbourhood of f(a), where g is analytic at the point f(a). This is also called reversion of series.
The series expansion of g is given by1



The formula is also valid for formal power series and can be generalized in various ways. It can be formulated for functions of several variables, it can be extended to provide a ready formula for F(g(z)) for any analytic function F, and it can be generalized to the case f '(a) = 0, where the inverse g is a multivalued function.
The theorem was proved by Lagrange2 and generalized by Hans Heinrich Bürmann,345 both in the late 18th century. There is a straightforward derivation6 using complex analysis and contour integration; the complex formal power series version is clearly a consequence of knowing the formula for polynomials, so the theory of analytic functions may be applied. Actually, the machinery from analytic function theory enters only in a formal way in this proof, in that what is really needed is just some property of the formal residue, and a more direct formal proof is available.
Applications
Lagrange–Bürmann formula
There is a special case of Lagrange inversion theorem that is used in combinatorics and applies when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  Take 
 
 
 
  to obtain 
 
 
 
  We have






which can be written alternatively as



where 
 
 
 
  is an operator which extracts the coefficient of 
 
 
 
  in the Taylor series of a function of w.
A useful generalization of the formula is known as the Lagrange–Bürmann formula:



where 
 
 
 
  can be an arbitrary analytic function, e.g.  wk}}.
Lambert W function
The Lambert W function is the function 
 
 
 
  that is implicitly defined by the equation



We may use the theorem to compute the Taylor series of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  We take 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  Recognizing that


 
  this gives



The radius of convergence of this series is 
 
 
 
 
  (this example refers to the principal branch of the Lambert function).
A series that converges for larger z (though not for all z) can also be derived by series inversion. The function 
 
 
 
  satisfies the equation



Then 
 
 
 
  can be expanded into a power series and inverted. This gives a series for 
 
 
 
 :



 
  can be computed by substituting 
 
 
 
  for z in the above series. For example, substituting −1 for z gives the value of 
 
 
 
 .
Binary trees
Consider the set 
 
 
 
  of unlabelled binary trees. An element of 
 
 
 
  is either a leaf of size zero, or a root node with two subtrees. Denote by 
 
 
 
  the number of binary trees on n nodes.
Note that removing the root splits a binary tree into two trees of smaller size. This yields the functional equation on the generating function 
 
 
 
 :



Now let 
 
 
 
  and rewrite this equation as follows:



Now apply the theorem with 
 
 




We conclude that 
 
 
 
  is the Catalan number.
See also

Faà di Bruno's formula gives coefficients of the composition of two formal power series in terms of the coefficients of those two series. Equivalently, it is a formula for the nth derivative of a composite function.
Lagrange reversion theorem for another theorem sometimes called the inversion theorem
Formal power series#The Lagrange inversion formula

References
External links



Bürmann–Lagrange series at Springer EOM

"
Category:Inverse functions Category:Theorems in real analysis Category:Theorems in complex analysis




 (Note: Although Lagrange submitted this article in 1768, it was not published until 1770.)
Bürmann, Hans Heinrich, “Essai de calcul fonctionnaire aux constantes ad-libitum,” submitted in 1796 to the Institut National de France. For a summary of this article, see: 
Bürmann, Hans Heinrich, "Formules du développement, de retour et d'integration," submitted to the Institut National de France. Bürmann's manuscript survives in the archives of the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées [National School of Bridges and Roads] in Paris. (See ms. 1715.)
A report on Bürmann's theorem by Joseph-Louis Lagrange and Adrien-Marie Legendre appears in: "Rapport sur deux mémoires d'analyse du professeur Burmann," Mémoires de l'Institut National des Sciences et Arts: Sciences Mathématiques et Physiques, vol. 2, pages 13–17 (1799).
*E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson. A Course of Modern Analysis. Cambridge University Press; 4th edition (January 2, 1927), pp. 129–130




