


Hodge dual




Hodge dual

In mathematics, the Hodge star operator or Hodge dual is an important linear map introduced in general by W. V. D. Hodge. It is defined on the exterior algebra of a finite-dimensional oriented inner product space.
Dimensionalities and algebra
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is the dimensionality of the oriented inner product space and 
 
 
 
  is an integer such that 
 
 
 
 , then the Hodge star operator establishes a one-to-one mapping from the space of 

 
 -vectors to the space of 
 
 
 
 -vectors. The image of a 
 
 
 
 -vector under this mapping is called the Hodge dual of the 
 
 
 
 -vector. The former space, of 
 
 
 
 -vectors, has dimensionality



while the latter has dimensionality



and by the symmetry of the binomial coefficients, these two dimensionalities are equal. Two vector spaces over the same field with the same dimensionality are always isomorphic; but not necessarily in a natural or canonical way. The Hodge duality, however, in this case exploits the inner product and orientation of the vector space. It singles out a unique isomorphism, that reflects therefore the pattern of the binomial coefficients in algebra. This in turn induces an inner product on the space of 
 
 
 
 -vectors. The 'natural' definition means that this duality relationship can play a geometrical role in theories.
The first interesting case is on three-dimensional Euclidean space

 
 . In this context the relevant row of Pascal's triangle reads





and the Hodge dual sets up an isomorphism between the two three-dimensional spaces, which are 
 
 
 
  itself and the space of wedge products of two vectors from 
 
 
 
 . See the Examples section for details. In this case the content is just that of the cross product of traditional vector calculus. While the properties of the cross product are special to three dimensions, the Hodge dual applies to all dimensionalities.
Extensions
Since the space of alternating linear forms in 
 
 
 
  arguments on a vector space is naturally isomorphic to the dual of the space of 
 
 
 
 -vectors over that vector space, the Hodge dual can be defined for these spaces as well. As with most constructions from linear algebra, the Hodge dual can then be extended to a vector bundle. Thus a context in which the Hodge dual is very often seen is the exterior algebra of the cotangent bundle (i.e. the space of differential forms on a manifold) where it can be used to construct the codifferential from the exterior derivative, and thus the Laplace-de Rham operator, which leads to the Hodge decomposition of differential forms in the case of compact Riemannian manifolds.
Formal definition of the Hodge star of 
 
 
 
 -vectors
The Hodge star operator on a vector space

 
  with a nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form (herein referred to as the inner product) is a linear operator on the exterior algebra of 
 
 
 
 , mapping 
 
 
 
 -vectors to 
 
 
 
 -vectors where 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
 . It has the following property, which defines it completely: given two 
 
 
 
 -vectors 
 
 




where 
 
 
 
  denotes the inner product on 
 
 
 
 -vectors and 
 
 
 
  is the preferred unit 
 
 
 
 -vector.
The inner product 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 -vectors is extended from that on 
 
 
 
  by requiring that



for any decomposable 
 
 
 
 -vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The unit 
 
 
 
 -vector 
 
 
 
  is unique up to a sign. The preferred choice of 
 
 
 
  defines an orientation on 
 
 
 
 .
Explanation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a vector space, with an inner product 
 
 
 
 . The Riesz representation theorem states that for every continuous (every in the finite-dimensional case) linear functional

 
  there exists a unique vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . The map 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism. This holds for all vector spaces with an inner product, and can be used to explain the Hodge dual.
Let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space with basis 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
 , consider the exterior power spaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For



we have



There is, up to a scalar, only one 
 
 
 
 -vector, namely 
 
 
 
 . In other words, 
 
 
 
  must be a scalar multiple of 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Consider a fixed

 
 . There exists a unique linear function



such that



This 
 
 
 
  is the scalar multiple mentioned in the previous paragraph. If 
 
 
 
  denotes the inner product on 
 
 
 
 -vectors, then there exists a unique 
 
 
 
 -vector, say



such that



This 
 
 
 
 -vector 
 
 
 
  is the Hodge dual of 
 
 
 
 , and is the image of the 
 
 
 
  under the isomorphism induced by the inner product,



Thus,


 
 .
Computation of the Hodge star
Given an orthonormal basis 
 
 
 
  ordered such that 
 
 
 
 , we see that



where 
 
 
 
  is an even permutation of 
Of these 
 
 
 
  relations, only 
 
 
 
  are independent. The first one in the usual lexicographical order reads



Index notation for the star operator
Using index notation, the Hodge dual is obtained by contracting the indices of a 
 
 
 
 -form with the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional completely antisymmetric Levi-Civita tensor. This differs from the Levi-Civita symbol by a factor of , where 
 
 
 
  is the matrix of an inner product (the metric tensor) with respect to the basis. The absolute value of the determinant is necessary if 
 
 
 
  is not positive-definite, e.g. for tangent spaces to Lorentzian manifolds.
Thus one writes1



where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary antisymmetric tensor in 
 
 
 
  indices. It is understood that indices are raised and lowered using the same inner product g as in the definition of the Levi-Civita tensor. Although one can take the star of any tensor, the result is antisymmetric, since the symmetric components of the tensor completely cancel out when contracted with the completely anti-symmetric Levi-Civita symbol.
Examples
A common example of the star operator is the case 
 
 
 
 , when it can be taken as the correspondence between the vectors and the skew-symmetric matrices of that size. This is used implicitly in vector calculus, for example to create the cross product vector from the wedge product of two vectors. Specifically, for Euclidean R3, one easily finds that









where dx, dy and dz are the standard orthonormal differential one-forms on R3. The Hodge dual in this case clearly relates the cross-product to the wedge product in three dimensions. A detailed presentation not restricted to differential geometry is provided next.
Three-dimensional example
Applied to three dimensions, the Hodge dual provides an isomorphism between axial vectors and bivectors, so each axial vector a is associated with a bivector 
 
 
 
  and vice versa, that is:2



where 
 
 
 
  indicates the dual operation. These dual relations can be implemented using multiplication by the unit pseudoscalar in Cℓ3(R),3  e1e2e3}} (the vectors  are an orthonormal basis in three dimensional Euclidean space) according to the relations:4



The dual of a vector is obtained by multiplication by 
 
 
 
 , as established using the properties of the geometric product of the algebra as follows:



and also, in the dual space spanned by 



In establishing these results, the identities are used:



and:



These relations between the dual 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  apply to any vectors. Here they are applied to relate the axial vector created as the cross product

 
  to the bivector-valued exterior product

 
  of two polar (that is, not axial) vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ; the two products can be written as determinants expressed in the same way:



using the notation  eℓem}}. These expressions show these two types of vector are Hodge duals:5



as a result of the relations:



with 
 
 
 
  cyclic,
and:



also with 
 
 
 
  cyclic.
Using the implementation of 
 
 
 
  based upon 
 
 
 
 , the commonly used relations are:6



Four dimensions
In case 
 
 
 
 , the Hodge dual acts as an endomorphism of the second exterior power (i.e. it maps two-forms to two-forms, since ). It is an involution, so it splits it into self-dual and anti-self-dual subspaces, on which it acts respectively as +1 and −1.
Another useful example is 
 
 
 
  Minkowski spacetime with metric signature 
 
 
 
  and coordinates 
 
 
 
  where (using 
 
 
 
 )












for one-forms while


















for two-forms.
Inner product of 
 
 
 
 -vectors
The Hodge dual induces an inner product on the space of 
 
 
 
 -vectors, that is, on the exterior algebra of 
 
 
 
 . Given two 
 
 
 
 -vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , one has



where 
 
 
 
  is the normalised 
 
 
 
 -form (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ). In the calculus of exterior differential forms on a pseudo-Riemannian manifold of dimension 
 
 
 
 , the normalised 
 
 
 
 -form is called the volume form and can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is the matrix of components of the metric tensor on the manifold in the coordinate basis.
If an inner product is given on 
 
 
 
 , then this equation can be regarded as an alternative definition of the Hodge dual.7 The wedge products of elements of an orthonormal basis in 
 
 
 
  form an orthonormal basis of the exterior algebra of 
 
 
 
 .
Duality
The Hodge star defines a dual in that when it is applied twice, the result is an identity on the exterior algebra, up to sign. Given a 
 
 
 
 -vector 
 
 
 
  in  in an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space 
 
 
 
 , one has



where 
 
 
 
  is related to the signature of the inner product on 
 
 
 
 . Specifically, 
 
 
 
  is the sign of the determinant of the inner product tensor. Thus, for example, if 
 
 
 
  and the signature of the inner product is either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 . For ordinary Euclidean spaces, the signature is always positive, and so 
 
 
 
 . When the Hodge star is extended to pseudo-Riemannian manifolds, then the above inner product is understood to be the metric in diagonal form.
Note that the above identity implies that the inverse of 
 
 
 
  can be given as



Note that if 
 
 
 
  is odd 
 
 
 
  is even for any 
 
 
 
  whereas if 
 
 
 
  is even 
 
 
 
  has the parity of 
 
 
 
 . Therefore:



where 
 
 
 
  is the degree of the forms operated on.
Hodge star on manifolds
One can repeat the construction above for each cotangent space of an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional oriented Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian manifold, and get the Hodge dual

 
 -form, of a 

 
 -form. The Hodge star then induces an -norm inner product on the differential forms on the manifold. One writes



for the inner product of sections

 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . (The set of sections is frequently denoted as 
 
 
 
 . Elements of 
 
 
 
  are called exterior 
 
 
 
 -forms).
More generally, in the non-oriented case, one can define the hodge star of a 
 
 
 
 -form as a 
 
 
 
 -pseudo differential form; that is, a differential forms with values in the canonical line bundle.
The codifferential
The most important application of the Hodge dual on manifolds is to define the codifferential

 
  on 
 
 
 
 -forms. Let



where 
 
 
 
  is the exterior derivative or differential, and 
 
 
 
  for Riemannian manifolds.



while



The codifferential is not an antiderivation on the exterior algebra, in contrast to the exterior derivative.
The codifferential is the adjoint of the exterior derivative, in that



where 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -form and 
 
 
 
  a 
 
 
 
 -form. This identity follows from Stokes' theorem for smooth forms, when



i.e. when 
 
 
 
  has empty boundary or when 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  has zero boundary values (of course, true adjointness follows after continuous continuation to the appropriate topological vector spaces as closures of the spaces of smooth forms).
Notice that since the differential satisfies  0}}, the codifferential has the corresponding property



The Laplace–deRham operator is given by



and lies at the heart of Hodge theory. It is symmetric:



and non-negative:



The Hodge dual sends harmonic forms to harmonic forms. As a consequence of the Hodge theory, the de Rham cohomology is naturally isomorphic to the space of harmonic 
 
 
 
 -forms, and so the Hodge star induces an isomorphism of cohomology groups



which in turn gives canonical identifications via Poincaré duality of  with its dual space.
Derivatives in three dimensions
The combination of the 
 
 
 
  operator and the exterior derivative

 
  generates the classical operators grad, curl, and div, in three dimensions. This works out as follows: 
 
 
 
  can take a 0-form (function) to a 1-form, a 1-form to a 2-form, and a 2-form to a 3-form (applied to a 3-form it just gives zero). For a 0-form, 
 
 
 
 , the first case written out in components is identifiable as the grad operator:



The second case followed by 
 
 
 
  is an operator on 1-forms (
 
 
 
 ) that in components is the curl operator:



Applying the Hodge star gives:



The final case prefaced and followed by 
 
 
 
 , takes a 1-form (
 
 
 
 ) to a 0-form (function); written out in components it is the divergence operator:



One advantage of this expression is that the identity  0}}, which is true in all cases, sums up two others, namely that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In particular, Maxwell's equations take on a particularly simple and elegant form, when expressed in terms of the exterior derivative and the Hodge star.
One can also obtain the Laplacian. Using the information above and the fact that 
 
 
 
  then for a 0-form, 
 
 
 
 :



Notes
References

David Bleecker (1981) Gauge Theory and Variational Principles. Addison-Wesley Publishing. ISBN 0-201-10096-7. Chpt. 0 contains a condensed review of non-Riemannian differential geometry.
Jurgen Jost (2002) Riemannian Geometry and Geometric Analysis. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-42627-2. A detailed exposition starting from basic principles; does not treat the pseudo-Riemannian case.
Charles W. Misner, Kip S. Thorne, John Archibald Wheeler (1970) Gravitation. W.H. Freeman. ISBN 0-7167-0344-0. A basic review of differential geometry in the special case of four-dimensional spacetime.
Steven Rosenberg (1997) The Laplacian on a Riemannian manifold. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-46831-0. An introduction to the heat equation and the Atiyah-Singer theorem.
Tevian Dray (1999) The Hodge Dual Operator. A thorough overview of the definition and properties of the Hodge dual operator.

"
Category:Differential forms Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Duality theories














