


Lie algebroid




Lie algebroid

In mathematics, Lie algebroids serve the same role in the theory of Lie groupoids that Lie algebras serve in the theory of Lie groups: reducing global problems to infinitesimal ones. Just as a Lie groupoid can be thought of as a "Lie group with many objects", a Lie algebroid is like a "Lie algebra with many objects".
More precisely, a Lie algebroid is a triple 
 
 
 
  consisting of a vector bundle

 
  over a manifold

 
 , together with a Lie bracket

 
  on its module of sections 
 
 
 
  and a morphism of vector bundles 
 
 
 
  called the anchor. Here 
 
 
 
  is the tangent bundle of 
 
 
 
 . The anchor and the bracket are to satisfy the Leibniz rule:



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the derivative of 
 
 
 
  along the vector field 
 
 
 
 . It follows that



for all 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

Every Lie algebra is a Lie algebroid over the one point manifold.


The tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  of a manifold 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebroid for the Lie bracket of vector fields and the identity of 
 
 
 
  as an anchor.


Every integrable subbundle of the tangent bundle — that is, one whose sections are closed under the Lie bracket — also defines a Lie algebroid.


Every bundle of Lie algebras over a smooth manifold defines a Lie algebroid where the Lie bracket is defined pointwise and the anchor map is equal to zero.


To every Lie groupoid is associated a Lie algebroid, generalizing how a Lie algebra is associated to a Lie group (see also below). For example, the Lie algebroid 
 
 
 
  comes from the pair groupoid whose objects are 
 
 
 
 , with one isomorphism between each pair of objects. Unfortunately, going back from a Lie algebroid to a Lie groupoid is not always possible,1 but every Lie algebroid gives a stacky Lie groupoid.23


Given the action of a Lie algebra g on a manifold M, the set of g -invariant vector fields on M is a Lie algebroid over the space of orbits of the action.


The Atiyah algebroid of a principal G-bundle P over a manifold M is a Lie algebroid with short exact sequence:
 
 




The space of sections of the Atiyah algebroid is the Lie algebra of G-invariant vector fields on P.
 

Lie algebroid associated to a Lie groupoid
To describe the construction let us fix some notation. G is the space of morphisms of the Lie groupoid, M the space of objects, 
 
 
 
  the units and 
 
 
 
  the target map.


 
  the t-fiber tangent space. The Lie algebroid is now the vector bundle 
 
 
 
 . This inherits a bracket from G, because we can identify the M-sections into A with left-invariant vector fields on G. The anchor map then is obtained as the derivation of the source map 
 
 
 
 . Further these sections act on the smooth functions of M by identifying these with left-invariant functions on G.
As a more explicit example consider the Lie algebroid associated to the pair groupoid 
 
 
 
 . The target map is 
 
 
 
  and the units 
 
 
 
 . The t-fibers are 
 
 
 
  and therefore 
 
 
 
 . So the Lie algebroid is the vector bundle 
 
 
 
 . The extension of sections X into A to left-invariant vector fields on G is simply 
 
 
 
  and the extension of a smooth function f from M to a left-invariant function on G is 
 
 
 
 . Therefore the bracket on A is just the Lie bracket of tangent vector fields and the anchor map is just the identity.
Of course you could do an analog construction with the source map and right-invariant vector fields/ functions. However you get an isomorphic Lie algebroid, with the explicit isomorphism 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the inverse map.
See also

R-algebroid

References


External links

Alan Weinstein, Groupoids: unifying internal and external

symmetry, AMS Notices, 43 (1996), 744-752. Also available as arXiv:math/9602220

Kirill Mackenzie, Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids in Differential Geometry, Cambridge U. Press, 1987.


Kirill Mackenzie, General Theory of Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids, Cambridge U. Press, 2005


Charles-Michel Marle, Differential calculus on a Lie algebroid and Poisson manifolds (2002). Also available in arXiv:0804.2451

"
Category:Lie algebras Category:Differential geometry



Marius Crainic, Rui L. Fernandes. Integrability of Lie brackets, Ann. of Math. (2), Vol. 157 (2003), no. 2, 575--620↩
Hsian-Hua Tseng and Chenchang Zhu, Integrating Lie algebroids via stacks, Compositio Mathematica, Volume 142 (2006), Issue 01, pp 251-270, available as arXiv:math/0405003↩
Chenchang Zhu, Lie II theorem for Lie algebroids via stacky Lie groupoids, available as arXiv:math/0701024↩




