   Re      Re   RE may be an abbreviation or a word/name. It may refer to:  Abbreviations   RE (complexity) , the set of recursively enumerable languages  RE (automobile) , a defunct Rhodesian race-car constructor  RE (e-mail) , ( re: ) "REPLY" "in reference to" in e-mail, letter, memorandum, court case title, etc. ( cf.  re )  The IATA code for Aer Arann , an Irish regional airline  Rare earth element , one of a group of elements on the periodic table. Only when followed by the word "element".  Real estate  Rotary engine  Royal Society of Painter-Printmakers  Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft , a German encyclopedia of classical scholarship  Recursively enumerable set  Regular expression , a string that describes or matches a set of strings, according to certain syntax rules  Relative effectiveness factor , a measurement of an explosive's power  Resident Evil , a franchise of horror-adventure video games  Réunion , a French island (pop. ~800,000) near Mauritius, ISO 3166 digram and FIPS PUB 10-4 territory code  .re , Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) of Réunion   Reuptake enhancer , a type of drug which enhances reuptake of a neurotransmitter  Reverse engineering , the process of taking something (a device, an electrical component, a software program, etc.) apart and analyzing its workings in detail  Requirements engineering during the development of computer programs  Rock-Eval, an apparatus for assessing the oil potential of a sedimentary rock, designed at the French Institute of Petroleum  Royal Engineers , a corps of the British Army  Religious Education  Abbreviations of single words:  Re(z) or   ℜ     \Re   : the real part in mathematics  Reynolds number , in physics  Réaumur scale degree of temperature (°Ré)  Rhenium , a chemical element whose symbol is "Re"  Re., or Rupee , a currency in many Asian countries    Words   re ( re: ), a word meaning "regarding, with reference to".  Re, the ancient Egyptian god Ra  Re: (band) , a musical duo based in Canada and the United States  Re, or Reinsurance , a process whereby an insurer spreads its own risks  Re (exclamation) , in Greek  Re, 'in the matter of...'; see the list of Latin phrases and In re  '' 're'', a contracted form of are , part of the English verb to be  re , a chemical descriptor, see Prochirality  re means again, e.g. re-reads  Re (kana) , the Japanese syllables written れ and レ   Music   Re, the second syllable of the scale in solfège   Re, or D (musical note) , the second note of the musical scale in fixed do solfège   Re (Café Tacuba album)  Re (Les Rita Mitsouko album)  Re. (Aya Ueto album)   People   Giovanni Battista Re , an Italian cardinal  Cayetano Ré , a former Paraguayan footballer with Asperger syndrome   Places   Re, Norway , a municipality in Vestfold county, Norway  Re, Sogn og Fjordane , a village in Gloppen municipality, Sogn og Fjordane county, Norway  Re, Piedmont , an Italian municipality  Île de Ré , an island off the west coast of France  Le Bois-Plage-en-Ré , a commune on that island   Re di Anfo , a torrent (seasonal stream) in Italy  Re di Gianico, Re di Niardo, Re di Sellero, Re di Tredenus, torrents in the Val Camonica   "  Category:Two-letter disambiguation pages   