


Autoignition temperature




Autoignition temperature

The autoignition temperature or kindling point of a substance is the lowest temperature at which it will spontaneously ignite in a normal atmosphere without an external source of ignition, such as a flame or spark. This temperature is required to supply the activation energy needed for combustion. The temperature at which a chemical will ignite decreases as the pressure or oxygen concentration increases. It is usually applied to a combustible fuel mixture.
Autoignition temperatures of liquid chemicals are typically measured using a 500 mL flask placed in a temperature controlled oven in accordance with the procedure described in ASTM E659.1
When measured for plastics, autoignition temperature can also be measured under elevated pressure and at 100% oxygen concentration. The resulting value is used as a predictor of viability for high-oxygen service. The main testing standard for this is ASTM G72.2
Autoignition equation
The time 
 
 
 
  it takes for a material to reach its autoignition temperature 
 
 
 
  when exposed to a heat flux

 
  is given by the following equation


3
where k = thermal conductivity (W/(m·K)), ρ = density (kg/m³), and c = specific heat capacity (J/(kg·K)) of the material of interest. 
 
 
 
  is the temperature, in Kelvin, the material starts at (or the temperature of the bulk material), and 
 
 
 
  is the heat flux (W/m²) incident to the material.
Autoignition point of selected substances
Temperatures vary widely in the literature and should only be used as estimates. Factors which may cause variation include partial pressure of oxygen, altitude, humidity, and amount of time required for ignition. Generally the auto-ignition temperature for hydrocarbon/air mixtures decreases with increasing molecular weight and increasing chain length. The auto-ignition temperature is also higher for branched-chain hydrocarbons than for straight-chain hydrocarbons.4




Substance

data-sort-type="number" | Autoignition (°C)5

Autoignition (°F)6

Note





Triethylborane




Silane


or below



White phosphorus


on contact with an organic substance, melts otherwise



Carbon disulfide




Diethyl ether


7



Gasoline (Petrol)


8



Ethanol


9



Diesel or Jet A-1


10 or below



Butane


11



Paper


1213



Leather / Parchment


1415



Magnesium




Hydrogen


16



For paper, there is considerable variation between sources, mainly because there are many physical variables over different kinds of paper, like thickness, density and composition; in addition, it takes longer for the combustion of paper to start at lower temperatures,17 ''see Fahrenheit 451.
See also

Pyrolysis
Flash point
Gas burner (For flame temperatures, combustion heat energy values and ignition temperatures)

References
External links

Analysis of Effective Thermal Properties of Thermally Thick Materials.

sv:Självantändning#Självantändningspunkt"
Category:Chemical properties Category:Fire Category:Threshold temperatures



E659 – 78 (Reapproved 2000), "Standard Test Method for Autoignition Temperature of Liquid Chemicals", ASTM, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959↩
S. Grynko, "Material Properties Explained" (2012), ISBN 1-4700-7991-7, p. 46.↩
Principles of Fire Behavior. ISBN 0-8273-7732-0. 1998.↩
Zabetakis, M.G. (1965), Flammability characteristics of combustible gases and vapours, U.S. Department of Mines, Bulletin 627.↩
Under standard conditions for pressure.↩

↩

↩

↩
 (Reproduced from "Firepoint" magazine)↩

↩
↩
↩
↩




