


Octagon




Octagon

In geometry, an octagon (from the Greek ὀκτάγωνον oktágōnon, "eight angles") is a polygon that has eight sides.
A regular octagon has Schläfli symbol {8} 1 and can also be constructed as a quasiregular truncated square, t{4}, which alternates two types of edges.
Properties of the general octagon
(Figure)
The diagonals of the green quadrilateral are equal in length and at right angles to each other

The sum of all the internal angles of any octagon is 1080°. As with all polygons, the external angles total 360°.
If squares are constructed all internally or all externally on the sides of an octagon, then the midpoints of the segments connecting the centers of opposite squares form a quadrilateral that is both equidiagonal and orthodiagonal (that is, whose diagonals are equal in length and at right angles to each other).2
The midpoint octagon of a reference octagon has its eight vertices at the midpoints of the sides of the reference octagon. If squares are constructed all internally or all externally on the sides of the midpoint octagon, then the midpoints of the segments connecting the centers of opposite squares themselves form the vertices of a square.3 {{-}}
Regular octagon
A regular octagon is a closed figure with sides of the same length and internal angles of the same size. It has eight lines of reflective symmetry and rotational symmetry of order 8. A regular octagon is represented by the Schläfli symbol {8}. The internal angle at each vertex of a regular octagon is 135°.
Area
The area of a regular octagon of side length a is given by



In terms of the circumradius R, the area is



In terms of the apothem r (see also inscribed figure), the area is



These last two coefficients bracket the value of pi, the area of the unit circle. 
The area can also be derived as follows:



where S is the span of the octagon, or the second shortest diagonal; and a is the length of one of the sides, or bases. This is easily proven if one takes an octagon, draws a square around the outside (making sure that four of the eight sides touch the four sides of the square) and then taking the corner triangles (these are 45–45–90 triangles) and placing them with right angles pointed inward, forming a square. The edges of this square are each the length of the base.
Given the length of a side a, the span S is:






The area is then as above:






Expressed in terms of the span, area is:






Another simple formula for the area is



More often the span S is known, and the length of the sides, a, is to be determined, as when cutting a square piece of material into a regular octagon. From the above:



The two end lengths e on each side, as well as being 
 
 
 
  may be calculated as:



Construction and elementary properties
(Figure)
Building a regular octagon via folding of paper sheet

A regular octagon may be constructed as follows:

Draw a circle and a diameter AOB, where O is the center and A,B are points on the circumference.
Draw another diameter COD, perpendicular to AOB.
(Note in passing that A,B,C,D are vertices of a square).
Draw the bisectors of the right angles AOC and BOC, making two more diameters EOF and GOH.
A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H are the vertices of the octagon.

A regular octagon can be constructed using a straightedge and a compass:
(Figure)
centre|508px

Each side of a regular octagon subtends half a right angle at the centre of the circle which connects its vertices. Its area can thus be computed as the sum of 8 isosceles triangles, leading to the result:



for an octagon of side a.
Standard coordinates
The coordinates for the vertices of a regular octagon centered at the origin and with side length 2 are:

(±1, ±(1+√2))
(±(1+√2), ±1).

Uses of octagons
 The octagonal shape is used as a design element in architecture. The Dome of the Rock has a characteristic octagonal plan. The Tower of the Winds in Athens is another example of an octagonal structure. The octagonal plan has also been in church architecture such as St. George's Cathedral, Addis Ababa, Basilica of San Vitale (in Ravenna, Italia), Castel del Monte (Apulia, Italia), Florence Baptistery, Zum Friedefürsten church (Germany) and a number of octagonal churches in Norway. The central space in the Aachen Cathedral, the Carolingian Palatine Chapel, has a regular octagonal floorplan. Uses of octagons in churches also include lesser design elements, such as the octagonal apse of Nidaros Cathedral.
Other uses
File:zont 8 ugolnik.jpg|Umbrellas often have an octagonal outline. File:Afghancarpet1.jpg|The famous Bukhara rug design incorporates an octagonal "elephant's foot" motif. File:Eixample.svg|The street & block layout of Barcelona's Eixample district is based on non-regular octagons File:Janggipieces.jpg|Janggi uses octagonal pieces. File:Revolving lottery machine,kaitenshiki-cyusenki,japan.JPG|Japanese lottery machines often have octagonal shape. File:MUTCD R1-1.svg|Stop sign used in English-speaking countries, as well as in most European countries File:Bagua-name-earlier.svg|The trigrams of the Taoist bagua are often arranged octagonally File:Octagonal footed gold cup from the Belitung shipwreck, ArtScience Museum, Singapore - 20110618-01.jpg|Famous octagonal gold cup from the Belitung shipwreck File:Shimer College class 1995 octagonal table.jpg|Classes at Shimer College are traditionally held around octagonal tables File:Labyrinthe de la cathédrale de Reims.svg|The Labyrinth of the Reims Cathedral with a quasi-octagonal shape.
Variations from regular octagons
A vertex-transitive (isogonal) octagon is construct in four mirrors can alternate long and short edges. An edge-transitive octagon (isotoxal) is constructed with equal edge lengths, but vertices alternating two different internal angles. These two forms are duals of each other and have half the symmetry order of the regular octagon.





Isogonal


Isotoxal



Skew octagon
 A skew octagon is a skew polygon with 8 vertices and edges but not existing on the same plane. The interior of such an octagon is not generally defined. A skew zig-zag octagon has vertices alternating between two parallel planes.
A regular skew octagon is vertex-transitive with equal edge lengths. In 3-dimensions it will be a zig-zag skew octagon and can be seen in the vertices and side edges of a square antiprism with the same D4d, [2+,8] symmetry, order 16.
Derived figures
File:Tiling Semiregular 4-8-8 Truncated Square.svg|The truncated square tiling has 2 octagons around every vertex.
File:Octagonal prism.png|An octagonal prism contains two octagonal faces.
File:Octagonal antiprism.png|An octagonal antiprism contains two octagonal faces.
File:Great rhombicuboctahedron.png|The truncated cuboctahedron contains 6 octagonal faces.
File:Omnitruncated cubic honeycomb2.png|The omnitruncated cubic honeycomb

Related polytopes
The octagon, as a truncated square, is first in a sequence of truncated hypercubes:  As an expanded square, it is also first in a sequence of expanded hypercubes: 
Petrie polygons
The octagon is the Petrie polygon for these higher-dimensional regular and uniform polytopes, shown in these skew orthogonal projections of in A7, B4, and D5 Coxeter planes.




A7

D5

B4






7-simplex


5-demicube


16-cell



See also

Bumper pool
Octagon house
Octagonal number
Octagram
Oktogon, a major intersection in Budapest, Hungary
Rub el Hizb (also known as Al Quds Star and as Octa Star)
Smoothed octagon

References
External links

Octagon Calculator
Definition and properties of an octagon With interactive animation


"
Category:Polygons Category:Elementary shapes



.↩
Dao Thanh Oai (2015), "Equilateral triangles and Kiepert perspectors in complex numbers", Forum Geometricorum 15, 105--114. http://forumgeom.fau.edu/FG2015volume15/FG201509index.html↩





