


Chi-squared distribution




Chi-squared distribution

\Gamma\left(\frac{k}{2}\right)}\; x^{\frac{k}{2}-1} e^{-\frac{x}{2}}\,
 | cdf        = 


 | mean       = k
 | median     = 


 | mode       = max{ k − 2, 0 }
 | variance   = 2k
 | skewness   = 


 | kurtosis   = 12 / k
 | entropy    = 


 | mgf        =    for  t        1
}}
In probability theory and statistics, the chi-squared distribution (also chi-square or ) with k degrees of freedom is the distribution of a sum of the squares of k independent standard normal random variables. It is a special case of the gamma distribution and is one of the most widely used probability distributions in inferential statistics, e.g., in hypothesis testing or in construction of confidence intervals.2345 When it is being distinguished from the more general noncentral chi-squared distribution, this distribution is sometimes called the central chi-squared distribution.
The chi-squared distribution is used in the common chi-squared tests for goodness of fit of an observed distribution to a theoretical one, the independence of two criteria of classification of qualitative data, and in confidence interval estimation for a population standard deviation of a normal distribution from a sample standard deviation. Many other statistical tests also use this distribution, like Friedman's analysis of variance by ranks.
Definition
If Z1, ..., Zk are independent, standard normal random variables, then the sum of their squares,


 
  is distributed according to the chi-squared distribution with k degrees of freedom. This is usually denoted as



The chi-squared distribution has one parameter: k — a positive integer that specifies the number of degrees of freedom (i.e. the number of Zi’s)
Characteristics
Further properties of the chi-squared distribution can be found in the box at the upper right corner of this article.
Probability density function
The probability density function (pdf) of the chi-squared distribution is


 
  where Γ(k/2) denotes the Gamma function, which has closed-form values for integer k.
For derivations of the pdf in the cases of one, two and k degrees of freedom, see Proofs related to chi-squared distribution.
Differential equation
The pdf of the chi-squared distribution is a solution to the following differential equation:



Cumulative distribution function
(Figure)
Chernoff bound for the CDF and tail (1-CDF) of a chi-squared random variable with ten degrees of freedom (k = 10) 

Its cumulative distribution function is:


 
  where γ(s,t) is the lower incomplete Gamma function and P(s,t) is the regularized Gamma function.
In a special case of k = 2 this function has a simple form:


 
  and the form is not much more complicated for other small even k.
Tables of the chi-squared cumulative distribution function are widely available and the function is included in many spreadsheets and all statistical packages.
Letting 
 
 
 
 , Chernoff bounds on the lower and upper tails of the CDF may be obtained.6 For the cases when 
 
 
 
  (which include all of the cases when this CDF is less than half):



The tail bound for the cases when 
 
 
 
 , similarly, is



For another approximation for the CDF modeled after the cube of a Gaussian, see under Noncentral chi-squared distribution.
Additivity
It follows from the definition of the chi-squared distribution that the sum of independent chi-squared variables is also chi-squared distributed. Specifically, if {Xi}i=1n are independent chi-squared variables with {ki}i=1n degrees of freedom, respectively, then  X''1 + ⋯ + Xn}} is chi-squared distributed with  degrees of freedom.
Sample mean
The sample mean of n i.i.d. chi-squared variables of degree k is distributed according to a gamma distribution with shape α and scale θ parameters: 
 
 

Asymptotically, given that for a scale parameter 
 
 
 
  going to infinity, a Gamma distribution converges towards a Normal distribution with expectation 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
 
 , the sample mean converges towards: 
 
 

Note that we would have obtained the same result invoking instead the central limit theorem, noting that for each chi-squared variable of degree 
 
 
 
  the expectation is 
 
 
 
  , and its variance 
 
 
 
  (and hence the variance of the sample mean 
 
 
 
  being 
 
 
 
 ).
Entropy
The differential entropy is given by


 
  where ψ(x) is the Digamma function.
The chi-squared distribution is the maximum entropy probability distribution for a random variate X for which 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are fixed. Since the chi-squared is in the family of gamma distributions, this can be derived by substituting appropriate values in the Expectation of the Log moment of Gamma. For derivation from more basic principles, see the derivation in moment generating function of the sufficient statistic.
Noncentral moments
The moments about zero of a chi-squared distribution with k degrees of freedom are given by78



Cumulants
The cumulants are readily obtained by a (formal) power series expansion of the logarithm of the characteristic function:



Asymptotic properties
By the central limit theorem, because the chi-squared distribution is the sum of k independent random variables with finite mean and variance, it converges to a normal distribution for large k. For many practical purposes, for k > 50 the distribution is sufficiently close to a normal distribution for the difference to be ignored.9 Specifically, if X ~ χ²(k), then as k tends to infinity, the distribution of 
 
 
tends to a standard normal distribution. However, convergence is slow as the skewness is 
 
 
 
  and the excess kurtosis is 12/k.

The sampling distribution of ln(χ2) converges to normality much faster than the sampling distribution of χ2,10 as the logarithm removes much of the asymmetry.11 Other functions of the chi-squared distribution converge more rapidly to a normal distribution. Some examples are:
If X ~ χ²(k) then 
 
 
 
  is approximately normally distributed with mean 
 
 
 
  and unit variance (result credited to R. A. Fisher).
If X ~ χ²(k) then 
 
 
 
  is approximately normally distributed with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
12 This is known as the Wilson–Hilferty transformation.

Relation to other distributions
(Figure)
Approximate formula for median compared with numerical quantile (top). Difference between numerical quantile and approximate formula (bottom).


As 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  (normal distribution)




 
  (Noncentral chi-squared distribution with non-centrality parameter 
 
 
 
 )


If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  has the chi-squared distribution 
 
 



As a special case, if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  has the chi-squared distribution 
 
 





 
  (The squared norm of k standard normally distributed variables is a chi-squared distribution with k degrees of freedom)


If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . (gamma distribution)


If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  (chi distribution)


If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is an exponential distribution. (See Gamma distribution for more.)


If 
 
 
 
  (Rayleigh distribution) then 
 
 



If 
 
 
 
  (Maxwell distribution) then 
 
 



If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  (Inverse-chi-squared distribution)


The chi-squared distribution is a special case of type 3 Pearson distribution


If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are independent then 
 
 
 
  (beta distribution)


If 
 
 
 
  (uniform distribution) then 
 
 





 
  is a transformation of Laplace distribution


If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 



chi-squared distribution is a transformation of Pareto distribution


Student's t-distribution is a transformation of chi-squared distribution


Student's t-distribution can be obtained from chi-squared distribution and normal distribution


Noncentral beta distribution can be obtained as a transformation of chi-squared distribution and Noncentral chi-squared distribution


Noncentral t-distribution can be obtained from normal distribution and chi-squared distribution

A chi-squared variable with k degrees of freedom is defined as the sum of the squares of k independent standard normal random variables.
If Y is a k-dimensional Gaussian random vector with mean vector μ and rank k covariance matrix C, then X = (Y−μ)TC−1(Y−μ) is chi-squared distributed with k degrees of freedom.
The sum of squares of statistically independent unit-variance Gaussian variables which do not have mean zero yields a generalization of the chi-squared distribution called the noncentral chi-squared distribution.
If Y is a vector of k i.i.d. standard normal random variables and A is a k×k symmetric, idempotent matrix with rank k−n then the quadratic form YTAY is chi-squared distributed with k−n degrees of freedom.
The chi-squared distribution is also naturally related to other distributions arising from the Gaussian. In particular,

Y is F-distributed, Y ~ F(k1,k2) if 
 
 
 
  where X1 ~ χ²(k1) and X2  ~ χ²(k2) are statistically independent.


If X is chi-squared distributed, then 
 
 
 
  is chi distributed.


If  and  are statistically independent, then . If X1 and X2 are not independent, then  is not chi-squared distributed.

Generalizations
The chi-squared distribution is obtained as the sum of the squares of k independent, zero-mean, unit-variance Gaussian random variables. Generalizations of this distribution can be obtained by summing the squares of other types of Gaussian random variables. Several such distributions are described below.
Linear combination
If 
 
 
 
  are chi square random variables and 
 
 
 
 , then a closed expression for the distribution of 
 
 
 
  is not known. It may be, however, calculated using the property of characteristic functions of the chi-squared random variable.13
Chi-squared distributions
Noncentral chi-squared distribution
The noncentral chi-squared distribution is obtained from the sum of the squares of independent Gaussian random variables having unit variance and nonzero means.
Generalized chi-squared distribution
The generalized chi-squared distribution is obtained from the quadratic form z′Az where z is a zero-mean Gaussian vector having an arbitrary covariance matrix, and A is an arbitrary matrix.
Gamma, exponential, and related distributions
The chi-squared distribution X ~ χ²(k) is a special case of the gamma distribution, in that X ~ Γ(k/2, 1/2) using the rate parameterization of the gamma distribution (or X ~ Γ(k/2, 2) using the scale parameterization of the gamma distribution) where k is an integer.
Because the exponential distribution is also a special case of the Gamma distribution, we also have that if X ~ χ²(2), then X ~ Exp(1/2) is an exponential distribution.
The Erlang distribution is also a special case of the Gamma distribution and thus we also have that if X ~ χ²(k) with even k, then X is Erlang distributed with shape parameter k/2 and scale parameter 1/2.
Applications
The chi-squared distribution has numerous applications in inferential statistics, for instance in chi-squared tests and in estimating variances. It enters the problem of estimating the mean of a normally distributed population and the problem of estimating the slope of a regression line via its role in Student’s t-distribution. It enters all analysis of variance problems via its role in the F-distribution, which is the distribution of the ratio of two independent chi-squared random variables, each divided by their respective degrees of freedom.
Following are some of the most common situations in which the chi-squared distribution arises from a Gaussian-distributed sample.

if X1, ..., Xn are i.i.d. N(μ, σ2) random variables, then 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .


The box below shows some statistics based on  1, ⋯, k, }} independent random variables that have probability distributions related to the chi-squared distribution:






Name

Statistic





chi-squared distribution







noncentral chi-squared distribution







chi distribution







noncentral chi distribution








The chi-squared distribution is also often encountered in Magnetic Resonance Imaging .14
Table of χ2 value vs p-value
The p-value is the probability of observing a test statistic at least as extreme in a chi-squared distribution. Accordingly, since the cumulative distribution function (CDF) for the appropriate degrees of freedom (df) gives the probability of having obtained a value less extreme than this point, subtracting the CDF value from 1 gives the p-value. The table below gives a number of p-values matching to χ2 for the first 10 degrees of freedom.
A low p-value indicates greater statistical significance, i.e. greater confidence that the observed deviation from the null hypothesis is significant. A p-value of 0.05 is often used as a cutoff between significant and not-significant results.




Degrees of freedom (df)

χ2 value15





1

0.004



2

0.10



3

0.35



4

0.71



5

1.14



6

1.63



7

2.17



8

2.73



9

3.32



10

3.94



P value (Probability)

0.05





History and name
This distribution was first described by the German statistician Friedrich Robert Helmert in papers of 1875-6,16 where he computed the sampling distribution of the sample variance of a normal population. Thus in German this was traditionally known as the Helmert'sche ("Helmertian") or "Helmert distribution".
The distribution was independently rediscovered by the English mathematician Karl Pearson in the context of goodness of fit, for which he developed his Pearson's chi-squared test, published in 1900, with computed table of values published in , collected in . The name "chi-squared" ultimately derives from Pearson's shorthand for the exponent in a multivariate normal distribution with the Greek letter Chi, writing -½χ² for what would appear in modern notation as -½xTΣ−1x (Σ being the covariance matrix).17 The idea of a family of "chi-squared distributions", however, is not due to Pearson but arose as a further development due to Fisher in the 1920s.
See also

Cochran's theorem
F-distribution
Fisher's method for combining independent tests of significance
Gamma distribution
Generalized chi-squared distribution
Hotelling's T-squared distribution
Noncentral chi-squared distribution
Pearson's chi-squared test
Student's t-distribution
Wilks' lambda distribution
Wishart distribution

References
Further reading




External links


Calculator for the pdf, cdf and quantiles of the chi-squared distribution
Earliest Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics: entry on Chi squared has a brief history
Course notes on Chi-Squared Goodness of Fit Testing from Yale University Stats 101 class.
Mathematica demonstration showing the chi-squared sampling distribution of various statistics, e.g. Σx², for a normal population
Simple algorithm for approximating cdf and inverse cdf for the chi-squared distribution with a pocket calculator

"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Normal distribution Category:Exponential family distributions Category:Infinitely divisible probability distributions Category:Probability distributions



↩
↩
NIST (2006). Engineering Statistics Handbook - Chi-Squared Distribution↩
↩
↩
↩
Chi-squared distribution, from MathWorld, retrieved Feb. 11, 2009↩
M. K. Simon, Probability Distributions Involving Gaussian Random Variables, New York: Springer, 2002, eq. (2.35), ISBN 978-0-387-34657-1↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
den Dekker A. J., Sijbers J., (2014) "Data distributions in magnetic resonance images: a review", Physica Medica, 1↩
Chi-Squared Test Table B.2. Dr. Jacqueline S. McLaughlin at The Pennsylvania State University. In turn citing: R.A. Fisher and F. Yates, Statistical Tables for Biological Agricultural and Medical Research, 6th ed., Table IV↩
F. R. Helmert, "[http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/img/?PPN=PPN599415665_0021&DMDID;;=DMDLOG_0018 Ueber die Wahrscheinlichkeit der Potenzsummen der Beobachtungsfehler und über einige damit im Zusammenhange stehende Fragen]", Zeitschrift für Mathematik und Physik 21, 1876, S. 102–219↩
R. L. Plackett, Karl Pearson and the Chi-Squared Test, International Statistical Review, 1983, 61f. See also Jeff Miller, Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics.↩




