


Second law of thermodynamics




Second law of thermodynamics

The second law of thermodynamics states that every natural thermodynamic process proceeds in the sense in which the sum of the entropies of all bodies taking part in the process is increased. In the limit, i.e. for reversible processes, the sum of the entropies remains unchanged.
The second law is an empirical finding that has been accepted as an axiom of thermodynamic theory.
Statistical thermodynamics, classical or quantum, explains the law.
The second law has been expressed in many ways. Its first formulation is credited to the French scientist Sadi Carnot in 1824 (see Timeline of thermodynamics).
Introduction
The first law of thermodynamics provides the basic definition of thermodynamic energy, also called internal energy, associated with all thermodynamic systems, but unknown in classical mechanics, and states the rule of conservation of energy in nature.12
The concept of energy in the first law does not, however, account for the observation that natural processes have a preferred direction of progress. The first law is symmetrical with respect to the initial and final states of an evolving system. But the second law asserts that a natural process runs only in one sense, and is not reversible. For example, heat always flows spontaneously from hotter to colder bodies, and never the reverse, unless external work is performed on the system. The key concept for the explanation of this phenomenon through the second law of thermodynamics is the definition of a new physical quantity, the entropy.34
For mathematical analysis of processes, entropy is introduced as follows. In a fictive reversible process, an infinitesimal increment in the entropy (
 
 
 
 ) of a system results from an infinitesimal transfer of heat (
 
 
 
 ) to a closed system divided by the common temperature (
 
 
 
 ) of the system and the surroundings which supply the heat.5



The zeroth law of thermodynamics in its usual short statement allows recognition that two bodies in a relation of thermal equilibrium have the same temperature, especially that a test body has the same temperature as a reference thermometric body.6 For a body in thermal equilibrium with another, there are indefinitely many empirical temperature scales, in general respectively depending on the properties of a particular reference thermometric body. The second law allows a distinguished temperature scale, which defines an absolute, thermodynamic temperature, independent of the properties of any particular reference thermometric body.78
Various statements of the law
The second law of thermodynamics may be expressed in many specific ways,9 the most prominent classical statements being the statement by Rudolf Clausius (1854), the statement by Lord Kelvin (1851), and the statement in axiomatic thermodynamics by Constantin Carathéodory (1909). These statements cast the law in general physical terms citing the impossibility of certain processes. The Clausius and the Kelvin statements have been shown to be equivalent.
Carnot's principle
The historical origin of the second law of thermodynamics was in Carnot's principle. It refers to a cycle of a Carnot engine, fictively operated in the limiting mode of extreme slowness known as quasi-static, so that the heat and work transfers are between subsystems that are always in their own internal states of thermodynamic equilibrium. The Carnot engine is an idealized device of special interest to engineers who are concerned with the efficiency of heat engines. Carnot's principle was recognized by Carnot at a time when the caloric theory of heat was seriously considered, before the recognition of the first law of thermodynamics, and before the mathematical expression of the concept of entropy. Interpreted in the light of the first law, it is physically equivalent to the second law of thermodynamics, and remains valid today. It states

The efficiency of a quasi-static or reversible Carnot cycle depends only on the temperatures of the two heat reservoirs, and is the same, whatever the working substance. A Carnot engine operated in this way is the most efficient possible heat engine using those two temperatures.10111213141516


Clausius statement
The German scientist Rudolf Clausius laid the foundation for the second law of thermodynamics in 1850 by examining the relation between heat transfer and work. His formulation of the second law, which was published in German in 1854, is known as the Clausius statement:

Heat can never pass from a colder to a warmer body without some other change, connected therewith, occurring at the same time.

The statement by Clausius uses the concept of 'passage of heat'. As is usual in thermodynamic discussions, this means 'net transfer of energy as heat', and does not refer to contributory transfers one way and the other.
Heat cannot spontaneously flow from cold regions to hot regions without external work being performed on the system, which is evident from ordinary experience of refrigeration, for example. In a refrigerator, heat flows from cold to hot, but only when forced by an external agent, the refrigeration system.
Kelvin statement
Lord Kelvin expressed the second law as

It is impossible, by means of inanimate material agency, to derive mechanical effect from any portion of matter by cooling it below the temperature of the coldest of the surrounding objects.

Equivalence of the Clausius and the Kelvin statements
(Figure)
Derive Kelvin Statement from Clausius Statement

Suppose there is an engine violating the Kelvin statement: i.e., one that drains heat and converts it completely into work in a cyclic fashion without any other result. Now pair it with a reversed Carnot engine as shown by the figure. The net and sole effect of this newly created engine consisting of the two engines mentioned is transferring heat 
 
 
 
  from the cooler reservoir to the hotter one, which violates the Clausius statement. Thus a violation of the Kelvin statement implies a violation of the Clausius statement, i.e. the Clausius statement implies the Kelvin statement. We can prove in a similar manner that the Kelvin statement implies the Clausius statement, and hence the two are equivalent.
Planck's proposition
Planck offered the following proposition as derived directly from experience. This is sometimes regarded as his statement of the second law, but he regarded it as a starting point for the derivation of the second law.


It is impossible to construct an engine which will work in a complete cycle, and produce no effect except the raising of a weight and cooling of a heat reservoir.1718




Relation between Kelvin's statement and Planck's proposition
It is almost customary in textbooks to speak of the "Kelvin-Planck statement" of the law, as for example in the text by ter Haar and Wergeland.19 One text gives a statement that for all the world looks like Planck's proposition, but attributes it to Kelvin without mention of Planck.20 One monograph quotes Planck's proposition as the "Kelvin-Planck" formulation, the text naming Kelvin as its author, though it correctly cites Planck in its references.21 The reader may compare the two statements quoted just above here.
Planck's statement
Planck stated the second law as follows.


''Every process occurring in nature proceeds in the sense in which the sum of the entropies of all bodies taking part in the process is increased. In the limit, i.e. for reversible processes, the sum of the entropies remains unchanged.''222324




Principle of Carathéodory
Constantin Carathéodory formulated thermodynamics on a purely mathematical axiomatic foundation. His statement of the second law is known as the Principle of Carathéodory, which may be formulated as follows:25

In every neighborhood of any state S of an adiabatically enclosed system there are states inaccessible from S.''26

With this formulation, he described the concept of adiabatic accessibility for the first time and provided the foundation for a new subfield of classical thermodynamics, often called geometrical thermodynamics. It follows from Carathéodory's principle that quantity of energy quasi-statically transferred as heat is a holonomic process function, in other words, 
 
 
 
 .27 
Though it is almost customary in textbooks to say that Carathéodory's principle expresses the second law and to treat it as equivalent to the Clausius or to the Kelvin-Planck statements, such is not the case. To get all the content of the second law, Carathéodory's principle needs to be supplemented by Planck's principle, that isochoric work always increases the internal energy of a closed system that was initially in its own internal thermodynamic equilibrium.282930 
Planck's Principle
In 1926, Max Planck wrote an important paper on the basics of thermodynamics.3132 He indicated the principle


The internal energy of a closed system is increased by an adiabatic process, throughout the duration of which, the volume of the system remains constant.33




This formulation does not mention heat and does not mention temperature, nor even entropy, and does not necessarily implicitly rely on those concepts, but it implies the content of the second law. A closely related statement is that "Frictional pressure never does positive work."34 Using a now-obsolete form of words, Planck himself wrote: "The production of heat by friction is irreversible."3536
Not mentioning entropy, this principle of Planck is stated in physical terms. It is very closely related to the Kelvin statement given just above.37 Nevertheless, this principle of Planck is not actually Planck's preferred statement of the second law, which is quoted above, in a previous sub-section of the present section of this present article, and relies on the concept of entropy.
The link to Kelvin's statement is illustrated by an equivalent statement by Allahverdyan & Nieuwenhuizen, which they attribute to Kelvin: "No work can be extracted from a closed equilibrium system during a cyclic variation of a parameter by an external source."3839
Statement for a system that has a known expression of its internal energy as a function of its extensive state variables
The second law has been shown to be equivalent to the internal energy U being a weakly convex function, when written as a function of extensive properties (mass, volume, entropy, ...).4041 
Gravitational systems
In non-gravitational systems, objects always have positive heat capacity, meaning that the temperature rises with energy. Therefore, when energy flows from a high-temperature object to a low-temperature object, the source temperature is decreased while the sink temperature is increased; hence temperature differences tend to diminish over time.
However, this is not always the case for systems in which the gravitational force is important and the general theory of relativity is required. (Apart from this, the thermodynamics of systems described by the general theory of relativity is beyond the scope of the present article.) The most striking examples are black holes, which – according to theory – have negative heat capacity. The larger the black hole, the more energy it contains, but the lower its temperature. Thus, the supermassive black hole in the center of the Milky Way is supposed to have a temperature of 10−14K, much lower than the cosmic microwave background temperature of 2.7K, but as it absorbs photons of the cosmic microwave background its mass is increasing so that its low temperature further decreases with time.
For this reason, gravitational systems tend towards non-even distribution of mass and energy. The universe in large scale is importantly a gravitational system, and the second law may therefore not apply to it.
Corollaries
Perpetual motion of the second kind
Before the establishment of the Second Law, many people who were interested in inventing a perpetual motion machine had tried to circumvent the restrictions of First Law of Thermodynamics by extracting the massive internal energy of the environment as the power of the machine. Such a machine is called a "perpetual motion machine of the second kind". The second law declared the impossibility of such machines.
Carnot theorem
Carnot's theorem (1824) is a principle that limits the maximum efficiency for any possible engine. The efficiency solely depends on the temperature difference between the hot and cold thermal reservoirs. Carnot's theorem states:

All irreversible heat engines between two heat reservoirs are less efficient than a Carnot engine operating between the same reservoirs.
All reversible heat engines between two heat reservoirs are equally efficient with a Carnot engine operating between the same reservoirs.

In his ideal model, the heat of caloric converted into work could be reinstated by reversing the motion of the cycle, a concept subsequently known as thermodynamic reversibility. Carnot, however, further postulated that some caloric is lost, not being converted to mechanical work. Hence, no real heat engine could realise the Carnot cycle's reversibility and was condemned to be less efficient.
Though formulated in terms of caloric (see the obsolete caloric theory), rather than entropy, this was an early insight into the second law.
Clausius Inequality
The Clausius Theorem (1854) states that in a cyclic process



The equality holds in the reversible case42 and the '\eta = \frac {A}{q_H} = \frac{q_H-q_C}{q_H} = 1 - \frac{q_C}{q_H} \qquad (1)
where A is the work done per cycle. Thus the efficiency depends only on qC/qH.
Carnot's theorem states that all reversible engines operating between the same heat reservoirs are equally efficient. Thus, any reversible heat engine operating between temperatures T1 and T2 must have the same efficiency, that is to say, the efficiency is the function of temperatures only: 
 
 

In addition, a reversible heat engine operating between temperatures T1 and T3 must have the same efficiency as one consisting of two cycles, one between T1 and another (intermediate) temperature T2, and the second between T2 andT3. This can only be the case if



Now consider the case where 
 
 
 
  is a fixed reference temperature: the temperature of the triple point of water. Then for any T2 and T3,



Therefore if thermodynamic temperature is defined by



then the function f, viewed as a function of thermodynamic temperature, is simply



and the reference temperature T1 will have the value 273.16. (Of course any reference temperature and any positive numerical value could be used—the choice here corresponds to the Kelvin scale.)
Entropy
According to the Clausius equality, for a reversible process



That means the line integral 
 
 
 
  is path independent.
So we can define a state function S called entropy, which satisfies



With this we can only obtain the difference of entropy by integrating the above formula. To obtain the absolute value, we need the Third Law of Thermodynamics, which states that S=0 at absolute zero for perfect crystals.
For any irreversible process, since entropy is a state function, we can always connect the initial and terminal states with an imaginary reversible process and integrating on that path to calculate the difference in entropy.
Now reverse the reversible process and combine it with the said irreversible process. Applying Clausius inequality on this loop,



Thus,



where the equality holds if the transformation is reversible.
Notice that if the process is an adiabatic process, then 
 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
 .
Energy, available useful work
An important and revealing idealized special case is to consider applying the Second Law to the scenario of an isolated system (called the total system or universe), made up of two parts: a sub-system of interest, and the sub-system's surroundings. These surroundings are imagined to be so large that they can be considered as an unlimited heat reservoir at temperature TR and pressure PR — so that no matter how much heat is transferred to (or from) the sub-system, the temperature of the surroundings will remain TR; and no matter how much the volume of the sub-system expands (or contracts), the pressure of the surroundings will remain PR.
Whatever changes to dS and dSR occur in the entropies of the sub-system and the surroundings individually, according to the Second Law the entropy Stot of the isolated total system must not decrease:



According to the First Law of Thermodynamics, the change dU in the internal energy of the sub-system is the sum of the heat δq added to the sub-system, less any work δw done by the sub-system, plus any net chemical energy entering the sub-system d ∑μiRNi, so that:



where μiR are the chemical potentials of chemical species in the external surroundings.
Now the heat leaving the reservoir and entering the sub-system is



where we have first used the definition of entropy in classical thermodynamics (alternatively, in statistical thermodynamics, the relation between entropy change, temperature and absorbed heat can be derived); and then the Second Law inequality from above.
It therefore follows that any net work δw done by the sub-system must obey



It is useful to separate the work δw done by the subsystem into the useful work δwu that can be done by the sub-system, over and beyond the work pR dV done merely by the sub-system expanding against the surrounding external pressure, giving the following relation for the useful work (exergy) that can be done:



It is convenient to define the right-hand-side as the exact derivative of a thermodynamic potential, called the availability or exergy E of the subsystem,



The Second Law therefore implies that for any process which can be considered as divided simply into a subsystem, and an unlimited temperature and pressure reservoir with which it is in contact,



i.e. the change in the subsystem's exergy plus the useful work done by the subsystem (or, the change in the subsystem's exergy less any work, additional to that done by the pressure reservoir, done on the system) must be less than or equal to zero.
In sum, if a proper infinite-reservoir-like reference state is chosen as the system surroundings in the real world, then the Second Law predicts a decrease in E for an irreversible process and no change for a reversible process.


 
  Is equivalent to 
 
 

This expression together with the associated reference state permits a design engineer working at the macroscopic scale (above the thermodynamic limit) to utilize the Second Law without directly measuring or considering entropy change in a total isolated system. (Also, see process engineer). Those changes have already been considered by the assumption that the system under consideration can reach equilibrium with the reference state without altering the reference state. An efficiency for a process or collection of processes that compares it to the reversible ideal may also be found (See second law efficiency.)
This approach to the Second Law is widely utilized in engineering practice, environmental accounting, systems ecology, and other disciplines.
History
 The first theory of the conversion of heat into mechanical work is due to Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot in 1824. He was the first to realize correctly that the efficiency of this conversion depends on the difference of temperature between an engine and its environment.
Recognizing the significance of James Prescott Joule's work on the conservation of energy, Rudolf Clausius was the first to formulate the second law during 1850, in this form: heat does not flow spontaneously from cold to hot bodies. While common knowledge now, this was contrary to the caloric theory of heat popular at the time, which considered heat as a fluid. From there he was able to infer the principle of Sadi Carnot and the definition of entropy (1865).
Established during the 19th century, the Kelvin-Planck statement of the Second Law says, "It is impossible for any device that operates on a cycle to receive heat from a single reservoir and produce a net amount of work." This was shown to be equivalent to the statement of Clausius.
The ergodic hypothesis is also important for the Boltzmann approach. It says that, over long periods of time, the time spent in some region of the phase space of microstates with the same energy is proportional to the volume of this region, i.e. that all accessible microstates are equally probable over a long period of time. Equivalently, it says that time average and average over the statistical ensemble are the same.
It has been shown that not only classical systems but also quantum mechanical ones tend to maximize their entropy over time. Thus the second law follows, given initial conditions with low entropy. More precisely, it has been shown that the local von Neumann entropy is at its maximum value with a very high probability.43 The result is valid for a large class of isolated quantum systems (e.g. a gas in a container). While the full system is pure and therefore does not have any entropy, the entanglement between gas and container gives rise to an increase of the local entropy of the gas. This result is one of the most important achievements of quantum thermodynamics.
Today, much effort in the field is attempting to understand why the initial conditions early in the universe were those of low entropy,4445 as this is seen as the origin of the second law (see below).
Informal descriptions
The second law can be stated in various succinct ways, including:

It is impossible to produce work in the surroundings using a cyclic process connected to a single heat reservoir (Kelvin, 1851).
It is impossible to carry out a cyclic process using an engine connected to two heat reservoirs that will have as its only effect the transfer of a quantity of heat from the low-temperature reservoir to the high-temperature reservoir (Clausius, 1854).
If thermodynamic work is to be done at a finite rate, free energy must be expended. (Stoner, 2000)46

Mathematical descriptions
 In 1856, the German physicist Rudolf Clausius stated what he called the "second fundamental theorem in the mechanical theory of heat" in the following form:



where Q is heat, T is temperature and N is the "equivalence-value" of all uncompensated transformations involved in a cyclical process. Later, in 1865, Clausius would come to define "equivalence-value" as entropy. On the heels of this definition, that same year, the most famous version of the second law was read in a presentation at the Philosophical Society of Zurich on April 24, in which, in the end of his presentation, Clausius concludes:

The entropy of the universe tends to a maximum.

This statement is the best-known phrasing of the second law. Because of the looseness of its language, e.g. universe, as well as lack of specific conditions, e.g. open, closed, or isolated, many people take this simple statement to mean that the second law of thermodynamics applies virtually to every subject imaginable. This, of course, is not true; this statement is only a simplified version of a more extended and precise description.
In terms of time variation, the mathematical statement of the second law for an isolated system undergoing an arbitrary transformation is:



where

S is the entropy of the system and
 
t is time.
 

The equality sign holds in the case that only reversible processes take place inside the system. If irreversible processes take place (which is the case in real systems in operation) the >-sign holds. An alternative way of formulating of the second law for isolated systems is:


 
  with 
 
 

with 
 
 
 
 
  the sum of the rate of entropy production by all processes inside the system. The advantage of this formulation is that it shows the effect of the entropy production. The rate of entropy production is a very important concept since it determines (limits) the efficiency of thermal machines. Multiplied with ambient temperature 
 
 
 
  it gives the so-called dissipated energy 
 
 
 
 .
The expression of the second law for closed systems (so, allowing heat exchange and moving boundaries, but not exchange of matter) is:


 
  with 
 
 

Here


 
  is the heat flow into the system


 
  is the temperature at the point where the heat enters the system.
If heat is supplied to the system at several places we have to take the algebraic sum of the corresponding terms.
For open systems (also allowing exchange of matter):


 
  with 
 
 

Here 
 
 
 
  is the flow of entropy into the system associated with the flow of matter entering the system. It should not be confused with the time derivative of the entropy. If matter is supplied at several places we have to take the algebraic sum of these contributions.
Statistical mechanics gives an explanation for the second law by postulating that a material is composed of atoms and molecules which are in constant motion. A particular set of positions and velocities for each particle in the system is called a microstate of the system and because of the constant motion, the system is constantly changing its microstate. Statistical mechanics postulates that, in equilibrium, each microstate that the system might be in is equally likely to occur, and when this assumption is made, it leads directly to the conclusion that the second law must hold in a statistical sense. That is, the second law will hold on average, with a statistical variation on the order of 1/√N where N is the number of particles in the system. For everyday (macroscopic) situations, the probability that the second law will be violated is practically zero. However, for systems with a small number of particles, thermodynamic parameters, including the entropy, may show significant statistical deviations from that predicted by the second law. Classical thermodynamic theory does not deal with these statistical variations.
Derivation from statistical mechanics
Due to Loschmidt's paradox, derivations of the Second Law have to make an assumption regarding the past, namely that the system is uncorrelated at some time in the past; this allows for simple probabilistic treatment. This assumption is usually thought as a boundary condition, and thus the second Law is ultimately a consequence of the initial conditions somewhere in the past, probably at the beginning of the universe (the Big Bang), though other scenarios have also been suggested.474849
Given these assumptions, in statistical mechanics, the Second Law is not a postulate, rather it is a consequence of the fundamental postulate, also known as the equal prior probability postulate, so long as one is clear that simple probability arguments are applied only to the future, while for the past there are auxiliary sources of information which tell us that it was low entropy. The first part of the second law, which states that the entropy of a thermally isolated system can only increase, is a trivial consequence of the equal prior probability postulate, if we restrict the notion of the entropy to systems in thermal equilibrium. The entropy of an isolated system in thermal equilibrium containing an amount of energy of 
 
 
 
 
  is:



where 
 
 
 
  is the number of quantum states in a small interval between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
 
  is a macroscopically small energy interval that is kept fixed. Strictly speaking this means that the entropy depends on the choice of 
 
 
 
 . However, in the thermodynamic limit (i.e. in the limit of infinitely large system size), the specific entropy (entropy per unit volume or per unit mass) does not depend on 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose we have an isolated system whose macroscopic state is specified by a number of variables. These macroscopic variables can, e.g., refer to the total volume, the positions of pistons in the system, etc. Then 
 
 
 
  will depend on the values of these variables. If a variable is not fixed, (e.g. we do not clamp a piston in a certain position), then because all the accessible states are equally likely in equilibrium, the free variable in equilibrium will be such that 
 
 
 
  is maximized as that is the most probable situation in equilibrium.
If the variable was initially fixed to some value then upon release and when the new equilibrium has been reached, the fact the variable will adjust itself so that 
 
 
 
 
  is maximized, implies that the entropy will have increased or it will have stayed the same (if the value at which the variable was fixed happened to be the equilibrium value). Suppose we start from an equilibrium situation and we suddenly remove a constraint on a variable. Then right after we do this, there are a number 
 
 
 
  of accessible microstates, but equilibrium has not yet been reached, so the actual probabilities of the system being in some accessible state are not yet equal to the prior probability of 
 
 
 
 . We have already seen that in the final equilibrium state, the entropy will have increased or have stayed the same relative to the previous equilibrium state. Boltzmann's H-theorem, however, proves that the quantity 
 
 
 
  increases monotonically as a function of time during the intermediate out of equilibrium state.
Derivation of the entropy change for reversible processes
The second part of the Second Law states that the entropy change of a system undergoing a reversible process is given by:



where the temperature is defined as:



See here for the justification for this definition. Suppose that the system has some external parameter, x, that can be changed. In general, the energy eigenstates of the system will depend on x. According to the adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics, in the limit of an infinitely slow change of the system's Hamiltonian, the system will stay in the same energy eigenstate and thus change its energy according to the change in energy of the energy eigenstate it is in.
The generalized force, X, corresponding to the external variable x is defined such that 
 
 
 
  is the work performed by the system if x is increased by an amount dx. E.g., if x is the volume, then X is the pressure. The generalized force for a system known to be in energy eigenstate 
 
 
 
  is given by:



Since the system can be in any energy eigenstate within an interval of 
 
 
 
 , we define the generalized force for the system as the expectation value of the above expression:



To evaluate the average, we partition the 
 
 
 
  energy eigenstates by counting how many of them have a value for 
 
 
 
  within a range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Calling this number 
 
 
 
 
 , we have:



The average defining the generalized force can now be written:



We can relate this to the derivative of the entropy w.r.t. x at constant energy E as follows. Suppose we change x to x + dx. Then 
 
 
 
  will change because the energy eigenstates depend on x, causing energy eigenstates to move into or out of the range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . Let's focus again on the energy eigenstates for which 
 
 
 
  lies within the range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since these energy eigenstates increase in energy by Y dx, all such energy eigenstates that are in the interval ranging from E – Y dx to E move from below E to above E. There are



such energy eigenstates. If 
 
 
 
 
 , all these energy eigenstates will move into the range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and contribute to an increase in 
 
 
 
 . The number of energy eigenstates that move from below 
 
 
 
  to above 
 
 
 
 
  is, of course, given by 
 
 
 
 . The difference



is thus the net contribution to the increase in 
 
 
 
 . Note that if Y dx is larger than 
 
 
 
  there will be the energy eigenstates that move from below E to above 
 
 
 
 
 . They are counted in both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , therefore the above expression is also valid in that case.
Expressing the above expression as a derivative w.r.t. E and summing over Y yields the expression:



The logarithmic derivative of 
 
 
 
  w.r.t. x is thus given by:



The first term is intensive, i.e. it does not scale with system size. In contrast, the last term scales as the inverse system size and will thus vanishes in the thermodynamic limit. We have thus found that:



Combining this with



Gives:



Derivation for systems described by the canonical ensemble
If a system is in thermal contact with a heat bath at some temperature T then, in equilibrium, the probability distribution over the energy eigenvalues are given by the canonical ensemble:



Here Z is a factor that normalizes the sum of all the probabilities to 1, this function is known as the partition function. We now consider an infinitesimal reversible change in the temperature and in the external parameters on which the energy levels depend. It follows from the general formula for the entropy:



that



Inserting the formula for 
 
 
 
  for the canonical ensemble in here gives:



General derivation from unitarity of quantum mechanics
The time development operator in quantum theory is unitary, because the Hamiltonian is hermitian. Consequently, the transition probability matrix is doubly stochastic, which implies the Second Law of Thermodynamics.5051 This derivation is quite general, based on the Shannon entropy, and does not require any assumptions beyond unitarity, which is universally accepted. It is a consequence of the irreversibility or singular nature of the general transition matrix.
Non-equilibrium states
The theory of classical or equilibrium thermodynamics is idealized. A main postulate or assumption, often not even explicitly stated, is the existence of systems in their own internal states of thermodynamic equilibrium. In general, a region of space containing a physical system at a given time, that may be found in nature, is not in thermodynamic equilibrium, read in the most stringent terms. In looser terms, nothing in the entire universe is or has ever been truly in exact thermodynamic equilibrium.5253
For purposes of physical analysis, it is often enough convenient to make an assumption of thermodynamic equilibrium. Such an assumption may rely on trial and error for its justification. If the assumption is justified, it can often be very valuable and useful because it makes available the theory of thermodynamics. Elements of the equilibrium assumption are that a system is observed to be unchanging over an indefinitely long time, and that there are so many particles in a system, that its particulate nature can be entirely ignored. Under such an equilibrium assumption, in general, there are no macroscopically detectable fluctuations. There is an exception, the case of critical states, which exhibit to the naked eye the phenomenon of critical opalescence. For laboratory studies of critical states, exceptionally long observation times are needed.
In all cases, the assumption of thermodynamic equilibrium, once made, implies as a consequence that no putative candidate "fluctuation" alters the entropy of the system.
It can easily happen that a physical system exhibits internal macroscopic changes that are fast enough to invalidate the assumption of the constancy of the entropy. Or that a physical system has so few particles that the particulate nature is manifest in observable fluctuations. Then the assumption of thermodynamic equilibrium is to be abandoned. There is no unqualified general definition of entropy for non-equilibrium states.54
Non-equilibrium thermodynamics is then appropriate. There are intermediate cases, in which the assumption of local thermodynamic equilibrium is a very good approximation,55565758 but strictly speaking it is still an approximation, not theoretically ideal. For non-equilibrium situations in general, it may be useful to consider statistical mechanical definitions of quantities that may be conveniently called 'entropy'. These indeed belong to statistical mechanics, not to macroscopic thermodynamics.
The physics of macroscopically observable fluctuations is beyond the scope of this article.
Arrow of time
The second law of thermodynamics is a physical law that is not symmetric to reversal of the time direction.
The second law has been proposed to supply an explanation of the difference between moving forward and backwards in time, such as why the cause precedes the effect (the causal arrow of time).59
Controversies
Maxwell's demon
 James Clerk Maxwell imagined one container divided into two parts, A and B. Both parts are filled with the same gas at equal temperatures and placed next to each other. Observing the molecules on both sides, an imaginary demon guards a trapdoor between the two parts. When a faster-than-average molecule from A flies towards the trapdoor, the demon opens it, and the molecule will fly from A to B. The average speed of the molecules in B will have increased while in A they will have slowed down on average. Since average molecular speed corresponds to temperature, the temperature decreases in A and increases in B, contrary to the second law of thermodynamics.
One of the most famous responses to this question was suggested in 1929 by Leó Szilárd and later by Léon Brillouin. Szilárd pointed out that a real-life Maxwell's demon would need to have some means of measuring molecular speed, and that the act of acquiring information would require an expenditure of energy.
Maxwell's demon repeatedly alters the permeability of the wall between A and B. It is therefore performing thermodynamic operations, not just presiding over natural processes.
Loschmidt's paradox
Loschmidt's paradox, also known as the reversibility paradox, is the objection that it should not be possible to deduce an irreversible process from time-symmetric dynamics. This puts the time reversal symmetry of nearly all known low-level fundamental physical processes at odds with any attempt to infer from them the second law of thermodynamics which describes the behavior of macroscopic systems. Both of these are well-accepted principles in physics, with sound observational and theoretical support, yet they seem to be in conflict; hence the paradox.
One proposed resolution of this paradox is as follows. The Loschmidt scenario refers to a strictly isolated system or to a strictly adiabatically isolated system. Heat and matter transfers are not allowed. The Loschmidt reversal times are fantastically long, far longer than any laboratory isolation of the required degree of perfection could be maintained in practice. In this sense, the Loschmidt scenario will never be subjected to empirical testing. Also in this sense, the second law, stated for an isolated system, will never be subjected to empirical testing. A system, supposedly perfectly isolated, in strictly perfect thermodynamic equilibrium, can be observed only once in its entire life, because the observation must break the isolation. Two observations would be needed to check empirically for a change of state, one initial and one final. When transfer of heat or matter are permitted, the requirements of perfection are not so tight. In practical laboratory reality, therefore, the second law can be tested only for systems with transfer of heat or matter, and not for isolated systems.
Due to this paradox, derivations of the second law have to make an assumption regarding the past, namely that the system is uncorrelated at some time in the past or, equivalently, that the entropy in the past was lower than in the future. This assumption is usually thought as a boundary condition, and thus the second Law is ultimately derived from the initial conditions of the Big Bang.6061
Poincaré recurrence theorem
The Poincaré recurrence theorem states that certain systems will, after a sufficiently long time, return to a state very close to the initial state. The Poincaré recurrence time is the length of time elapsed until the recurrence, which is of the order of 
 
 
 
 .62 The result applies to physical systems in which energy is conserved. The Recurrence theorem apparently contradicts the Second law of thermodynamics, which says that large dynamical systems evolve irreversibly towards the state with higher entropy, so that if one starts with a low-entropy state, the system will never return to it. There are many possible ways to resolve this paradox, but none of them is universally accepted. The most reasonable argument is that for typical thermodynamical systems the recurrence time is so large (many many times longer than the lifetime of the universe) that, for all practical purposes, one cannot observe the recurrence.
Quotations
See also

Clausius–Duhem inequality
Entropy: A New World View
Fluctuation theorem
History of thermodynamics
Jarzynski equality
Laws of thermodynamics
Maximum entropy thermodynamics
Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire
Thermal diode
Relativistic heat conduction

References
Bibliography of citations

Adkins, C.J. (1968/1983). Equilibrium Thermodynamics, (1st edition 1968), third edition 1983, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK, ISBN 0-521-25445-0.
Attard, P. (2012). Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics: Foundations and Applications, Oxford University Press, Oxford UK, ISBN 978-0-19-966276-0.
Bailyn, M. (1994). A Survey of Thermodynamics, American Institute of Physics, New York, ISBN 0-88318-797-3.
Boltzmann, L. (1896/1964). Lectures on Gas Theory, translated by S.G. Brush, University of California Press, Berkeley.
Buchdahl, H.A. (1966). The Concepts of Classical Thermodynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
Callen, H.B. (1960/1985). Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics, (1st edition 1960) 2nd edition 1985, Wiley, New York, ISBN 0-471-86256-8.
Čápek, V., Sheehan, D.P. (2005). Challenges to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Theory and Experiment, Springer, Dordrecht, ISBN 1-4020-3015-0.

. A translation may be found here. Also a mostly reliable [http://books.google.com.au/books?id=xwBRAAAAMAAJ&q;;=Investigation+into+the+foundations translation is to be found] at Kestin, J. (1976). The Second Law of Thermodynamics, Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross, Stroudsburg PA.
Carnot, S. (1824/1986). [http://www.worldcat.org/title/reflections-on-the-motive-power-of-fire-a-critical-edition-with-the-surviving-scientific-manuscripts-translated-and-edited-by-fox-robert/oclc/812944517&referer;;=brief_results Reflections on the motive power of fire], Manchester University Press, Manchester UK, ISBN 0719017416. Also here.
Chapman, S., Cowling, T.G. (1939/1970). The Mathematical Theory of Non-uniform gases. An Account of the Kinetic Theory of Viscosity, Thermal Conduction and Diffusion in Gases, third edition 1970, Cambridge University Press, London.

Translated into English: 

Translated into English:  Reprinted in: 
Eu, B.C. (2002). Generalized Thermodynamics. The Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes and Generalized Hydrodynamics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, ISBN 1–4020–0788–4.
Gibbs, J.W. (1876/1878). On the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances, Trans. Conn. Acad., 3: 108-248, 343-524, reprinted in The Collected Works of J. Willard Gibbs, Ph.D, LL. D., edited by W.R. Longley, R.G. Van Name, Longmans, Green & Co., New York, 1928, volume 1, pp. 55–353.
Griem, H.R. (2005). Principles of Plasma Spectroscopy (Cambridge Monographs on Plasma Physics), Cambridge University Press, New York ISBN 0-521-61941-6.
Glansdorff, P., Prigogine, I. (1971). Thermodynamic Theory of Structure, Stability, and Fluctuations, Wiley-Interscience, London, 1971, ISBN 0-471-30280-5.
Grandy, W.T., Jr (2008). [http://global.oup.com/academic/product/entropy-and-the-time-evolution-of-macroscopic-systems-9780199546176?cc=au〈=en& Entropy and the Time Evolution of Macroscopic Systems]. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-954617-6.
Greven, A., Keller, G., Warnecke (editors) (2003). Entropy, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ, ISBN 0-691-11338-6.
Gyarmati, I. (1967/1970) Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics. Field Theory and Variational Principles, translated by E. Gyarmati and W.F. Heinz, Springer, New York.
Kondepudi, D., Prigogine, I. (1998). Modern Thermodynamics: From Heat Engines to Dissipative Structures, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, ISBN 0–471–97393–9.
Lebon, G., Jou, D., Casas-Vázquez, J. (2008). Understanding Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics: Foundations, Applications, Frontiers, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, e-ISBN 978-3-540-74252-4.

Lieb, E.H., Yngvason, J. (2003). The Entropy of Classical Thermodynamics, pp. 147–195, Chapter 8 of Entropy, Greven, A., Keller, G., Warnecke (editors) (2003).

Müller, I. (1985). Thermodynamics, Pitman, London, ISBN 0-273-08577-8.
Müller, I. (2003). Entropy in Nonequilibrium, pp. 79–109, Chapter 5 of Entropy, Greven, A., Keller, G., Warnecke (editors) (2003).
Münster, A. (1970), Classical Thermodynamics, translated by E.S. Halberstadt, Wiley–Interscience, London, ISBN 0-471-62430-6.
Pippard, A.B. (1957/1966). Elements of Classical Thermodynamics for Advanced Students of Physics, original publication 1957, reprint 1966, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
Planck, M. (1897/1903). Treatise on Thermodynamics, translated by A. Ogg, Longmans Green, London, p. 100.
Planck. M. (1914). The Theory of Heat Radiation, a translation by Masius, M. of the second German edition, P. Blakiston's Son & Co., Philadelphia.
Planck, M. (1926). Über die Begründung des zweiten Hauptsatzes der Thermodynamik, Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften: Physikalisch-mathematische Klasse: 453–463.
Quinn, T.J. (1983). Temperature, Academic Press, London, ISBN 0-12-569680-9.

Roberts, J.K., Miller, A.R. (1928/1960). Heat and Thermodynamics, (first edition 1928), fifth edition, Blackie & Son Limited, Glasgow.
ter Haar, D., Wergeland, H. (1966). Elements of Thermodynamics, Addison-Wesley Publishing, Reading MA.

Also published in 
Truesdell, C. (1980). The Tragicomical History of Thermodynamics 1822–1854, Springer, New York, ISBN 0–387–90403–4.
Uffink, J. (2003). Irreversibility and the Second Law of Thermodynamics, Chapter 7 of Entropy, Greven, A., Keller, G., Warnecke (editors) (2003).
Zemansky, M.W. (1968). Heat and Thermodynamics. An Intermediate Textbook, fifth edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.

Further reading

Goldstein, Martin, and Inge F., 1993. The Refrigerator and the Universe. Harvard Univ. Press. Chpts. 4–9 contain an introduction to the Second Law, one a bit less technical than this entry. ISBN 978-0-674-75324-2
Leff, Harvey S., and Rex, Andrew F. (eds.) 2003. Maxwell's Demon 2 : Entropy, classical and quantum information, computing. Bristol UK; Philadelphia PA: Institute of Physics. ISBN 978-0-585-49237-7

(technical).

(full text of 1897 ed.) (html)
Stephen Jay Kline (1999). The Low-Down on Entropy and Interpretive Thermodynamics, La Cañada, CA: DCW Industries. ISBN 1928729010.

also at 1.

External links

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Philosophy of Statistical Mechanics" – by Lawrence Sklar.
Second law of thermodynamics in the MIT Course Unified Thermodynamics and Propulsion from Prof. Z. S. Spakovszky
E.T. Jaynes, 1988, "The evolution of Carnot's principle," in G. J. Erickson and C. R. Smith (eds.)Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Science and Engineering, Vol 1: p. 267.
Caratheodory, C., "Examination of the foundations of thermodynamics," trans. by D. H. Delphenich

de:Thermodynamik#Zweiter Hauptsatz"
Category:Concepts in physics 2 Category:Non-equilibrium thermodynamics Category:Philosophy of thermal and statistical physics



Planck, M. (1897/1903), pp. 40–41.↩
Munster A. (1970), pp. 8–9, 50–51.↩
Planck, M. (1897/1903), pp. 79–107.↩
Bailyn, M. (1994), Section 71, pp. 113–154.↩
Bailyn, M. (1994), p. 120.↩
↩
Zemansky, M.W. (1968), pp. 207–209.↩
Quinn, T.J. (1983), p. 8.↩
↩
Carnot, S. (1824/1986).↩
Truesdell, C. (1980), Chapter 5.↩
Adkins, C.J. (1968/1983), pp. 56–58.↩
Münster, A. (1970), p. 11.↩
Kondepudi, D., Prigogine, I. (1998), pp.67–75.↩
Lebon, G., Jou, D., Casas-Vázquez, J. (2008), p. 10.↩
Eu, B.C. (2002), pp. 32–35.↩
Planck, M. (1897/1903), p. 86.↩
Roberts, J.K., Miller, A.R. (1928/1960), p. 319.↩
ter Haar, D., Wergeland, H. (1966), p. 17.↩
Pippard, A.B. (1957/1966), p. 30.↩
Čápek, V., Sheehan, D.P. (2005), p. 3↩
Planck, M. (1897/1903), p. 100.↩
Planck, M. (1926), p. 463, translation by Uffink, J. (2003), p. 131.↩
Roberts, J.K., Miller, A.R. (1928/1960), p. 382. This source is partly verbatim from Planck's statement, but does not cite Planck. This source calls the statement the principle of the increase of entropy.↩
Carathéodory, C. (1909).↩
Buchdahl, H.A. (1966), p. 68.↩
↩
Münster, A. (1970), p. 45.↩
Planck, M. (1926).↩
Buchdahl, H.A. (1966), p. 69.↩

Uffink, J. (2003), pp. 129–132.↩

Truesdell, C., Muncaster, R.G. (1980). Fundamentals of Maxwell's Kinetic Theory of a Simple Monatomic Gas, Treated as a Branch of Rational Mechanics, Academic Press, New York, ISBN0-12-701350-4, p. 15.↩
Planck, M. (1897/1903), p. 81.↩
Planck, M. (1926), p. 457, Wikipedia editor's translation.↩
Lieb, E.H., Yngvason, J. (2003), p. 149.↩
Allahverdyan, A.E., Nieuwenhuizen, T.H. (2001). A mathematical theorem as the basis for the second law: Thomson's formulation applied to equilibrium, http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0110422↩
Čápek, V., Sheehan, D.P. (2005), p. 11↩
↩
↩
Clausius theorem at Wolfram Research↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Hugh Everett, "Theory of the Universal Wavefunction", Thesis, Princeton University, (1956, 1973), Appendix I, pp 121 ff, in particular equation (4.4) at the top of page 127, and the statement on page 29 that "it is known that the [Shannon] entropy [...] is a monotone increasing function of the time."↩
Bryce Seligman DeWitt, R. Neill Graham, eds, The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton Series in Physics, Princeton University Press (1973), ISBN 0-691-08131-X Contains Everett's thesis: The Theory of the Universal Wavefunction, pp 3–140.↩
Grandy, W.T., Jr (2008), p. 151.↩
Callen, H.B. (1960/1985), p. 15.↩
Lieb, E.H., Yngvason, J. (2003), p. 190.↩
Gyarmati, I. (1967/1970), pp. 4-14.↩
Glansdorff, P., Prigogine, I. (1971).↩
Müller, I. (1985).↩
Müller, I. (2003).↩
 chapter 6↩

↩
L. Dyson, J. Lindesay and L. Susskind, Is There Really a de Sitter/CFT Duality, JHEP 0208, 45 (2002)↩




