


Citizen's dividend




Citizen's dividend

 Citizen's dividend or social dividend is a proposed state policy based upon the principle that the natural world is the common property of all persons (see Georgism). It is proposed that all citizens receive regular payments (dividends) from revenue raised by the state through leasing or taxing land (natural resources) for private use.
In the United States, the idea can be traced back to Thomas Paine's essay, Agrarian Justice,1 which is also considered one of the earliest proposals for a social security system. Thomas Paine summarized his view by stating that "Men did not make the earth. It is the value of the improvements only, and not the earth itself, that is individual property. Every proprietor owes to the community a ground rent for the land which he holds." Paine saw inheritance as being partly a common fund and wanted to supplement the citizen's dividend in a tax on inheritance transfers, but georgist supporters now focus on natural resources.
Implementations and proposals
This concept is a form of basic income guarantee, where the citizen's dividend depends upon the value of natural resources or what could be titled as common goods like location values, seignorage, the electromagnetic spectrum, the industrial use of air (CO
 
 
 
  production), etc. 2
The state of Alaska dispenses a form of citizen's dividend in its Permanent Fund dividend, which holds investments initially seeded by the state's revenue from mineral resources, particularly petroleum. In 2005, every eligible Alaskan resident (including children) received a check for $845.76. Over the 24-year history of the fund, it has paid out a total of $24,775.45 to every resident.3 Alaska now has one of the lowest rates of inequality and relatively low levels of poverty compared to other US states. 4
The concept is also promoted as a tool to reduce carbon emissions.5 Peter Barnes created the concept of "Sky Trust" as an example of how this could be implemented.
Peter Barnes states that a common trust could be set up to manage the funds, the trust would be separate from the private sector. 6 A calculation based on specific assets by Barnes estimates that American Citizens could each get $5,000 per year by this model. 7 A Swiss campaign for a citizen’s income which could net each citizen an amount equivalent to $34,000 dollars. 8 A citizens dividend based on resources according to Thomas Pogge is due to every citizen because everyone owns an inalienable stake in all limited natural resources. 9His theory goes along with Barnes with the exception of ownership, Pogge contends that the people own the resources. 1011 The Progress Report says that the dividend should be valued by the free market. 12
See also

Asset-based egalitarianism (basic capital)
Basic income
Bleeding-heart libertarianism
Demogrant
Geolibertarianism
Georgism
Land value tax
Prosperity Bonus
Social dividend
Global resources dividend

Notes
References

Clive Lord. A Citizens’ Income. John Carpenter, 2003. ISBN 1-897766-87-4.
The Permanent Fund Dividend

External links

Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend
Progress.org: Citizen's Dividend
Wealth and Want
Citizen-ownership Democracy

fr:Revenu citoyen"
Category:Employment compensation Category:Basic income



"Agrarian Justice," Thomas Paine















