


Singular value decomposition




Singular value decomposition

(Figure)
Visualization of the SVD of a two-dimensional, real shearing matrix

 
 . First, we see the unit disc in blue together with the two canonical unit vectors. We then see the action of 
 
 
 
 , which distorts the disk to an ellipse. The SVD decomposes 
 
 
 
  into three simple transformations: an initial rotation , a scaling

 
 
  along the coordinate axes, and a final rotation 
 
 
 
 . The lengths  and  of the semi-axes of the ellipse are the singular values of 
 
 
 
 , namely  and .

In linear algebra, the singular value decomposition (SVD) is a factorization of a real or complex matrix. It has many useful applications in signal processing and statistics.
Formally, the singular value decomposition of an 
 
 
 
  real or complex matrix 
 
 
 
  is a factorization of the form  UΣV∗}}, where 
 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
  real or complex unitary matrix, 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
rectangular diagonal matrix with non-negative real numbers on the diagonal, and  (the conjugate transpose of 
 
 
 
 , or simply the transpose of 
 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is real) is an 
 
 
 
  real or complex unitary matrix. The diagonal entries  of 
 
 
 
  are known as the singular values of 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
 
 
  columns of 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  columns of 
 
 
 
  are called the left-singular vectors and right-singular vectors of 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
The singular value decomposition and the eigendecomposition are closely related. Namely:
:* The left-singular vectors of 
 
 
 
 
  are eigenvectors of .
:* The right-singular vectors of 
 
 
 
  are eigenvectors of .
:* The non-zero singular values of 
 
 
 
  (found on the diagonal entries of 
 
 
 
 ) are the square roots of the non-zero eigenvalues of both  and .
Applications that employ the SVD include computing the pseudoinverse, least squares fitting of data, multivariable control, matrix approximation, and determining the rank, range and null space of a matrix.
Statement of the theorem
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
matrix whose entries come from the field

 
 , which is either the field of real numbers or the field of complex numbers. Then there exists a factorization of the form



where 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
unitary matrix over 
 
 
 
 
  (orthogonal matrix if 
 
 
 
 ), 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
diagonal matrix with non-negative real numbers on the diagonal, and the 
 
 
 
  unitary matrix  denotes the conjugate transpose of the 
 
 
 
 
  unitary matrix 
 
 
 
 . Such a factorization is called a singular value decomposition of 
 
 
 
 .
The diagonal entries  of 
 
 
 
  are known as the singular values of 
 
 
 
 . A common convention is to list the singular values in descending order. In this case, the diagonal matrix 
 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined by 
 
 
 
  (though the matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not).
Intuitive interpretations
(Figure)
The image shows:
Upper Left: The unit disc with the two canonical unit vectors
Upper Right: Unit disc transformed with M and singular Values  and  indicated
Lower Left: The action of  on the unit disc. This is just a rotation.
Lower Right: The action of  on the unit disc. Sigma scales in vertically and horizontally.
 In this special case, the singular values are Phi and 1/Phi where Phi is the Golden ratio.  is a (counter clockwise) rotation by an angle alpha where alpha satisfies tan(alpha) = -Phi. 
 
 
 
  is a rotation by an angle beta with tan(beta) = Phi-1

Rotation, scaling
In the special, yet common case when 
 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
  real square matrix with positive determinant, , and 
 
 
 
  are real 
 
 
 
  matrices as well, 
 
 
 
  can be regarded as a scaling matrix, and  can be viewed as rotation matrices. Thus the expression  can be intuitively interpreted as a composition (or sequence) of three geometrical transformations: a rotation, a scaling, and another rotation. For instance, the figure above explains how a shear matrix can be described as such a sequence.
Singular values as semiaxes of an ellipse or ellipsoid
As shown in the figure, the singular values can be interpreted as the semiaxes of an ellipse in 2D. This concept can be generalized to 
 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space, with the singular values of any 
 
 
square matrix being viewed as the semiaxes of an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional ellipsoid. See below for further details.
The columns of U and V are orthonormal bases
Since 
 
 
 
  and  are unitary, the columns of each of them form a set of orthonormal vectors, which can be regarded as basis vectors. By the definition of a unitary matrix, the same is true for their conjugate transposes  and 
 
 
 
 . In short, the columns of , and  are orthonormal bases.
Example
Consider the 
 
 
 
 
  matrix



A singular value decomposition of this matrix is given by 



Notice 
 
 
 
  is zero outside of the diagonal and one diagonal element is zero. Furthermore, because the matrices 
 
 
 
  and  are unitary, multiplying by their respective conjugate transposes yields identity matrices, as shown below. In this case, because 
 
 
 
  and  are real valued, they each are an orthogonal matrix.



This particular singular value decomposition is not unique. Choosing 
 
 
 
  such that



is also a valid singular value decomposition.
Singular values, singular vectors, and their relation to the SVD
A non-negative real number 
 
 
 
  is a singular value for 
 
 
 
  if and only if there exist unit-length vectors u in Km and v in Kn such that



The vectors u and v are called left-singular and right-singular vectors for 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
In any singular value decomposition



the diagonal entries of 
 
 
 
  are equal to the singular values of 
 
 
 
 . The columns of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are, respectively, left- and right-singular vectors for the corresponding singular values. Consequently, the above theorem implies that:

An 
 
 
 
  matrix 
 
 
 
  has at most 
 
 
 
  distinct singular values.
It is always possible to find an orthogonal basis

 
  for  consisting of left-singular vectors of 
 
 
 
 .
It is always possible to find an orthogonal basis 
 
 
 
  for  consisting of right-singular vectors of 
 
 
 
 .

A singular value for which we can find two left (or right) singular vectors that are linearly independent is called degenerate.
Non-degenerate singular values always have unique left- and right-singular vectors, up to multiplication by a unit-phase factor eiφ (for the real case up to sign). Consequently, if all singular values of 
 
 
 
  are non-degenerate and non-zero, then its singular value decomposition is unique, up to multiplication of a column of 
 
 
 
  by a unit-phase factor and simultaneous multiplication of the corresponding column of 
 
 
 
  by the same unit-phase factor.
Degenerate singular values, by definition, have non-unique singular vectors. Furthermore, if u1 and u2 are two left-singular vectors which both correspond to the singular value σ, then any normalized linear combination of the two vectors is also a left-singular vector corresponding to the singular value σ. The similar statement is true for right-singular vectors. Consequently, if 
 
 
 
  has degenerate singular values, then its singular value decomposition is not unique.
Applications of the SVD
Pseudoinverse
The singular value decomposition can be used for computing the pseudoinverse of a matrix. Indeed, the pseudoinverse of the matrix 
 
 
 
  with singular value decomposition  UΣV∗}} is



where  is the pseudoinverse of 
 
 
 
 , which is formed by replacing every non-zero diagonal entry by its reciprocal and transposing the resulting matrix. The pseudoinverse is one way to solve linear least squares problems.
Solving homogeneous linear equations
A set of homogeneous linear equations can be written as 
 
 
 
  for a matrix 
 
 
 
  and vector 
 
 
 
 . A typical situation is that 
 
 
 
  is known and a non-zero 
 
 
 
  is to be determined which satisfies the equation. Such an 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
 's null space and is sometimes called a (right) null vector of 
 
 
 
 . The vector 
 
 
 
  can be characterized as a right-singular vector corresponding to a singular value of 
 
 
 
  that is zero. This observation means that if 
 
 
 
  is a square matrix and has no vanishing singular value, the equation has no non-zero 
 
 
 
  as a solution. It also means that if there are several vanishing singular values, any linear combination of the corresponding right-singular vectors is a valid solution. Analogously to the definition of a (right) null vector, a non-zero 
 
 
 
  satisfying  0}}, with  denoting the conjugate transpose of 
 
 
 
 , is called a left null vector of 
 
 
 
 .
Total least squares minimization
A total least squares problem refers to determining the vector 
 
 
 
  which minimizes the 2-norm of a vector 
 
 
 
  under the constraint 
 
 
 
 . The solution turns out to be the right-singular vector of 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the smallest singular value.
Range, null space and rank
Another application of the SVD is that it provides an explicit representation of the range and null space of a matrix 
 
 
 
 . The right-singular vectors corresponding to vanishing singular values of 
 
 
 
  span the null space of 
 
 
 
 . E.g., the null space is spanned by the last two columns of 
 
 
 
  in the above example. The left-singular vectors corresponding to the non-zero singular values of 
 
 
 
  span the range of 
 
 
 
 . As a consequence, the rank of 
 
 
 
  equals the number of non-zero singular values which is the same as the number of non-zero diagonal elements in 
 
 
 
 .
In numerical linear algebra the singular values can be used to determine the effective rank of a matrix, as rounding error may lead to small but non-zero singular values in a rank deficient matrix.
Low-rank matrix approximation
Some practical applications need to solve the problem of approximating a matrix 
 
 
 
  with another matrix 
 
 
 
 , said truncated, which has a specific rank 
 
 
 
 . In the case that the approximation is based on minimizing the Frobenius norm of the difference between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  under the constraint that 
 
 
 
  it turns out that the solution is given by the SVD of 
 
 
 
 , namely



where 
 
 
 
  is the same matrix as 
 
 
 
  except that it contains only the 
 
 
 
  largest singular values (the other singular values are replaced by zero). This is known as the Eckart–Young theorem, as it was proved by those two authors in 1936 (although it was later found to have been known to earlier authors; see ).
Separable models
The SVD can be thought of as decomposing a matrix into a weighted, ordered sum of separable matrices. By separable, we mean that a matrix 
 
 
 
  can be written as an outer product of two vectors 
 
 
 
 , or, in coordinates, 
 
 
 
 . Specifically, the matrix 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed as:



Here  and  are the 
 
 
 
 -th columns of the corresponding SVD matrices,  are the ordered singular values, and each  is separable. The SVD can be used to find the decomposition of an image processing filter into separable horizontal and vertical filters. Note that the number of non-zero  is exactly the rank of the matrix.
Separable models often arise in biological systems, and the SVD decomposition is useful to analyze such systems. For example, some visual area V1 simple cells' receptive fields can be well described1 by a Gabor filter in the space domain multiplied by a modulation function in the time domain. Thus, given a linear filter evaluated through, for example, reverse correlation, one can rearrange the two spatial dimensions into one dimension, thus yielding a two-dimensional filter (space, time) which can be decomposed through SVD. The first column of 
 
 
 
  in the SVD decomposition is then a Gabor while the first column of 
 
 
 
  represents the time modulation (or vice versa). One may then define an index of separability,



which is the fraction of the power in the matrix M which is accounted for by the first separable matrix in the decomposition.2
Nearest orthogonal matrix
It is possible to use the SVD of a square matrix 
 
 
 
  to determine the orthogonal matrix

 
  closest to 
 
 
 
 . The closeness of fit is measured by the Frobenius norm of 
 
 
 
 . The solution is the product .3 This intuitively makes sense because an orthogonal matrix would have the decomposition  where 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix, so that if  UΣV∗}} then the product  UV∗}} amounts to replacing the singular values with ones.
A similar problem, with interesting applications in shape analysis, is the orthogonal Procrustes problem, which consists of finding an orthogonal matrix 
 
 
 
  which most closely maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Specifically,



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Frobenius norm.
This problem is equivalent to finding the nearest orthogonal matrix to a given matrix  ATB}}.
The Kabsch algorithm
The Kabsch algorithm (called Wahba's problem in other fields) uses SVD to compute the optimal rotation (with respect to least-squares minimization) that will align a set of points with a corresponding set of points. It is used, among other applications, to compare the structures of molecules.
Signal processing
The SVD and pseudoinverse have been successfully applied to signal processing and big data, e.g., in genomic signal processing.4567
Other examples
The SVD is also applied extensively to the study of linear inverse problems, and is useful in the analysis of regularization methods such as that of Tikhonov. It is widely used in statistics where it is related to principal component analysis and to Correspondence analysis, and in signal processing and pattern recognition. It is also used in output-only modal analysis, where the non-scaled mode shapes can be determined from the singular vectors. Yet another usage is latent semantic indexing in natural language text processing.
SVD is significantly important for solving nonlinear inverse problems where usually a truncated SVD (TSVD) is used as representation of model. An important application is constructing computational models of subsurface oil and gas reservoirs .8
The SVD also plays a crucial role in the field of quantum information, in a form often referred to as the Schmidt decomposition. Through it, states of two quantum systems are naturally decomposed, providing a necessary and sufficient condition for them to be entangled: if the rank of the 
 
 
 
  matrix is larger than one.
One application of SVD to rather large matrices is in numerical weather prediction, where Lanczos methods are used to estimate the most linearly quickly growing few perturbations to the central numerical weather prediction over a given initial forward time period; i.e., the singular vectors corresponding to the largest singular values of the linearized propagator for the global weather over that time interval. The output singular vectors in this case are entire weather systems. These perturbations are then run through the full nonlinear model to generate an ensemble forecast, giving a handle on some of the uncertainty that should be allowed for around the current central prediction.
SVD has also been applied to reduced order modelling. The aim of reduced order modelling is to reduce the number of degrees of freedom in a complex system which is to be modelled. SVD was coupled with radial basis functions to interpolate solutions to three-dimensional unsteady flow problems.9
Singular value decomposition is used in recommender systems to predict people's item ratings.10 Distributed algorithms have been developed for the purpose of calculating the SVD on clusters of commodity machines.11
Low-rank SVD has been applied for hotspot detection from spatiotemporal data with application to disease outbreak detection .12 A combination of SVD and higher-order SVD also has been applied for real time event detection from complex data streams (multivariate data with space and time dimensions) in Disease surveillance.13
Relation to eigenvalue decomposition
The singular value decomposition is very general in the sense that it can be applied to any 
 
 
 
  matrix whereas eigenvalue decomposition can only be applied to certain classes of square matrices. Nevertheless, the two decompositions are related.
Given an SVD of 
 
 
 
 , as described above, the following two relations hold:



The right-hand sides of these relations describe the eigenvalue decompositions of the left-hand sides. Consequently:
:* The columns of 
 
 
 
  (right-singular vectors) are eigenvectors of .
:* The columns of 
 
 
 
  (left-singular vectors) are eigenvectors of .
:* The non-zero elements of 
 
 
 
  (non-zero singular values) are the square roots of the non-zero eigenvalues of  or .
In the special case that 
 
 
 
  is a normal matrix, which by definition must be square, the spectral theorem says that it can be unitarily diagonalized using a basis of eigenvectors, so that it can be written  UDU∗}} for a unitary matrix 
 
 
 
  and a diagonal matrix 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  is also positive semi-definite, the decomposition  UDU∗}} is also a singular value decomposition.
However, the eigenvalue decomposition and the singular value decomposition differ for all other matrices 
 
 
 
 : the eigenvalue decomposition is  UDU−1}} where 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily unitary and 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily positive semi-definite, while the SVD is  UΣV∗}} where 
 
 
 
  is a diagonal positive semi-definite, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are unitary matrices that are not necessarily related except through the matrix 
 
 
 
 .
Existence
An eigenvalue 
 
 
 
  of a matrix 
 
 
 
  is characterized by the algebraic relation 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  is Hermitian, a variational characterization is also available. Let 
 
 
 
  be a real 
 
 
symmetric matrix. Define



By the extreme value theorem, this continuous function attains a maximum at some u when restricted to the closed unit sphere {||x|| ≤ 1}. By the Lagrange multipliers theorem, u necessarily satisfies



where the nabla symbol, 
 
 
 
 , is the del operator.
A short calculation shows the above leads to 
 
 
 
  (symmetry of 
 
 
 
  is needed here). Therefore 
 
 
 
  is the largest eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
 . The same calculation performed on the orthogonal complement of u gives the next largest eigenvalue and so on. The complex Hermitian case is similar; there f(x) = x* M x is a real-valued function of 
 
 
 
  real variables.
Singular values are similar in that they can be described algebraically or from variational principles. Although, unlike the eigenvalue case, Hermiticity, or symmetry, of 
 
 
 
  is no longer required.
This section gives these two arguments for existence of singular value decomposition.
Based on the spectral theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
  complex matrix. Since  is positive semi-definite and Hermitian, by the spectral theorem, there exists a unitary 
 
 
 
  matrix 
 
 
 
  such that



where 
 
 
 
  is diagonal and positive definite. Partition 
 
 
 
  appropriately so we can write



Therefore:



The second equation implies  0}}. Also, since 
 
 
 
  is unitary:



where the subscripts on the identity matrices are there to keep in mind that they are of different dimensions. Define



Then



We see that this is almost the desired result, except that  and  are not unitary in general since they might not be square. However, we do know that for , the number of rows is greater than the number of columns since the dimensions of 
 
 
 
  is no greater than 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Also, since



the columns in  are orthonormal and can be extended to an orthonormal basis. This means, we can choose  such that the following matrix is unitary:



For  we already have  to make it unitary. Now, define



where extra zero rows are added or removed to make the number of zero rows equal the number of columns of . Then



which is the desired result:



Notice the argument could begin with diagonalizing  rather than  (This shows directly that  and  have the same non-zero eigenvalues).
Based on variational characterization
The singular values can also be characterized as the maxima of , considered as a function of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , over particular subspaces. The singular vectors are the values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where these maxima are attained.
Let 
 
 
 
  denote an 
 
 
 
  matrix with real entries. Let  and  denote the sets of unit 2-norm vectors in  and  respectively. Define the function



Consider the function 
 
 
 
  restricted to . Since both  and  are compact sets, their product is also compact. Furthermore, since 
 
 
 
  is continuous, it attains a largest value for at least one pair of vectors  and . This largest value is denoted  and the corresponding vectors are denoted  and . Since  is the largest value of 
 
 
 
  it must be non-negative. If it were negative, changing the sign of either  or  would make it positive and therefore larger.

Statement.  are left and right-singular vectors of 
 
 
 
  with corresponding singular value σ1.
 

Proof: Similar to the eigenvalues case, by assumption the two vectors satisfy the Lagrange multiplier equation:



After some algebra, this becomes



Multiplying the first equation from left by 
 
 
 
  and the second equation from left by 
 
 
 
 
  and taking 
 
 
 
  into account gives



Plugging this into the pair of equations above, we have



This proves the statement.
More singular vectors and singular values can be found by maximizing 
 
 
 
  over normalized 
 
 
 
  which are orthogonal to  and , respectively.
The passage from real to complex is similar to the eigenvalue case.
Geometric meaning
Because 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are unitary, we know that the columns  of 
 
 
 
  yield an orthonormal basis of  and the columns  of 
 
 
 
  yield an orthonormal basis of  (with respect to the standard scalar products on these spaces).
The linear transformation



has a particularly simple description with respect to these orthonormal bases: we have



where  is the 
 
 
 
 -th diagonal entry of 
 
 
 
 , and  0}} for 
 
 
 
 .
The geometric content of the SVD theorem can thus be summarized as follows: for every linear map  one can find orthonormal bases of  and  such that 
 
 
 
  maps the 
 
 
 
 -th basis vector of  to a non-negative multiple of the 
 
 
 
 -th basis vector of , and sends the left-over basis vectors to zero. With respect to these bases, the map 
 
 
 
  is therefore represented by a diagonal matrix with non-negative real diagonal entries.
To get a more visual flavour of singular values and SVD decomposition — at least when working on real vector spaces — consider the sphere 
 
 
 
  of radius one in . The linear map 
 
 
 
  maps this sphere onto an ellipsoid in . Non-zero singular values are simply the lengths of the semi-axes of this ellipsoid. Especially when 
 
 
 
 , and all the singular values are distinct and non-zero, the SVD of the linear map 
 
 
 
  can be easily analysed as a succession of three consecutive moves: consider the ellipsoid 
 
 
 
  and specifically its axes; then consider the directions in  sent by 
 
 
 
  onto these axes. These directions happen to be mutually orthogonal. Apply first an isometry  sending these directions to the coordinate axes of . On a second move, apply an endomorphism

 
  diagonalized along the coordinate axes and stretching or shrinking in each direction, using the semi-axes lengths of 
 
 
 
  as stretching coefficients. The composition  then sends the unit-sphere onto an ellipsoid isometric to 
 
 
 
 . To define the third and last move 
 
 
 
 , apply an isometry to this ellipsoid so as to carry it over 
 
 
 
 . As can be easily checked, the composition  coincides with 
 
 
 
 .
Calculating the SVD
Numerical approach
The SVD of a matrix 
 
 
 
  is typically computed by a two-step procedure. In the first step, the matrix is reduced to a bidiagonal matrix. This takes O(mn2) floating-point operations (flops), assuming that m ≥ n. The second step is to compute the SVD of the bidiagonal matrix. This step can only be done with an iterative method (as with eigenvalue algorithms). However, in practice it suffices to compute the SVD up to a certain precision, like the machine epsilon. If this precision is considered constant, then the second step takes O(n) iterations, each costing O(n) flops. Thus, the first step is more expensive, and the overall cost is O(mn2) flops .
The first step can be done using Householder reflections for a cost of 4mn2 − 4n3/3 flops, assuming that only the singular values are needed and not the singular vectors. If m is much larger than n then it is advantageous to first reduce the matrix M to a triangular matrix with the QR decomposition and then use Householder reflections to further reduce the matrix to bidiagonal form; the combined cost is 2mn2 + 2n3 flops .
The second step can be done by a variant of the QR algorithm for the computation of eigenvalues, which was first described by . The LAPACK subroutine DBDSQR14 implements this iterative method, with some modifications to cover the case where the singular values are very small . Together with a first step using Householder reflections and, if appropriate, QR decomposition, this forms the DGESVD15 routine for the computation of the singular value decomposition.
The same algorithm is implemented in the GNU Scientific Library (GSL). The GSL also offers an alternative method, which uses a one-sided Jacobi orthogonalization in step 2 . This method computes the SVD of the bidiagonal matrix by solving a sequence of 2 × 2 SVD problems, similar to how the Jacobi eigenvalue algorithm solves a sequence of 2 × 2 eigenvalue methods . Yet another method for step 2 uses the idea of divide-and-conquer eigenvalue algorithms .
There is an alternative way which is not explicitly using the eigenvalue decomposition.16 Usually the singular value problem of a matrix 
 
 
 
  is converted into an equivalent symmetric eigenvalue problem such as , , or


 
  The approaches using eigenvalue decompositions are based on QR algorithm which is well-developed to be stable and fast. Note that the singular values are not complex and right- and left- singular vectors are not required to form any similarity transformation. Alternating QR decomposition and LQ decomposition can be claimed to use iteratively to find the real diagonal matrix with Hermitian matrices. QR decomposition gives 
 
 
 
  and LQ decomposition of 
 
 
 
  gives . Thus, at every iteration, we have , update 
 
 
 
  and repeat the orthogonalizations. Eventually, QR decomposition and LQ decomposition iteratively provide unitary matrices for left- and right- singular matrices, respectively. This approach does not come with any acceleration method such as spectral shifts and deflation as in QR algorithm. It is because the shift method is not easily defined without using similarity transformation. But it is very simple to implement where the speed does not matter. Also it give us a good interpretation that only orthogonal/unitary transformations can obtain SVD as the QR algorithm can calculate the eigenvalue decomposition.
Analytic result of 2 × 2 SVD
The singular values of a 2 × 2 matrix can be found analytically. Let the matrix be 
 
 

where 
 
 
 
  are complex numbers that parameterize the matrix, 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix, and 
 
 
 
  denote the Pauli matrices. Then its two singular values are given by



Reduced SVDs
In applications it is quite unusual for the full SVD, including a full unitary decomposition of the null-space of the matrix, to be required. Instead, it is often sufficient (as well as faster, and more economical for storage) to compute a reduced version of the SVD. The following can be distinguished for an m×n matrix M of rank r:
Thin SVD



Only the n column vectors of U corresponding to the row vectors of V* are calculated. The remaining column vectors of U are not calculated. This is significantly quicker and more economical than the full SVD if n≪m. The matrix Un is thus m×n, Σn is n×n diagonal, and V is n×n.
The first stage in the calculation of a thin SVD will usually be a QR decomposition of M, which can make for a significantly quicker calculation if n≪m.
Compact SVD



Only the r column vectors of U and r row vectors of V* corresponding to the non-zero singular values Σr are calculated. The remaining vectors of U and V* are not calculated. This is quicker and more economical than the thin SVD if r≪n. The matrix Ur is thus m×r, Σr is r×r diagonal, and Vr* is r×n.
Truncated SVD



Only the t column vectors of U and t row vectors of V* corresponding to the t largest singular values Σt are calculated. The rest of the matrix is discarded. This can be much quicker and more economical than the compact SVD if t≪r. The matrix Ut is thus m×t, Σt is t×t diagonal, and Vt* is t×n.
Of course the truncated SVD is no longer an exact decomposition of the original matrix M, but as discussed above, the approximate matrix 
 
 
 
  is in a very useful sense the closest approximation to M that can be achieved by a matrix of rank t.
Norms
Ky Fan norms
The sum of the k largest singular values of M is a matrix norm, the Ky Fan k-norm of M.
The first of the Ky Fan norms, the Ky Fan 1-norm is the same as the operator norm of M as a linear operator with respect to the Euclidean norms of Km and Kn. In other words, the Ky Fan 1-norm is the operator norm induced by the standard l2 Euclidean inner product. For this reason, it is also called the operator 2-norm. One can easily verify the relationship between the Ky Fan 1-norm and singular values. It is true in general, for a bounded operator M on (possibly infinite-dimensional) Hilbert spaces



But, in the matrix case, (M* M)½ is a normal matrix, so ||M* M||½ is the largest eigenvalue of (M* M)½, i.e. the largest singular value of M.
The last of the Ky Fan norms, the sum of all singular values, is the trace norm (also known as the 'nuclear norm'), defined by ||M|| = Tr[(M* M)½] (the eigenvalues of M* M are the squares of the singular values).
Hilbert–Schmidt norm
The singular values are related to another norm on the space of operators. Consider the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product on the 
 
 
 
  matrices, defined by



So the induced norm is



Since the trace is invariant under unitary equivalence, this shows



where  are the singular values of 
 
 
 
 . This is called the Frobenius norm, Schatten 2-norm, or Hilbert–Schmidt norm of 
 
 
 
 . Direct calculation shows that the Frobenius norm of  (mij)}} coincides with:



Tensor SVD
Two types of tensor decompositions exist, which generalise the SVD to multi-way arrays. One of them decomposes a tensor into a sum of rank-1 tensors, which is called a tensor rank decomposition. The second type of decomposition computes the orthonormal subspaces associated with the different factors appearing in the tensor product of vector spaces in which the tensor lives. This decomposition is referred to in the literature as the higher-order SVD (HOSVD) or Tucker3/TuckerM. In addition, multilinear principal component analysis in multilinear subspace learning involves the same mathematical operations as Tucker decomposition, being used in a different context of dimensionality reduction.
Bounded operators on Hilbert spaces
The factorization  UΣV∗}} can be extended to a bounded operator M on a separable Hilbert space H. Namely, for any bounded operator M, there exist a partial isometry U, a unitary V, a measure space (X, μ), and a non-negative measurable f such that



where 
 
 
 
  is the multiplication by f on L2(X, μ).
This can be shown by mimicking the linear algebraic argument for the matricial case above. VTf V* is the unique positive square root of M*M, as given by the Borel functional calculus for self adjoint operators. The reason why U need not be unitary is because, unlike the finite-dimensional case, given an isometry U1 with nontrivial kernel, a suitable U2 may not be found such that



is a unitary operator.
As for matrices, the singular value factorization is equivalent to the polar decomposition for operators: we can simply write



and notice that U V* is still a partial isometry while VTf V* is positive.
Singular values and compact operators
To extend notion of singular values and left/right-singular vectors to the operator case, one needs to restrict to compact operators. It is a general fact that compact operators on Banach spaces have only discrete spectrum. This is also true for compact operators on Hilbert spaces, since Hilbert spaces are a special case of Banach spaces. If 
 
 
 
  is compact, every non-zero 
 
 
 
  in its spectrum is an eigenvalue. Furthermore, a compact self adjoint operator can be diagonalized by its eigenvectors. If 
 
 
 
  is compact, so is . Applying the diagonalization result, the unitary image of its positive square root  has a set of orthonormal eigenvectors  corresponding to strictly positive eigenvalues  For any 
 
 
 
 ,



where the series converges in the norm topology on 
 
 
 
 . Notice how this resembles the expression from the finite-dimensional case.  are called the singular values of 
 
 
 
 .  (resp. ) can be considered the left-singular (resp. right-singular) vectors of 
 
 
 
 .
Compact operators on a Hilbert space are the closure of finite-rank operators in the uniform operator topology. The above series expression gives an explicit such representation. An immediate consequence of this is:

Theorem.

 
  is compact if and only if  is compact.
 

History
The singular value decomposition was originally developed by differential geometers, who wished to determine whether a real bilinear form could be made equal to another by independent orthogonal transformations of the two spaces it acts on. Eugenio Beltrami and Camille Jordan discovered independently, in 1873 and 1874 respectively, that the singular values of the bilinear forms, represented as a matrix, form a complete set of invariants for bilinear forms under orthogonal substitutions. James Joseph Sylvester also arrived at the singular value decomposition for real square matrices in 1889, apparently independently of both Beltrami and Jordan. Sylvester called the singular values the canonical multipliers of the matrix A. The fourth mathematician to discover the singular value decomposition independently is Autonne in 1915, who arrived at it via the polar decomposition. The first proof of the singular value decomposition for rectangular and complex matrices seems to be by Carl Eckart and Gale Young in 1936;17 they saw it as a generalization of the principal axis transformation for Hermitian matrices.
In 1907, Erhard Schmidt defined an analog of singular values for integral operators (which are compact, under some weak technical assumptions); it seems he was unaware of the parallel work on singular values of finite matrices. This theory was further developed by Émile Picard in 1910, who is the first to call the numbers 
 
 
singular values (or in French, valeurs singulières).
Practical methods for computing the SVD date back to Kogbetliantz in 1954, 1955 and Hestenes in 1958.18 resembling closely the Jacobi eigenvalue algorithm, which uses plane rotations or Givens rotations. However, these were replaced by the method of Gene Golub and William Kahan published in 1965,19 which uses Householder transformations or reflections. In 1970, Golub and Christian Reinsch20 published a variant of the Golub/Kahan algorithm that is still the one most-used today.
See also
Notes
References






Halldor, Bjornsson and Venegas, Silvia A. (1997). "A manual for EOF and SVD analyses of climate data". McGill University, CCGCR Report No. 97-1, Montréal, Québec, 52pp.









External links

Online SVD calculator

"
  Category:Linear algebra Category:Numerical linear algebra Category:Matrix theory Category:Matrix decompositions Category:Functional analysis





The Singular Value Decomposition in Symmetric (Lowdin) Orthogonalization and Data Compression










Netlib.org
Netlib.org
mathworks.co.kr/matlabcentral/fileexchange/12674-simple-svd








