


Residue (complex analysis)




Residue (complex analysis)

In mathematics, more specifically complex analysis, the residue is a complex number proportional to the contour integral of a meromorphic function along a path enclosing one of its singularities. (More generally, residues can be calculated for any function 
 
 
 
  that is holomorphic except at the discrete points {ak}k, even if some of them are essential singularities.) Residues can be computed quite easily and, once known, allow the determination of general contour integrals via the residue theorem.
Definition
The residue of a meromorphic function

 
  at an isolated singularity

 
 , often denoted 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , is the unique value 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  has an analytic antiderivative in a punctured disk

 
 .
Alternatively, residues can be calculated by finding Laurent series expansions, and one can define the residue as the coefficient a-1 of a Laurent series.
The definition of a residue can be generalized to arbitrary Riemann surfaces. Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a 1-form on a Riemann surface. Let 
 
 
 
  be meromorphic at some point 
 
 
 
 , so that we may write 
 
 
 
  in local coordinates as 
 
 
 
 . Then the residue of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the residue of 
 
 
 
  at the point corresponding to 
 
 
 
 .
Example
As an example, consider the contour integral


 
  where C is some simple closed curve about 0.
Let us evaluate this integral using a standard convergence result about integration by series. We can substitute the Taylor series for 
 
 
 
  into the integrand. The integral then becomes



Let us bring the 1/z5 factor into the series. The contour integral of the series then writes











Since the series converges uniformly on the support of the integration path, we are allowed to exchange integration and summation. The series of the path integrals then collapses to a much simpler form: recall that



So now the integral around C of every other term not in the form cz−1 is zero, and the integral is reduced to



The value 1/4! is the residue of ez/z5 at z = 0, and is denoted



Calculating residues
Suppose a punctured disk D = {z : 0 −1 of (z − c)−1 in the Laurent series expansion of f around c. Various methods exist for calculating this value, and the choice of which method to use depends on the function in question, and on the nature of the singularity.
According to Cauchy's integral formula, we have:



where γ traces out a circle around c in a counterclockwise manner. We may choose the path γ to be a circle of radius ε around c, where ε is as small as we desire. This may be used for calculation in cases where the integral can be calculated directly, but it is usually the case that residues are used to simplify calculation of integrals, and not the other way around.
Removable singularities
If the function f can be continued to a holomorphic function on the whole disk { y :; c| \operatorname{Res}(f,c)=\lim_{z\to c}(z-c)f(z).
It may be that the function f can be expressed as a quotient of two functions, f(z)=g(z)/h(z), where g and h are holomorphic functions in a neighbourhood of c, with h(c) = 0 and h'(c) ≠ 0. In such a case, the above formula simplifies to:



Limit formula for higher order poles
More generally, if c is a pole of order n, then the residue of f around z = c can be found by the formula:



This formula can be very useful in determining the residues for low-order poles. For higher order poles, the calculations can become unmanageable, and series expansion is usually easier. Also for essential singularities, residues often must be taken directly from series expansions.
Residue at infinity
In general, the residue at infinity is given by:


 
 . If the following condition is met:


 
 , then the residue at infinity can be computed using the following formula:


 
 . If instead


 
 , then the residue at infinity is


 
 .
Series methods
If parts or all of a function can be expanded into a Taylor series or Laurent series, which may be possible if the parts or the whole of the function has a standard series expansion, then calculating the residue is significantly simpler than by other methods.
1. As a first example, consider calculating the residues at the singularities of the function



which may be used to calculate certain contour integrals. This function appears to have a singularity at z = 0, but if one factorizes the denominator and thus writes the function as



it is apparent that the singularity at z = 0 is a removable singularity and then the residue at z = 0 is therefore 0.
The only other singularity is at z = 1. Recall the expression for the Taylor series for a function g(z) about z = a:



So, for g(z) = sin z and a = 1 we have



and for g(z) = 1/z and a = 1 we have



Multiplying those two series and introducing 1/(z − 1) gives us



So the residue of f(z) at z = 1 is sin 1.
2. The next example shows that, computing a residue by series expansion, a major role is played by the Lagrange inversion theorem. Let



be an entire function, and let



with positive radius of convergence, and with 
 
 
 
 . So 
 
 
 
  has a local inverse 
 
 
 
  at 0, and 
 
 
 
  is meromorphic at 0. Then we have:


 
 .
Indeed,



because the first series converges uniformly on any small circle around 0. Using the Lagrange inversion theorem


 
 ,
and we get the above expression. For example, if 
 
 
 
  and also 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The first term contributes 1 to the residue, and the second term contributes 2 since it is asymptotic to 
 
 
 
 .
Note that, with the corresponding stronger symmetric assumptions on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it also follows


 
  ,
where 
 
 
 
  is a local inverse of 
 
 
 
  at 0.
See also

Cauchy's integral formula
Cauchy's integral theorem
Mittag-Leffler's theorem
Methods of contour integration
Morera's theorem
Partial fractions in complex analysis

References




External links



John H. Mathews. Module for Residues.

"
Category:Meromorphic functions


