


Disjunctive normal form




Disjunctive normal form
{{refimprove|date=November 2010}}In [[boolean logic]], a '''disjunctive normal form''' (DNF) is a stand
 ardization (or normalization) of a logical formula which is a disjunction of conjunctive clauses; it can also be described as an OR of ANDs, a sum of products, or (in philosophical logic) a cluster concept. As a normal form, it is useful in automated theorem proving. A logical formula is considered to be in DNF if and only if it is a disjunction of one or more conjunctions of one or more literals. A DNF formula is in full disjunctive normal form if each of its variables appears exactly once in every clause. As in conjunctive normal form (CNF), the only propositional operators in DNF are and, or, and not. The not operator can only be used as part of a literal, which means that it can only precede a propositional variable. For example, all of the following formulas are in DNF:





 
  but and also






However, the following formulas are NOT in DNF:


 
  — NOT is the outermost operator


 
  — an OR is nested within an AND
Converting a formula to DNF involves using logical equivalences, such as the double negative elimination, De Morgan's laws, and the distributive law.
All logical formulas can be converted into disjunctive normal form. However, in some cases conversion to DNF can lead to an exponential explosion of the formula. For example, in DNF, logical formulas of the following form have 2n terms:



Any particular Boolean function can be represented by one and only one full disjunctive normal form, one of the two canonical forms.
An important variation used in the study of computational complexity is k-DNF. A formula is in k-DNF if it is in DNF and each clause contains at most k literals. Unlike the corresponding subclasses of conjunctive normal form for k>=3, there is no easy algorithm to convert an arbitrary instance of a formula in DNF to k-DNF.
The following is a formal grammar for DNF:

disjunct → (conjunct ∨ disjunct)
disjunct → conjunct
conjunct → (literal ∧ conjunct)
conjunct → literal
literal → ¬variable
literal → variable

Where variable is any variable.
See also

Algebraic normal form
Boolean function
Boolean-valued function
Conjunctive normal form
Horn clause
Karnaugh map
Logical graph
Propositional logic
Quine–McCluskey algorithm
Truth table

External links


Java applet for converting boolean logic expressions to CNF and DNF, showing the laws used

"
Category:Normal forms (logic)


