


Inverse functions and differentiation




Inverse functions and differentiation

 In mathematics, the inverse of a function

 
  is a function that, in some fashion, "undoes" the effect of 
 
 
 
  (see inverse function for a formal and detailed definition). The inverse of 
 
 
 
  is denoted 
 
 
 
 . The statements  and  are equivalent.
Their two derivatives, assuming they exist, are reciprocal, as the Leibniz notation suggests; that is:



This is a direct consequence of the chain rule, since



and the derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  is 1.
Writing explicitly the dependence of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and the point at which the differentiation takes place and using Lagrange's notation, the formula for the derivative of the inverse becomes



Geometrically, a function and inverse function have graphs that are reflections, in the line . This reflection operation turns the gradient of any line into its reciprocal.
Assuming that 
 
 
 
  has an inverse in a neighbourhood of 
 
 
 
  and that its derivative at that point is non-zero, its inverse is guaranteed to be differentiable at 
 
 
 
  and have a derivative given by the above formula.
Examples



 
  (for positive 
 
 
 
 ) has inverse 
 
 
 
 .







At , however, there is a problem: the graph of the square root function becomes vertical, corresponding to a horizontal tangent for the square function.



 
  (for real 
 
 
 
 ) has inverse 
 
 
 
  (for positive 
 
 
 
 )







Additional properties

Integrating this relationship gives










This is only useful if the integral exists. In particular we need 
 
 
 
  to be non-zero across the range of integration.
 


It follows that a function that has a continuous derivative has an inverse in a neighbourhood of every point where the derivative is non-zero. This need not be true if the derivative is not continuous.
 

Higher derivatives
The chain rule given above is obtained by differentiating the identity  with respect to x. One can continue the same process for higher derivatives. Twice differentiating the identity with respect to ''x ''obtains,



or replacing the first derivative using the formula above,



Similarly for the third derivative:



or using the formula for the second derivative,



These formulas are generalized by the Faà di Bruno's formula.
These formulas can also be written using Lagrange's notation. If f and g are inverses, then



Example



 
  has the inverse 
 
 
 
 . Using the formula for the second derivative of the inverse function,




so that


 
 ,
which agrees with the direct calculation.
See also

Calculus
Inverse functions
Chain rule
Inverse function theorem
Implicit function theorem
Integration of inverse functions

"
Category:Differentiation rules Category:Inverse functions


