


Power rule




Power rule

In calculus, the power rule is one of the most important differentiation rules. Since differentiation is linear, polynomials can be differentiated using this rule.


 
  The power rule holds for all powers except for the constant value 
 
 
 
  which is covered by the constant rule. The derivative is just 
 
 
 
  rather than 
 
 
 
  which is undefined when 
 
 
 
 .
The inverse of the power rule enables all powers of a variable 
 
 
 
  except 
 
 
 
  to be integrated. This integral is called Cavalieri's quadrature formula and was first found in a geometric form by Bonaventura Cavalieri for 
 
 
 
 . It is considered the first general theorem of calculus to be discovered.



This is an indefinite integral where 
 
 
 
  is the arbitrary constant of integration.
The integration of 
 
 
 
  requires a rule.



Hence, the derivative of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  and the integral of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Power rule
Historically the power rule was derived as the inverse of Cavalieri's quadrature formula which gave the area under 
 
 
 
  for any integer 
 
 
 
 . Nowadays the power rule is derived first and integration considered as its inverse.
For integers 
 
 
 
 , the derivative of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  that is,



The power rule for integration


 
  for 
 
 
 
  is then an easy consequence. One just needs to take the derivative of this equality and use the power rule and linearity of differentiation on the right-hand side.
Proof
To prove the power rule for differentiation, we use the definition of the derivative as a limit. But first, note the factorization for 
 
 
 
 :



Using this, we can see that



Since the division has been eliminated and we have a continuous function, we can freely substitute to find the limit:



The use of the quotient rule allows the extension of this rule for n as a negative integer, and the use of the laws of exponents and the chain rule allows this rule to be extended to all rational values of 
 
 
 
  . For an irrational 
 
 
 
 , a rational approximation is appropriate.
Differentiation of arbitrary polynomials
To differentiate arbitrary polynomials, one can use the linearity property of the differential operator to obtain:



Using the linearity of integration and the power rule for integration, one shows in the same way that



Generalizations
One can prove that the power rule is valid for any exponent 
 
 
 
 , that is



Proof by logarithmic differentiation:








 
  (chain rule and constant factor rule)








 
  as long as 
 
 
 
  is in the domain of the functions on the left and right hand sides and 
 
 
 
  is nonzero. Using this formula, together with


 
  one can differentiate and integrate linear combinations of powers of 
 
 
 
  which are not necessarily polynomials.
References

Larson, Ron; Hostetler, Robert P.; and Edwards, Bruce H. (2003). Calculus of a Single Variable: Early Transcendental Functions (3rd edition). Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-618-22307-X.

"
Category:Calculus Category:Articles containing proofs


