


Hilbert's Nullstellensatz




Hilbert's Nullstellensatz

Hilbert's Nullstellensatz (German for "theorem of zeros," or more literally, "zero-locus-theorem" – see Satz) is a theorem that establishes a fundamental relationship between geometry and algebra. This relationship is the basis of algebraic geometry, an important branch of mathematics. It relates algebraic sets to ideals in polynomial rings over algebraically closed fields. This relationship was discovered by David Hilbert who proved the Nullstellensatz and several other important related theorems named after him (like Hilbert's basis theorem).
Formulation
Let k be a field (such as the rational numbers) and K be an algebraically closed field extension (such as the complex numbers), consider the polynomial ring k[X1,X2,..., Xn] and let I be an ideal in this ring. The algebraic set V(I) defined by this ideal consists of all n-tuples x = (x1,...,xn) in Kn such that f(x) = 0 for all f in I. Hilbert's Nullstellensatz states that if p is some polynomial in k[X1,X2,..., Xn] that vanishes on the algebraic set V(I), i.e. p(x) = 0 for all x in V(I), then there exists a natural number r such that pr is in I.
An immediate corollary is the "weak Nullstellensatz": The ideal I in k[X1,X2,..., Xn] contains 1 if and only if the polynomials in I do not have any common zeros in Kn. It may also be formulated as follows: if I is a proper ideal in k[X1,X2,..., Xn], then V(I) cannot be empty, i.e. there exists a common zero for all the polynomials in the ideal in every algebraically closed extension of k. This is the reason for the name of the theorem, which can be proved easily from the 'weak' form using the Rabinowitsch trick. The assumption of considering common zeros in an algebraically closed field is essential here; for example, the elements of the proper ideal (X2 + 1) in R[X] do not have a common zero in R. With the notation common in algebraic geometry, the Nullstellensatz can also be formulated as


 
  for every ideal J. Here, 
 
 
 
  denotes the radical of J and I(U) is the ideal of all polynomials that vanish on the set U.
In this way, we obtain an order-reversing bijective correspondence between the algebraic sets in Kn and the radical ideals of K[X1,X2,..., Xn]. In fact, more generally, one has a Galois connection between subsets of the space and subsets of the algebra, where "Zariski closure" and "radical of the ideal generated" are the closure operators.
As a particular example, consider a point 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 . More generally,


 
  Conversely, every maximal ideal of the a polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  (note that 
 
 
 
  is algebraically closed) is of the form 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 .
As another example, an algebraic subset W in Kn is irreducible (in the Zariski topology) if and only if 
 
 
 
  is a prime ideal.
Proof and generalization
There are many known proofs of the theorem. One proof is the following:

Note that it is enough to prove Zariski's lemma: a finitely generated algebra over a field k that is a field is a finite field extension of k.
Prove Zariski's lemma.

The proof of Step 1 is elementary. Step 2 is deeper. It follows, for example, from the Noether normalization lemma. See Zariski's lemma for more. Here we sketch the proof of Step 1.1
Let 
 
 
 
  (k algebraically closed field), I an ideal of A and V the common zeros of I in 
 
 
 
 . Clearly, 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  for some prime ideal 
 
 
 
  in A. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  a maximal ideal in 
 
 
 
 . By Zariski's lemma, 
 
 
 
  is a finite extension of k; thus, is k since k is algebraically closed. Let 
 
 
 
  be the images of 
 
 
 
  under the natural map 
 
 
 
 . It follows that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The Nullstellensatz will also follow trivially once one systematically developed the theory of a Jacobson ring, a ring in which a radical ideal is an intersection of maximal ideals. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Jacobson ring. If 
 
 
 
  is a finitely generated R-algebra, then 
 
 
 
  is a Jacobson ring. Further, if 
 
 
 
  is a maximal ideal, then 
 
 
 
  is a maximal ideal of R, and 
 
 
 
  is a finite extension field of 
 
 
 
 .
Another generalization states that a faithfully flat morphism 
 
 
 
  locally of finite type with X quasi-compact has a quasi-section, i.e. there exists 
 
 
 
  affine and faithfully flat and quasi-finite over X together with an X-morphism 
 
 

Effective Nullstellensatz
In all of its variants, Hilbert's Nullstellensatz asserts that some polynomial 
 
 
 
  belongs or not to an ideal generated, say, by ; we have  f r}} in the strong version, 
 
 
 
  in the weak form. This means the existence or the non existence of polynomials  such that  f1g1 + ... + fkgk}} The usual proofs of the Nullstellensatz are non effective in the sense that they do not give any way to compute the .
It is thus a rather natural question to ask if there is an effective way to compute the  (and the exponent 
 
 
 
  in the strong form) or to prove that they do not exist. To solve this problem, it suffices to provide an upper bound on the total degree of the : such a bound reduces the problem to a finite system of linear equations that may be solved by usual linear algebra techniques. Any such upper bound is called an effective Nullstellensatz.
A related problem is the ideal membership problem, which consists in testing if a polynomial belongs to an ideal. For this problem also, a solution is provided by an upper bound on the degree of the . A general solution of the ideal membership problem provides an effective Nullstellensatz, at least for the weak form.
In 1925, Grete Hermann gave an upper bound for ideal membership problem that is doubly exponential in the number of variables. In 1982 Mayr and Meyer gave an example where the  have a degree that is at least double exponential, showing that every general upper bound for the ideal membership problem is doubly exponential in the number of variables.
Until 1987, nobody had the idea that effective Nullstellensatz was easier than ideal membership, when W. Dale Brownawell gave an upperbound for the effective Nullstellensatz that is simply exponential in the number of variables. Brownawell proof uses calculus techniques and thus is valid only in characteristic 
 
 
 
 . Soon after, in 1988, János Kollár gave a purely algebraic proof valid in any characteristic, leading to a better bound.
In the case of the weak Nullstellensatz, Kollár's bound is the following:2

Let  be polynomials in 
 
 
 
  variables, of total degree . If there exist polynomials  such that  1}}, then they can be chosen such that
 
 



This bound is optimal if all the degrees are greater than 2.
 

If 
 
 
 
  is the maximum of the degrees of the , this bound may be simplified to



Kollár's result has been improved by several authors. M. Sombra has provided the best improvement, up to date, giving the bound3



His bound is better than Kollár's as soon as at least two of the degrees that are involved are lower than 3.
Projective Nullstellensatz
We can formulate a certain correspondence between homogeneous ideals of polynomials and algebraic subsets of a projective space, called the projective Nullstellensatz, that is analogous to the affine one. To do that, we introduce some notations. Let 
 
 
 
  The homogeneous ideal 
 
 
 
  is called the maximal homogeneous ideal (see also irrelevant ideal). As in the affine case, we let: for a subset 
 
 
 
  and a homogeneous ideal I of R,


 
 
  By 
 
 
 
  we mean: for every homogeneous coordinates 
 
 
 
  of a point of S we have 
 
 
 
 . This implies that the homogeneous components of f are also zero on S and thus that 
 
 
 
  is a homogeneous ideal. Equivalently, 
 
 
 
  is the homogeneous ideal generated by homogeneous polynomials f that vanish on S. Now, for any homogeneous ideal 
 
 
 
 , by the usual Nullstellensatz, we have:


 
  and so, like in the affine case, we have:4

There exists an order-reversing one-to-one correspondence between proper homogeneous radical ideals of R and subsets of 
 
 
 
  of the form 
 
 
 
  The correspondence is given by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 


See also

Stengle's Positivstellensatz
Differential Nullstellensatz
Combinatorial Nullstellensatz
Arithmetic Nullstellensatz
Artin–Tate lemma

Notes
References

M. Atiyah, I.G. Macdonald, Introduction to Commutative Algebra, Addison–Wesley, 1994. ISBN 0-201-40751-5

David Eisenbud, Commutative Algebra With a View Toward Algebraic Geometry, New York : Springer-Verlag, 1999.


"
Category:Polynomials Category:Theorems in algebraic geometry






This formulation comes from Milne, Algebraic geometry 1 and differs from 




