


Pafnuty Chebyshev




Pafnuty Chebyshev

Pafnuty Lvovich Chebyshev () ( – )1 was a Russian mathematician. His name can be alternatively transliterated as Chebychev, Chebysheff, Chebyshov; or Tchebychev, Tchebycheff (French transcriptions); or Tschebyschev, Tschebyschef, Tschebyscheff (German transcriptions).
Biography
One of nine children, Chebyshev was born in the central Russian village of Akatovo near Borovsk, to Agrafena Ivanova Pozniakova and Lev Pavlovich Chebyshev. His father had fought as an officer against Napoleon Bonaparte's invading army.
Chebyshev was originally home schooled by his mother and his cousin, Avdotia Kvintillianova Soukhareva. He learned French early in life, which later helped him communicate with other mathematicians. A stunted leg prevented him from playing with other children, leading him to concentrate on his studies instead.
Chebyshev studied at the college level at Moscow University, where he earned his bachelor's degree in 1841. At Moscow University, Chebyshev was a graduate student of Nikolai Brashman.
After Chebyshev became a professor of mathematics in Moscow himself, his two most illustrious graduate students were Andrei Andreyevich Markov (the elder) and Aleksandr Lyapunov.
Later he moved to St. Petersburg, where he founded one of the most important schools of mathematics in Russia, and there is today a research institute in mathematics called the Chebyshev Laboratory in that city.
Mathematical contributions
Chebyshev is known for his work in the fields of probability, statistics, mechanics, and number theory. The Chebyshev inequality states that if 
 
 
 
  is a random variable with standard deviation σ > 0, then the probability that the outcome of 
 
 
 
  is no less than 
 
 
 
  away from its mean is no more than 
 
 
 
 :



The Chebyshev inequality is used to prove the Weak Law of Large Numbers.
The Bertrand–Chebyshev theorem (1845,1852) states that for any 
 
 
 
 , there exists a prime number

 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . This is a consequence of the Chebyshev inequalities for the number 
 
 
 
  of prime numbers less than 
 
 
 
 , which state that 
 
 
 
  is of the order of 
 
 
 
 . A more precise form is given by the celebrated prime number theorem: the quotient of the two expressions approaches 1.0 as 
 
 
 
  tends to infinity.
Chebyshev is also known for the Chebyshev polynomials and the Chebyshev bias – the difference between the number of primes that are 3 (modulo 4) and 1 (modulo 4).
Legacy
 Chebyshev is considered to be a founding father of Russian mathematics. Among his well-known students were the mathematicians Dmitry Grave, Aleksandr Korkin, Aleksandr Lyapunov, and Andrei Markov. According to the Mathematics Genealogy Project, Chebyshev has 10,629 mathematical "descendants" as of 2015.2
The lunar crater Chebyshev and the asteroid 2010 Chebyshev were named in his honour.
Publications





See also

Chebyshev cube root
Chebyshev distance
Chebyshev filter, a family of analog filters in electronics and signal processing
Chebyshev function in number theory
Chebyshev polynomials and the "Chebyshev form"
Chebyshev's inequality in probability and statistics
Chebyshev's sum inequality
Chebyshev equation
Chebyshev iteration
Chebyshev linkage, a straight line generating linkage
Roberts–Chebyshev theorem on the generation of cognate coupler-curves.
Chebyshev–Markov–Stieltjes inequalities
Chebychev–Grübler–Kutzbach criterion for the mobility analysis of linkages
Chebyshev nodes
Chebyshev rational functions
Chebyshev's bias
Discrete Chebyshev polynomials
Chebyshev integral

References
External links

Mechanisms by Chebyshev – short 3d films – embodiment of Tchebishev's inventions



Biography, another one, and yet another (all in Russian).
Œuvres de P.L. Tchebychef (in French)

"
Category:1821 births Category:1894 deaths Category:People from Zhukovsky District, Kaluga Oblast Category:People from Kaluga Governorate Category:19th-century Russian mathematicians Category:Probability theorists Category:Imperial Russian inventors Category:Number theorists Category:Numerical analysts Category:Ballistics experts Category:Imperial Russian statisticians Category:Moscow State University alumni Category:Full Members of the St Petersburg Academy of Sciences Category:Members of the French Academy of Sciences Category:Demidov Prize laureates Category:Foreign Members of the Royal Society Category:Russian mathematicians



Pafnuty Lvovich Chebyshev – Britannica Online Encyclopedia↩
↩




