


Face (geometry)




Face (geometry)

In solid geometry, a face is a flat (planar) surface that forms part of the boundary of a solid object;1 a three-dimensional solid bounded exclusively by flat faces is a polyhedron.
In more technical treatments of the geometry of polyhedra and higher-dimensional polytopes, the term is also used to mean an element of any dimension of a more general polytope (in any number of dimensions).2
Polygonal face
In elementary geometry, a face is a two-dimensional polygon on the boundary of a polyhedron.34 Other names for a polygonal face include side of a polyhedron, and tile of a Euclidean plane tessellation.
For example, any of the six squares that bound a cube is a face of the cube. Sometimes "face" is also used to refer to the 2-dimensional features of a 4-polytope. With this meaning, the 4-dimensional tesseract has 24 square faces, each sharing two of 8 cubic cells.




Regular examples by Schläfli symbol



Polyhedron



{4,3}




 The cube has 3 square faces per vertex.



Some other polygons, which are not faces, are also important for polyhedra and tessellations. These include Petrie polygons, vertex figures and facets (flat polygons formed by coplanar vertices which do not lie in the same face of the polyhedron).
Number of polygonal faces of a polyhedron
Any convex polyhedron's surface has Euler characteristic



where V is the number of vertices, E is the number of edges, and F is the number of faces. This equation is known as Euler's polyhedron formula. Thus the number of faces is 2 more than the excess of the number of edges over the number of vertices. For example, a cube has 12 edges and 8 vertices, and hence 6 faces.
k-face
In higher-dimensional geometry the faces of a polytope are features of all dimensions.567 A face of dimension k is called a k-face. For example the polygonal faces of an ordinary polyhedron are 2-faces. In set theory, the set of faces of a polytope includes the polytope itself and the empty set where the empty set is for consistency given a "dimension" of −1. For any n-polytope (n-dimensional polytope), −1 ≤ k ≤ n.
For example, with this meaning, the faces of a cube include the empty set, its vertices (0-faces), edges (1-faces) and squares (2-faces), and the cube itself (3-face).
All of the following are the faces of a 4-dimensional polytope:

4-face – the 4-dimensional 4-polytope itself
3-faces – 3-dimensional cells (polyhedral faces)
2-faces – 2-dimensional faces (polygonal faces)
1-faces – 1-dimensional edges
0-faces – 0-dimensional vertices
the empty set, which has dimension −1

In some areas of mathematics, such as polyhedral combinatorics, a polytope is by definition convex. Formally, a face of a polytope P is the intersection of P with any closed halfspace whose boundary is disjoint from the interior of P.8 From this definition it follows that the set of faces of a polytope includes the polytope itself and the empty set.910
In other areas of mathematics, such as the theories of abstract polytopes and star polytopes, the requirement for convexity is relaxed. Abstract theory still requires that the set of faces include the polytope itself and the empty set.
Cell or 3-face
A cell is a polyhedral element (3-face) of a 4-dimensional polytope or 3-dimensional tessellation, or higher. Cells are facets for 4-polytopes and 3-honeycombs.
Examples:




Regular examples by Schläfli symbol



4-polytopes



{4,3,3}




 The tesseract has 3 cubic cells (3-faces) per edge.



Facet or (n-1)-face
In higher-dimensional geometry, the facets of a n-polytope are the (n-1)-faces of dimension one less than the polytope itself.11 A polytope is bounded by its facets.12
For example:

The facets of a line segment are its 0-faces or vertices.
The facets of a polygon are its 1-faces or edges.
The facets of a polyhedron or plane tiling are its 2-faces.
The facets of a 4D polytope or 3-honeycomb are its 3-faces.
The facets of a 5D polytope or 4-honeycomb are its 4-faces.

Ridge or (n-2)-face
In related terminology, a (n − 2)-face of an n-polytope is called a ridge (also subfacet).13 A ridge is seens as the boundary between exactly two facets of a polytope or honeycomb.14
For example:

The ridges of a 2D polygon or 1D tiling are its 0-faces or vertices.
The ridges of a 3D polyhedron or plane tiling are its 1-faces or edges.
The ridges of a 4D polytope or 3-honeycomb are its 2-faces or simply faces.
The ridges of a 5D polytope or 4-honeycomb are its 3-faces or cells.

Peak or (n-3)-face
A (n − 3)-face of an n-polytope is called a peak. Peaks contain simple rotation gyration axes of a polytope or honeycomb.
For example:

The peaks of a 3D polyhedron or plane tiling are its 0-faces or vertices.
The peaks of a 4D polytope or 3-honeycomb are its 1-faces or edges.
The peaks of a 5D polytope or 4-honeycomb are its 2-faces or simply faces.

See also

Face lattice

References

N.W. Johnson: Geometries and Transformations, (2015) Chapter 11: Finite symmetry groups, 11.1 Polytopes and honeycombs

External links









de:Fläche (Mathematik) et:Tahk"
Category:Elementary geometry Category:Convex geometry Category:Polyhedra



↩
.↩

.↩

.↩
.↩
 and  use a slightly different but equivalent definition, which amounts to intersecting P with either a hyperplane disjoint from the interior of P or the whole space.↩


, p. 87; , p. 27; , p. 17.↩
Johnson (2015) Sec 11.1, p. 137↩
, p. 87; , p. 71.↩





