


C-symmetry




C-symmetry

In physics, C-symmetry means the symmetry of physical laws under a charge-conjugation transformation. Electromagnetism, gravity and the strong interaction all obey C-symmetry, but weak interactions violate C-symmetry.
Charge reversal in electromagnetism
The laws of electromagnetism (both classical and quantum) are invariant under this transformation: if each charge q were to be replaced with a charge −q, and thus the directions of the electric and magnetic fields were reversed, the dynamics would preserve the same form. In the language of quantum field theory, charge conjugation transforms:1











Notice that these transformations do not alter the chirality of particles. A left-handed neutrino would be taken by charge conjugation into a left-handed antineutrino, which does not interact in the Standard Model. This property is what is meant by the "maximal violation" of C-symmetry in the weak interaction.
(Some postulated extensions of the Standard Model, like left-right models, restore this C-symmetry.)
Combination of charge and parity reversal
It was believed for some time that C-symmetry could be combined with the parity-inversion transformation (see P-symmetry) to preserve a combined CP-symmetry. However, violations of this symmetry have been identified in the weak interactions (particularly in the kaons and B mesons). In the Standard Model, this CP violation is due to a single phase in the CKM matrix. If CP is combined with time reversal (T-symmetry), the resulting CPT-symmetry can be shown using only the Wightman axioms to be universally obeyed.
Charge definition
To give an example, take two real scalar fields, φ and χ. Suppose both fields have even C-parity (even C-parity refers to even symmetry under charge conjugation ex. 
 
 
 
 , as opposed to odd C-parity which refers to antisymmetry under charge conjugation ex. 
 
 
 
 ). Now reformulate things so that 
 
 
 
 . Now, φ and χ have even C-parities because the imaginary number i has an odd C-parity (C is antiunitary).
In other models, it is possible for both φ and χ to have odd C-parities.
See also

C parity
anti-particle
antimatter

References



"
Category:Quantum field theory Category:Symmetry








