


Linear function




Linear function

 
In mathematics, the term linear function refers to two distinct, although related, notions:1

In calculus and related areas, a linear function is a polynomial function of degree zero or one, or is the zero polynomial.2
In linear algebra and functional analysis, a linear function is a linear map.3

As a polynomial function
In calculus, analytic geometry and related areas, a linear function is a polynomial of degree one or less, including the zero polynomial (the latter not being considered to have degree zero).
When the function is of only one variable, it is of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are constants, often real numbers. The graph of such a function of one variable is a nonvertical line. 
 
 
 
  is frequently referred to as the slope of the line, and 
 
 
 
  as the intercept.
For a function 
 
 
 
  of any finite number of independent variables, the general formula is


 
 , and the graph is a hyperplane of dimension .
A constant function is also considered linear in this context, as it is a polynomial of degree zero or is the zero polynomial. Its graph, when there is only one independent variable, is a horizontal line.
In this context, the other meaning (a linear map) may be referred to as a homogeneous linear function or a linear form. In the context of linear algebra, this meaning (polynomial functions of degree 0 or 1) is a special kind of affine map.
As a linear map
In linear algebra, a linear function is a map f between two vector spaces that preserves vector addition and scalar multiplication:





 
  Here 
 
 
 
  denotes a constant belonging to some field

 
  of scalars (for example, the real numbers) and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are elements of a vector space, which might be 
 
 
 
  itself.
Some authors use "linear function" only for linear maps that take values in the scalar field;4 these are also called linear functionals.
The "linear functions" of calculus qualify as "linear maps" when (and only when) 
 
 
 
 , or, equivalently, when the constant 
 
 
 
 . Geometrically, the graph of the function must pass through the origin.
See also

Homogeneous function
Nonlinear system
Piecewise linear function
Linear interpolation
Discontinuous linear map
Almost linear hash function

Notes


References

Izrail Moiseevich Gelfand (1961), Lectures on Linear Algebra, Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York. Reprinted by Dover, 1989. ISBN 0-486-66082-6
Thomas S. Shores (2007), Applied Linear Algebra and Matrix Analysis, Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer. ISBN 0-387-33195-6
James Stewart (2012), Calculus: Early Transcendentals, edition 7E, Brooks/Cole. ISBN 978-0-538-49790-9
Leonid N. Vaserstein (2006), "Linear Programming", in Leslie Hogben, ed., Handbook of Linear Algebra, Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications, Chapman and Hall/CRC, chap. 50. ISBN 1-584-88510-6

External links
"
Category:Polynomials



"The term linear function, which is not used here, means a linear form in some textbooks and an affine function in others." Vaserstein 2006, p. 50-1
Stewart 2012, p. 23
Shores 2007, p. 71
Gelfand 1961




