


Probability mass function




Probability mass function

 In probability theory and statistics, a probability mass function (pmf) is a function that gives the probability that a discrete random variable is exactly equal to some value.1 The probability mass function is often the primary means of defining a discrete probability distribution, and such functions exist for either scalar or multivariate random variables whose domain is discrete.
A probability mass function differs from a probability density function (pdf) in that the latter is associated with continuous rather than discrete random variables; the values of the latter are not probabilities as such: a pdf must be integrated over an interval to yield a probability.2
Formal definition
(Figure)
The probability mass function of a fair die. All the numbers on the  have an equal chance of appearing on top when the die stops rolling.

Suppose that X: S → A (A 
 
 
R) is a discrete random variable defined on a sample space S. Then the probability mass function fX: A → [0, 1] for X is defined as34



Thinking of probability as mass helps to avoid mistakes since the physical mass is conserved as is the total probability for all hypothetical outcomes x:



When there is a natural order among the hypotheses x, it may be convenient to assign numerical values to them (or n-tuples in case of a discrete multivariate random variable) and to consider also values not in the image of X. That is, fX may be defined for all real numbers and fX(x) = 0 for all x

X(S) as shown in the figure.
Since the image of X is countable, the probability mass function fX(x) is zero for all but a countable number of values of x. The discontinuity of probability mass functions is related to the fact that the cumulative distribution function of a discrete random variable is also discontinuous. Where it is differentiable, the derivative is zero, just as the probability mass function is zero at all such points.
Measure theoretic formulation
A probability mass function of a discrete random variable X can be seen as a special case of two more general measure theoretic constructions: the distribution of X and the probability density function of X with respect to the counting measure. We make this more precise below.
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a probability space and that 
 
 
 
  is a measurable space whose underlying σ-algebra is discrete, so in particular contains singleton sets of B. In this setting, a random variable 
 
 
 
  is discrete provided its image is a countable set. The pushforward measure

 
 ---called a distribution of X in this context---is a probability measure on B whose restriction to singleton sets induces a probability mass function 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  for each b in B.
Now suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a measure space equipped with the counting measure μ. The probability density function f of X with respect to the counting measure, if it exists, is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of the pushforward measure of X (with respect to the counting measure), so 
 
 
 
  and f is a function from B to the non-negative reals. As a consequence, for any b in B we have


 
  demonstrating that f is in fact a probability mass function.
Examples
Suppose that S is the sample space of all outcomes of a single toss of a fair coin, and X is the random variable defined on S assigning 0 to "tails" and 1 to "heads". Since the coin is fair, the probability mass function is


 
  This is a special case of the binomial distribution, the Bernoulli distribution.
An example of a multivariate discrete distribution, and of its probability mass function, is provided by the multinomial distribution.
References
Further reading

Johnson, N.L., Kotz, S., Kemp A. (1993) Univariate Discrete Distributions (2nd Edition). Wiley. ISBN 0-471-54897-9 (p 36)

"
Category:Probability theory Category:Types of probability distributions




Probability Function at Mathworld






