


Lagrange multiplier




Lagrange multiplier

 
In mathematical optimization, the method of Lagrange multipliers (named after Joseph Louis Lagrange1) is a strategy for finding the local maxima and minima of a function subject to equality constraints.
For instance (see Figure 1), consider the optimization problem

maximize 
 
 

subject to 
 
 
 
 .
 

We need both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to have continuous first partial derivatives. We introduce a new variable (
 
 
 
 ) called a Lagrange multiplier and study the Lagrange function (or Lagrangian) defined by



where the 
 
 
 
  term may be either added or subtracted. If  is a maximum of 
 
 
 
  for the original constrained problem, then there exists  such that  is a stationary point for the Lagrange function (stationary points are those points where the partial derivatives of 
 
 
 
  are zero). However, not all stationary points yield a solution of the original problem. Thus, the method of Lagrange multipliers yields a necessary condition for optimality in constrained problems.23





4 Sufficient conditions for a minimum or maximum also exist.
Introduction
One of the most common problems in calculus is that of finding maxima or minima (in general, "extrema") of a function, but it is often difficult to find a closed form for the function being extremized. Such difficulties often arise when one wishes to maximize or minimize a function subject to fixed outside conditions or constraints. The method of Lagrange multipliers is a powerful tool for solving this class of problems without the need to explicitly solve the conditions and use them to eliminate extra variables.
Consider the two-dimensional problem introduced above:

maximize 
 
 

subject to 
 
 


Lagrange multipliers relies on the intuition that at a maximum 
 
 
 
  cannot be increasing in the direction of any neighboring point where 
 
 
 
 . If it were, we could walk along 
 
 
 
  to get higher, meaning that the starting point wasn't actually the maximum.
We can visualize contours of 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
  for various values of 
 
 
 
 , and the contour of 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose we walk along the contour line with 
 
 
 
 . We are interested in finding points where 
 
 
 
  does not change as we walk, since these points might be maxima. There are two ways this could happen: First, we could be following a contour line of 
 
 
 
 , since by definition 
 
 
 
  does not change as we walk along its contour lines. This would mean that the contour lines of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are parallel here. The second possibility is that we have reached a "level" part of 
 
 
 
 , meaning that 
 
 
 
  does not change in any direction.
To check the first possibility, notice that since the gradient of a function is perpendicular to the contour lines, the contour lines of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are parallel if and only if the gradients of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are parallel. Thus we want points 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and


 
 ,
for some 
 
 

where



are the respective gradients. The constant 
 
 
 
  is required because although the two gradient vectors are parallel, the magnitudes of the gradient vectors are generally not equal. (The negative is traditional). This constant is called the Lagrange multiplier.
Notice that this method also solves the second possibility: if 
 
 
 
  is level, then its gradient is zero, and setting 
 
 
 
  is a solution regardless of 
 
 
 
 .
To incorporate these conditions into one equation, we introduce an auxiliary function



and solve



This is the method of Lagrange multipliers. Note that 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 .
The constrained extrema of 
 
 
 
  are critical points of the Lagrangian 
 
 
 
 , but they are not necessarily local extrema of 
 
 
 
  (see Example 2 below).
One may reformulate the Lagrangian as a Hamiltonian, in which case the solutions are local minima for the Hamiltonian. This is done in optimal control theory, in the form of Pontryagin's minimum principle.
The fact that solutions of the Lagrangian are not necessarily extrema also poses difficulties for numerical optimization. This can be addressed by computing the magnitude of the gradient, as the zeros of the magnitude are necessarily local minima, as illustrated in the numerical optimization example.
Handling multiple constraints
  The method of Lagrange multipliers can also accommodate multiple constraints. To see how this is done, we need to reexamine the problem in a slightly different manner because the concept of “crossing” discussed above becomes rapidly unclear when we consider the types of constraints that are created when we have more than one constraint acting together.
As an example, consider a paraboloid with a constraint that is a single point (as might be created if we had 2 line constraints that intersect). The level set (i.e., contour line) clearly appears to “cross” that point and its gradient is clearly not parallel to the gradients of either of the two line constraints. Yet, it is obviously a maximum and a minimum because there is only one point on the paraboloid that meets the constraint.
While this example seems a bit odd, it is easy to understand and is representative of the sort of “effective” constraint that appears quite often when we deal with multiple constraints intersecting. Thus, we take a slightly different approach below to explain and derive the Lagrange Multipliers method with any number of constraints.
Throughout this section, the independent variables will be denoted by  and, as a group, we will denote them as  (x1, x2, ..., xN)}}. Also, the function being analyzed will be denoted by 
 
 
 
  and the constraints will be represented by the equations  g2(p) {{=}} ... {{=}} gM(p) {{=}} 0}}.
The basic idea remains essentially the same: if we consider only the points that satisfy the constraints (i.e., are in the constraints), then a point 
 
 
 
  is a stationary point (i.e., a point in a “flat” region) of 
 
 
 
  if and only if the constraints at that point do not allow movement in a direction where 
 
 
 
  changes value.
Once we have located the stationary points, we need to do further tests to see if we have found a minimum, a maximum or just a stationary point that is neither.
We start by considering the level set of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 . The set of vectors  containing the directions in which we can move and still remain in the same level set are the directions where the value of 
 
 
 
  does not change (i.e., the change equals zero). Thus, for every vector 
 
 
 
  in , the following relation must hold:



where the notation  above means the -component of the vector 
 
 
 
 . The equation above can be rewritten in a more compact geometric form that helps our intuition:



which is the same as writing



This makes it clear that if we are at 
 
 
 
 , then all directions from this point that do not change the value of 
 
 
must be perpendicular to 
 
 
 
  (the gradient of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 ).
Now let us consider the effect of the constraints. Each constraint limits the directions that we can move from a particular point and still satisfy the constraint. We can use the same procedure, to look for the set of vectors  containing the directions in which we can move and still satisfy the constraint. As above, for every vector 
 
 
 
  in , the following relation must hold:



From this, we see that at point 
 
 
 
 , all directions from this point that will still satisfy this constraint must be perpendicular to 
 
 
 
 .
Now we are ready to refine our idea further and complete the method: a point on

is a constrained stationary point if and only if the direction that changes

violates at least one of the constraints, i.e., has no "component" in the "legal" space perpendicular to

 
 . (We can see that this is true because if a direction that changes 
 
 
 
  did not violate any constraints, then there would be a “legal” point nearby with a higher or lower value for 
 
 
 
  and the current point would then not be a stationary point.) Mathematically, this means that the gradient of 
 
 
 
  at this constrained stationary point is perpendicular to the space spanned by the set of vectors , which in turn is perpendicular to the gradients of the constraints 
 
 
 
 .
Single constraint revisited
For a single constraint, we use the statement above to say that at stationary points the direction that changes 
 
 
 
  is in the same direction that violates the constraint. To determine if two vectors are in the same direction, we note that if two vectors start from the same point and are “in the same direction”, then one vector can always “reach” the other by changing its length and/or flipping to point the opposite way along the same direction line. In this way, we can succinctly state that two vectors point in the same direction if and only if one of them can be multiplied by some real number such that they become equal to the other. So, for our purposes, we require that:



If we now add another simultaneous equation to guarantee that we only perform this test when we are at a point that satisfies the constraint, we end up with 2 simultaneous equations that when solved, identify all constrained stationary points:



Note that the above is a succinct way of writing the equations. Fully expanded, there are 
 
 
 
  simultaneous equations that need to be solved for the 
 
 
 
  variables which are 
 
 
 
  and :



Multiple constraints
For more than one constraint, similar reasoning applies. Each constraint function, 
 
 
 
 , has a space of allowable directions at 
 
 
 
 : the space of vectors perpendicular to 
 
 
 
 . The set of directions that are allowed by all constraints is thus the space of directions perpendicular to all of the constraint gradients. Denote this space of allowable moves by 
 
 
 
  and denote the span of the constraint gradients by 
 
 
 
 . By the discussion above, 
 
 
 
 , the space of vectors perpendicular to every element of 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is an optimum then any element not perpendicular to 
 
 
 
  is not an allowable direction. One can show that this implies 
 
 
 
 . Thus there are scalars  such that



As before, we now add simultaneous equation to guarantee that we only perform this test when we are at a point that satisfies every constraint, we end up with simultaneous equations that when solved, identify all constrained stationary points:



The method is complete now (from the standpoint of solving the problem of finding stationary points) but as mathematicians delight in doing, these equations can be further condensed into an even more elegant and succinct form. Lagrange must have cleverly noticed that the equations above look like partial derivatives of some larger scalar function 
 
 
 
  that takes all the  and all the  as inputs. Next, he might then have noticed that setting every equation equal to zero is exactly what one would have to do to solve for the unconstrained stationary points of that larger function. Finally, he showed that a larger function 
 
 
 
  with partial derivatives that are exactly the ones we require can be constructed very simply as below:



Solving the equation above for its unconstrained stationary points generates exactly the same stationary points as solving for the constrained stationary points of 
 
 
 
  under the constraints .
In Lagrange’s honor, the function above is called a Lagrangian, the scalars  are called Lagrange Multipliers and this optimization method itself is called The Method of Lagrange Multipliers.
The method of Lagrange multipliers is generalized by the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions, which can also take into account inequality constraints of the form 
 
 
 
 .
Modern Formulation via Differentiable Manifolds
Finding local maxima of a function 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an open subset of 
 
 
 
  is done by finding all points 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  then checking whether all the eigenvalues of the Hessian 
 
 
 
  are negative. Setting 
 
 
 
  is a non-linear problem and in general arbitrarily difficult. After finding the critical points, checking the eigenvalues is a linear problem and thus easy.
When 
 
 
 
  is a smooth function such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in the level set of 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  becomes an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional smooth manifold 
 
 
 
 , by the level set theorem. Finding local maxima is by definition a local problem, so it can be done on local charts of 
 
 
 
 : after finding a diffeomorphism 
 
 
 
  from an open subset of 
 
 
 
  onto an open subset 
 
 
 
 , we can apply the algorithm in the previous paragraph to the function 
 
 
 
 .
While the above idea sounds good, it is difficult to compute 
 
 
 
  in practice. The entire method of Lagrange multipliers reduces to the idea of skipping that step and finding the zeros of 
 
 
 
  directly. It follows from the construction in the level set theorem that 
 
 
 
  is the inclusion map 
 
 
 
 . Therefore


 
  if and only if


 
  writing 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
By the first isomorphism theorem this is true if and only if there exists a linear map 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . As a linear map, we must have that 
 
 
 
  for a fixed 
 
 
 
 . So finding a critical point of 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to solving the system of equations






in the variables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This is in general a non-linear system of 
 
 
 
  equations and 
 
 
 
  unknowns.
In the case of several constraints, we work with 
 
 
 
  and replace the condition 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  with the requirement that 
 
 
 
  be surjective at all such points. In this case 
 
 
 
  will be a linear map 
 
 
 
 , ie a row vector with 
 
 
 
  entries.
Interpretation of the Lagrange multipliers
Often the Lagrange multipliers have an interpretation as some quantity of interest. For example, if the Lagrangian expression is



then



So,  is the rate of change of the quantity being optimized as a function of the constraint variable. As examples, in Lagrangian mechanics the equations of motion are derived by finding stationary points of the action, the time integral of the difference between kinetic and potential energy. Thus, the force on a particle due to a scalar potential, 
 
 
 
 , can be interpreted as a Lagrange multiplier determining the change in action (transfer of potential to kinetic energy) following a variation in the particle's constrained trajectory. In control theory this is formulated instead as costate equations.
Moreover, by the envelope theorem the optimal value of a Lagrange multiplier has an interpretation as the marginal effect of the corresponding constraint constant upon the optimal attainable value of the original objective function: if we denote values at the optimum with an asterisk, then it can be shown that



For example, in economics the optimal profit to a player is calculated subject to a constrained space of actions, where a Lagrange multiplier is the change in the optimal value of the objective function (profit) due to the relaxation of a given constraint (e.g. through a change in income); in such a context 
 
 
 
  is the marginal cost of the constraint, and is referred to as the shadow price.
Sufficient conditions
Sufficient conditions for a constrained local maximum or minimum can be stated in terms of a sequence of principal minors (determinants of upper-left-justified sub-matrices) of the bordered Hessian matrix of second derivatives of the Lagrangian expression.5
Examples
Example 1
(Figure)
Fig. 3. Illustration of the constrained optimization problem

Suppose we wish to maximize 
 
 
 
  subject to the constraint 
 
 
 
 . The feasible set is the unit circle, and the level sets of 
 
 
 
  are diagonal lines (with slope -1), so we can see graphically that the maximum occurs at 
 
 
 
 , and that the minimum occurs at 
 
 
 
 .
Using the method of Lagrange multipliers, we have 
 
 
 
 , hence



Setting the gradient 
 
 
 
  yields the system of equations



where the last equation is the original constraint.
The first two equations yield



Substituting into the last equation yields 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
 , which implies that the stationary points are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . Evaluating the objective function 
 
 
 
  at these points yields



thus the maximum is 
 
 
 
 , which is attained at 
 
 
 
 , and the minimum is 
 
 
 
 
 , which is attained at 
 
 
 
 .
Example 2
(Figure)
Fig. 4. Illustration of the constrained optimization problem

Suppose we want to find the maximum values of



with the condition that the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  coordinates lie on the circle around the origin with radius √3, that is, subject to the constraint



As there is just a single constraint, we will use only one multiplier, say 
 
 
 
 .
The constraint 
 
 
 
  is identically zero on the circle of radius √3. So any multiple of 
 
 
 
  may be added to 
 
 
 
  leaving 
 
 
 
 
  unchanged in the region of interest (above the circle where our original constraint is satisfied). Let



The critical values of 
 
 
 
  occur where its gradient is zero. The partial derivatives are



Equation (iii) is just the original constraint. Equation (i) implies 
 
 
or

 
 . In the first case, if 
 
 
 
  then we must have 
 
 
 
  by (iii) and then by (ii) λ = 0. In the second case, if 
 
 
 
  and substituting into equation (ii) we have that,



Then  2y2}}. Substituting into equation (iii) and solving for 
 
 
 
  gives 
 
 
 
 . Thus there are six critical points:



Evaluating the objective at these points, we find that



Therefore, the objective function attains the global maximum (subject to the constraints) at 
 
 
 
  and the global minimum at 
 
 
 
  The point 
 
 
 
  is a local minimum and 
 
 
 
  is a local maximum, as may be determined by consideration of the Hessian matrix of 
 
 
 
 .
Note that while 
 
 
 
  is a critical point of 
 
 
 
 , it is not a local extremum. We have 
 
 
 
 . Given any neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 , we can choose a small positive 
 
 
 
  and a small 
 
 
 
  of either sign to get 
 
 
 
  values both greater and less than 
 
 
 
 .
Example 3: Entropy
Suppose we wish to find the discrete probability distribution on the points 
 
 
 
  with maximal information entropy. This is the same as saying that we wish to find the least biased probability distribution on the points 
 
 
 
 . In other words, we wish to maximize the Shannon entropy equation:



For this to be a probability distribution the sum of the probabilities 
 
 
 
  at each point 
 
 
 
  must equal 1, so our constraint is:



We use Lagrange multipliers to find the point of maximum entropy, 
 
 
 
 , across all discrete probability distributions 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . We require that:



which gives a system of 
 
 
 
  equations, 
 
 
 
 , such that:



Carrying out the differentiation of these 
 
 
 
  equations, we get



This shows that all 
 
 
 
  are equal (because they depend on 
 
 
 
  only). By using the constraint



we find



Hence, the uniform distribution is the distribution with the greatest entropy, among distributions on 
 
 
 
  points.
Example 4: Numerical optimization
(Figure)
Lagrange multipliers cause the critical points to occur at saddle points.

(Figure)
The magnitude of the gradient can be used to force the critical points to occur at local minima.

The critical points of Lagrangians occur at saddle points, rather than at local maxima (or minima).6 Unfortunately, many numerical optimization techniques, such as hill climbing, gradient descent, some of the quasi-Newton methods, among others, are designed to find local maxima (or minima) and not saddle points. For this reason, one must either modify the formulation to ensure that it's a minimization problem (for example, by extremizing the square of the gradient of the Lagrangian as below), or else use an optimization technique that finds stationary points (such as Newton's method without an extremum seeking line search) and not necessarily extrema.
As a simple example, consider the problem of finding the value of 
 
 
 
  that minimizes 
 
 
 
 , constrained such that 
 
 
 
 . (This problem is somewhat pathological because there are only two values that satisfy this constraint, but it is useful for illustration purposes because the corresponding unconstrained function can be visualized in three dimensions.)
Using Lagrange multipliers, this problem can be converted into an unconstrained optimization problem:



The two critical points occur at saddle points where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In order to solve this problem with a numerical optimization technique, we must first transform this problem such that the critical points occur at local minima. This is done by computing the magnitude of the gradient of the unconstrained optimization problem.
First, we compute the partial derivative of the unconstrained problem with respect to each variable:






If the target function is not easily differentiable, the differential with respect to each variable can be approximated as


 
 ,


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is a small value.
Next, we compute the magnitude of the gradient, which is the square root of the sum of the squares of the partial derivatives:



(Since magnitude is always non-negative, optimizing over the squared-magnitude is equivalent to optimizing over the magnitude. Thus, the ``square root" may be omitted from these equations with no expected difference in the results of optimization.)
The critical points of 
 
 
 
  occur at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , just as in 
 
 
 
 . Unlike the critical points in 
 
 
 
 , however, the critical points in 
 
 
 
  occur at local minima, so numerical optimization techniques can be used to find them.
Applications
Economics
Constrained optimization plays a central role in economics. For example, the choice problem for a consumer is represented as one of maximizing a utility function subject to a budget constraint. The Lagrange multiplier has an economic interpretation as the shadow price associated with the constraint, in this example the marginal utility of income. Other examples include profit maximization for a firm, along with various macroeconomic applications.
Control theory
In optimal control theory, the Lagrange multipliers are interpreted as costate variables, and Lagrange multipliers are reformulated as the minimization of the Hamiltonian, in Pontryagin's minimum principle.
Nonlinear programming
The Lagrange multiplier method has several generalizations. In nonlinear programming there are several multiplier rules, e.g., the Carathéodory-John Multiplier Rule and the Convex Multiplier Rule, for inequality constraints.7
See also

Adjustment of observations
Duality
Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions: generalization of the method of Lagrange multipliers.
Lagrange multipliers on Banach spaces: another generalization of the method of Lagrange multipliers.
Lagrangian relaxation

References
External links
Exposition

Conceptual introduction (plus a brief discussion of Lagrange multipliers in the calculus of variations as used in physics)
Lagrange Multipliers for Quadratic Forms With Linear Constraints by Kenneth H. Carpenter

For additional text and interactive applets

Simple explanation with an example of governments using taxes as Lagrange multipliers
Lagrange Multipliers without Permanent Scarring Explanation with focus on the intuition by Dan Klein
Geometric Representation of Method of Lagrange Multipliers Provides compelling insight in 2 dimensions that at a minimizing point, the direction of steepest descent must be perpendicular to the tangent of the constraint curve at that point. [Needs InternetExplorer/Firefox/Safari] Mathematica demonstration by Shashi Sathyanarayana
Applet
Video Lecture of Lagrange Multipliers
MIT OpenCourseware Video Lecture on Lagrange Multipliers from Multivariable Calculus course
Slides accompanying Bertsekas's nonlinear optimization text, with details on Lagrange multipliers (lectures 11 and 12)
Geometric idea behind Lagrange multipliers

"
Category:Multivariable calculus Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Mathematical and quantitative methods (economics)



Mécanique Analytique sect. IV, 2 vols. Paris, 1811 https://archive.org/details/mcaniqueanalyt01lagr

.

Chiang, Alpha C., Fundamental Methods of Mathematical Economics, McGraw-Hill, third edition, 1984: p. 386. isbn:9757860069






