


Ball (mathematics)




Ball (mathematics)

(Figure)
In Euclidean space, a ball is the inside of a sphere

In mathematics, a ball is the space inside a sphere. It may be a closed ball (including the boundary points of the sphere) or an open ball (excluding them).
These concepts are defined not only in three-dimensional Euclidean space but also for lower and higher dimensions, and for metric spaces in general. A ball in 
 
 
 
  dimensions is called an 

 
 -ball and is bounded by an (
 
 
 
 -1)-sphere. Thus, for example, a ball in the Euclidean plane is the same thing as a disk, the area bounded by a circle. In  Euclidean 3-space, a ball is taken to be the volume bounded by a 2-dimensional spherical shell boundary.
In other contexts, such as in Euclidean geometry and informal use, sphere is sometimes used to mean ball.
Balls in Euclidean space
In Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -space, an (open) 
 
 
 
 -ball of radius 
 
 
 
  and center 
 
 
 
  is the set of all points of distance $r$ from 
 
 
 
 . A closed 
 
 
 
 -ball of radius 
 
 
 
  is the set of all points of distance ≤ 
 
 
 
  away from 
 
 
 
 .
In Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -space, every ball is the interior of a hypersphere (a hyperball), that is a bounded interval when 
 
 
 
  = 1, the interior of a circle (a disk) when 
 
 
 
  = 2, and the interior of a sphere when 
 
 
 
  = 3.
The volume




The 
 
 
 
 -dimensional volume of a Euclidean ball of radius 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space is:1


 
  where Γ is Leonhard Euler's gamma function (which can be thought of as an extension of the factorial function to fractional arguments). Using explicit formulas for particular values of the gamma function at the integers and half integers gives formulas for the volume of a Euclidean ball that do not require an evaluation of the gamma function. These are:





 
  In the formula for odd-dimensional volumes, the double factorial  is defined for odd integers  as .
Balls in general metric spaces
Let (
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
 ) be a metric space, namely a set 
 
 
 
  with a metric (distance function) 
 
 
 
 . The open (metric) ball of radius

 
  > 0 centered at a point 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , usually denoted by 
 
 


(
 
 
 
 ) or 
 
 
 
 (
 
 
 
 ; 
 
 
 
 ), is defined by



The closed (metric) ball, which may be denoted by 
 
 


[
 
 
 
 ] or 
 
 
 
 [
 
 
 
 ; 
 
 
 
 ], is defined by



Note in particular that a ball (open or closed) always includes 
 
 
 
  itself, since the definition requires 
 
 
 
  > 0.
The closure of the open ball 
 
 


(
 
 
 
 ) is usually denoted 
 
 
 
 . While it is always the case that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it is  always the case that 
 
 
 
 . For example, in a metric space 
 
 
 
  with the discrete metric, one has 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , for any 
 
 
 
 .
A (open or closed) unit ball is a ball of radius 1.
A subset of a metric space is bounded if it is contained in some ball. A set is totally bounded if, given any positive radius, it is covered by finitely many balls of that radius.
The open balls of a metric space are a basis for a topological space, whose open sets are all possible unions of open balls. This space is called the topology induced by the metric 
 
 
 
 .
Balls in normed vector spaces
Any normed vector space

 
  with norm |·| is also a metric space, with the metric 
 
 
 
 (
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 ) = |
 
 
 
  − 
 
 
 
 |. In such spaces, every ball 
 
 


(
 
 
 
 ) is a copy of the unit ball 
 
 
1(0), scaled by 
 
 
 
  and translated by 
 
 
 
 .
The Euclidean balls discussed earlier are an example of balls in a normed vector space.


 
 -norm
In Cartesian space

 
  with the 

 
 -norm



, an open ball, is the set



For 
 
 
 
 =2, in particular, the balls of 
 
 
1 (often called the taxicab or Manhattan metric) are squares with the diagonals parallel to the coordinate axes; those of 
 
 
∞ (the Chebyshev metric) are squares with the sides parallel to the coordinate axes. For other values of 
 
 
 
 , the balls are the interiors of Lamé curves (hypoellipses or hyperellipses).
For 
 
 
 
  = 3, the balls of 
 
 
1 are octahedra with axis-aligned body diagonals, those of 
 
 
∞ are cubes with axis-aligned edges, and those of 
 
 


 with 
 
 
 
  > 2 are superellipsoids.
General convex norm
More generally, given any centrally symmetric, bounded, open, and convex subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 


, one can define a norm on R

 where the balls are all translated and uniformly scaled copies of 
 
 
 
 . Note this theorem does not hold if "open" subset is replaced by "closed" subset, because the origin point qualifies but does not define a norm on R

.
Topological balls
One may talk about balls in any topological space

 
 , not necessarily induced by a metric. An (open or closed) 
 
 
 
 -dimensional topological ball of 
 
 
 
  is any subset of 
 
 
 
  which is homeomorphic to an (open or closed) Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -ball. Topological 
 
 
 
 -balls are important in combinatorial topology, as the building blocks of cell complexes.
Any open topological 
 
 
 
 -ball is homeomorphic to the Cartesian space R

 and to the open unit 
 
 
 
 -cube (hypercube) 
 
 
 
 . Any closed topological 
 
 
 
 -ball is homeomorphic to the closed 
 
 
 
 -cube [0, 1]

.
An 
 
 
 
 -ball is homeomorphic to an 
 
 
 
 -ball if and only if 
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
 . The homeomorphisms between an open 
 
 
 
 -ball 
 
 
 
  and R

 can be classified in two classes, that can be identified with the two possible topological orientations of 
 
 
 
 .
A topological 
 
 
 
 -ball need not be smooth; if it is smooth, it need not be diffeomorphic to a Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -ball.
See also

Ball - ordinary meaning
Disk (mathematics)
Formal ball, an extension to negative radii
Neighborhood (mathematics)
3-sphere
n-sphere, or hypersphere
Alexander horned sphere
Manifold
Volume of an n-ball
Octahedron - a 3-ball in the 
 
 
 
  metric.
Spherical shell

References

D. J. Smith and M. K. Vamanamurthy, "How small is a unit ball?", Mathematics Magazine, 62 (1989) 101–107.
"Robin conditions on the Euclidean ball", J. S. Dowker [http://www.citebase.org/fulltext?format=application/pdf&identifier;;=oai:arXiv.org:hep-th/9506042]
"Isometries of the space of convex bodies contained in a Euclidean ball", Peter M. Gruber1

"
Category:Balls Category:Metric geometry Category:Spheres Category:Topology



Equation 5.19.4, NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions. http://dlmf.nist.gov/, Release 1.0.6 of 2013-05-06.↩




