


Pi (letter)




Pi (letter)

Pi (; Greek: , uppercase Π, lowercase π) is the sixteenth letter of the Greek alphabet, representing . In the system of Greek numerals it has a value of 80. It was derived from the Phoenician letter pe . Letters that arose from pi include Cyrillic Pe (П, п), Coptic pi (), and Gothic pairthra ().
Symbol
The upper-case letter Π is used as a symbol for:

The product operator in mathematics, indicated with capital pi notation ∏ (in analogy to the use of the capital Sigma Σ as summation symbol).
In textual criticism, Codex Petropolitanus, a 9th-century, uncial codex of the Gospels, now located in St. Petersburg, Russia.
In legal shorthand, it represents a plaintiff.
The osmotic pressure in chemistry. Π=MRT

The lower-case letter π is used as a symbol for:

The mathematical real transcendental (and thus irrational) constant π ≈ 3.1415926535897932384626433832795028841971…, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter in Euclidean geometry. The letter "π" is the first letter of the Greek words "περιφέρεια" 'periphery' and "περίμετρος" 'perimeter', i.e. the circumference.
The prime-counting function in mathematics.
Homotopy groups in algebraic topology.
Dimensionless parameters constructed using the Buckingham π theorem of dimensional analysis.
The hadron called the pi meson or pion.
Economic profit in microeconomics.
Inflation rate in macroeconomics.
A type of chemical bond in which the P-orbitals overlap, called a pi bond.
The natural projection on the tangent bundle on a manifold.
The unary operation of projection in relational algebra.
In reinforcement learning π denotes policy.

History
An early form of pi was , appearing almost like a gamma with a hook.
In the book 'L'alphabet grec', T. H. de Mortain speculates that letter П is a gate, since it is the first letter of "πύλη" (gate of town or temple). Allegedly, the Greeks wanted to represent the shape of the entrance to civilization, such as the gate of the lions in Mycenae. This hypothesis is not shared by any other authority in the field and has no other attestation.
Variant pi
Variant pi or "pomega" (
 
 
 
  or ϖ) is a glyph variant of lower case pi sometimes used in technical contexts as though it were a lower-case omega with a macron, though historically it is simply a cursive form of pi, with its legs bent inward to meet. It is used as a symbol for:

Angular frequency of a wave, in fluid dynamics (angular frequency is usually represented by 
 
 
 
  but this may be confused with vorticity in a fluid dynamics context).
Longitude of pericenter, in celestial mechanics.1
Comoving distance in cosmology.2
Single-scattering albedo in Radiative transfer.

The various forms of pi are present in Unicode as:








.3

Character Encodings

Greek / Coptic Pi

4

Mathematical Pi

These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.
See also

П, п - Pe (Cyrillic)
Р, р - Er (Cyrillic)
P, p - Pe (Latin)
Greek letters used in mathematics, science, and engineering#Ππ (pi)

References
"
Category:Greek letters



Pomega - from Eric Weisstein's World of Physics
Outline for Weeks 14&15, Astronomy 225 Spring 2008
Unicode characters supported by the Calibri font
Unicode Code Charts: Greek and Coptic (Range: 0370-03FF)




