


Fokker–Planck equation




Fokker–Planck equation

 In statistical mechanics, the Fokker–Planck equation is a partial differential equation that describes the time evolution of the probability density function of the velocity of a particle under the influence of drag forces and random forces, as in Brownian motion. The equation can be generalized to other observables as well.1 It is named after Adriaan Fokker2 and Max Planck3 and is also known as the Kolmogorov forward equation (diffusion), named after Andrey Kolmogorov, who first introduced it in a 1931 paper.4 When applied to particle position distributions, it is better known as the Smoluchowski equation. The case with zero diffusion is known in statistical mechanics as Liouville equation.
The first consistent microscopic derivation of the Fokker–Planck equation in the single scheme of classical and quantum mechanics was performed5 by Nikolay Bogoliubov and Nikolay Krylov.6
The Smoluchowski equation (after Marian Smoluchowski) is the Fokker–Planck equation for the probability density function of the particle positions of Brownian particles.7
One dimension
In one spatial dimension x, for an Itō process driven by the standard Wiener process 
 
 
 
  and described by the stochastic differential equation (SDE)


 
  with drift

 
  and diffusion coefficient 
 
 
 
 , the Fokker–Planck equation for the probability density 
 
 
 
  of the random variable 
 
 
 
  is



In the following, use 
 
 
 
 .
Define the Infinitesimal Generator

 
  (the following can be found in Ref.8) :



We introduce here the transition probability, 
 
 
 
 , the probability of going from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ; the expectation can be written as


 
  Now we replace in the definition of 
 
 
 
 , multiply by 
 
 
 
  and integrate over 
 
 
 
 . The limit is taken on


 
 
  We note now that


 
  which is the Chapman-Kolmogorov Theorem. Changing the dummy variable 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , we get


 
 
  which is a time derivative. Finally we arrive to


 
  From here, the Kolmogorov Backward Equation can be deduced. If we instead use the adjoint operator of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , defined such that


 
  then we arrive to the Kolmogorov Forward Equation, or Fokker-Planck Equation which, simplifying the notation 
 
 
 
 , in its differential form reads



Remains the issue of defining explicitly 
 
 
 
 . This can be done taking the expectation from the integral form of the Itō's lemma,



Notice that the part that depends on 
 
 
 
  vanished because of the martingale property.
Then, for a particle subject to an Itō equation, using



it can be easily calculated, using integration by parts, that


 
  which bring us to the Fokker–Planck equation,



While the Fokker-Planck equation is used with problems where the initial distribution is known, if the problem is to know the distribution at previous times, the Feynman-Kac formula can be used, which is a consequence of the Kolmogorov backward equation.
The stochastic process defined above in the Itō sense can be rewritten within the Stratonovich convention as a Stratonovich SDE:


 
  It includes an added noise-induced drift term due to diffusion gradient effects if the noise is state-dependent. This convention is more often used in physical applications. Indeed, it is well known that any solution to the Stratonovich SDE is a solution to the Itō SDE.
The zero drift equation with constant diffusion can be considered as a model of classical Brownian motion:



This model has discrete spectrum of solutions if the condition of fixed boundaries is added for 
 
 
 
 :




It has been shown 9 that in this case an analytical spectrum of solutions allows deriving a local uncertainty relation for the coordinate-velocity phase volume:



Here 
 
 
 
  is a minimal value of a corresponding diffusion spectrum 
 
 
 
 , while 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent the uncertainty of coordinate-velocity definition.
Many dimensions
More generally, if



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are N-dimensional random vectors, 
 
 
 
  is an N

M matrix and 
 
 
 
  is an M-dimensional standard Wiener process, the probability density 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  satisfies the Fokker–Planck equation



with drift vector 
 
 
 
  and diffusion tensor



If instead of an Itō SDE, a Stratonovich SDE is considered,



the Fokker–Planck equation will read (10 pag. 129):



Examples
Wiener Process
A standard scalar Wiener process is generated by the stochastic differential equation



Here the drift term is zero and the diffusion coefficient is 1/2. Thus the corresponding Fokker–Planck equation is



which is the simplest form of a diffusion equation. If the initial condition is 
 
 
 
 , the solution is



Ornstein–Uhlenbeck Process
The Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process is a process defined as


 
 .
with 
 
 

The stationary solution (
 
 
 
 ) is



Plasma Physics
In plasma physics, the distribution function for a particle species 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , takes the place of the probability density function. The corresponding Boltzmann equation is given by


 
 ,
where the third term includes the particle acceleration due to the Lorentz force and the Fokker Planck term at right-hand side represents the effects of particle collisions. The quantities, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the average change in velocity a particle of type 
 
 
 
  experiences due to collisions with all other particle species in unit time. Expressions for these quantities are given elsewhere.11 If collisions are ignored the Boltzmann equation reduces to the Vlasov equation.
Computational considerations
Brownian motion follows the Langevin equation, which can be solved for many different stochastic forcings with results being averaged (the Monte Carlo method, canonical ensemble in molecular dynamics). However, instead of this computationally intensive approach, one can use the Fokker–Planck equation and consider the probability 
 
 
 
  of the particle having a velocity in the interval 
 
 
 
  when it starts its motion with 
 
 
 
  at time 0.
Solution
Being a partial differential equation, the Fokker–Planck equation can be solved analytically only in special cases. A formal analogy of the Fokker–Planck equation with the Schrödinger equation allows the use of advanced operator techniques known from quantum mechanics for its solution in a number of cases. In many applications, one is only interested in the steady-state probability distribution 
 
 
 
 , which can be found from 
 
 
 
 . The computation of mean first passage times and splitting probabilities can be reduced to the solution of an ordinary differential equation which is intimately related to the Fokker–Planck equation.
Particular cases with known solution and inversion
In mathematical finance for volatility smile modeling of options via local volatility, one has the problem of deriving a diffusion coefficient 
 
 
 
  consistent with a probability density obtained from market option quotes. The problem is therefore an inversion of the Fokker Planck–equation: Given the density f(x,t) of the option underlying X deduced from the option market, one aims at finding the local volatility 
 
 
 
  consistent with f. This is an inverse problem that has been solved in general by Dupire (1994, 1997) with a non-parametric solution. Brigo and Mercurio (2002, 2003) propose a solution in parametric form via a particular local volatility 
 
 
 
  consistent with a solution of the Fokker–Planck equation given by a mixture model. More information is available also in Fengler (2008), Gatheral (2008) and Musiela and Rutkowski (2008).
Fokker–Planck equation and path integral
Every Fokker–Planck equation is equivalent to a path integral. The path integral formulation is an excellent starting point for the application of field theory methods.12 This is used, for instance, in critical dynamics.
A derivation of the path integral is possible in the same way as in quantum mechanics, simply because the Fokker–Planck equation is formally equivalent to the Schrödinger equation. Here are the steps for a Fokker–Planck equation with one variable x. Write the FP equation in the form



The x-derivatives here only act on the 
 
 
 
 -function, not on 
 
 
 
 . Integrate over a time interval 
 
 
 
 ,



Insert the Fourier integral



for the 
 
 
 
 
 -function,



This equation expresses 
 
 
 
  as functional of 
 
 
 
 . Iterating 
 
 
 
  times and performing the limit 
 
 
 
  gives a path integral with Lagrangian



The variables 
 
 
 
  conjugate to $x$ are called "response variables".13
Although formally equivalent, different problems may be solved more easily in the Fokker–Planck equation or the path integral formulation. The equilibrium distribution for instance may be obtained more directly from the Fokker–Planck equation.
See also

Kolmogorov backward equation
Boltzmann equation
Vlasov equation
Master equation
Bogoliubov–Born–Green–Kirkwood–Yvon hierarchy of equations
Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process
Convection–diffusion equation

Notes and references
Further reading

Bruno Dupire (1994) Pricing with a Smile. Risk Magazine, January, 18–20.
Bruno Dupire (1997) Pricing and Hedging with Smiles. Mathematics of Derivative Securities. Edited by M.A.H. Dempster and S.R. Pliska, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 103–111. ISBN 0-521-58424-8.


Fengler, M. R. (2008). Semiparametric Modeling of Implied Volatility, 2005, Springer Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-26234-3
Crispin Gardiner (2009), "Stochastic Methods", 4th edition, Springer, ISBN 978-3-540-70712-7.
Jim Gatheral (2008). The Volatility Surface. Wiley and Sons, ISBN 978-0-471-79251-2.
Marek Musiela, Marek Rutkowski. Martingale Methods in Financial Modelling, 2008, 2nd Edition, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-20966-9.
Hannes Risken, "The Fokker–Planck Equation: Methods of Solutions and Applications", 2nd edition, Springer Series in Synergetics, Springer, ISBN 3-540-61530-X.
Giorgio Orfino, "Simulazione dell'equazione di Fokker-Planck in Ottica Quantistica", Università degli Studi di Pavia, A.a. 94/95: http://www.qubit.it/educational/thesis/orfino.pdf

External links

Fokker–Planck equation on the Earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics

"
Category:Stochastic processes Category:Equations Category:Parabolic partial differential equations Category:Max Planck



↩
A. D. Fokker, Die mittlere Energie rotierender elektrischer Dipole im Strahlungsfeld, Ann. Phys. 348 (4. Folge 43), 810–820 (1914).↩
M. Planck, Sitz.ber. Preuß. Akad. (1917).↩
Andrei Kolmogorov, "On Analytical Methods in the Theory of Probability", 448-451, (1931), (in German).↩
N. N. Bogolyubov (jr) and D. P. Sankovich (1994). "N. N. Bogolyubov and statistical mechanics". Russian Math. Surveys 49(5): 19—49.↩
N. N. Bogoliubov and N. M. Krylov (1939). Fokker–Planck equations generated in perturbation theory by a method based on the spectral properties of a perturbed Hamiltonian. Zapiski Kafedry Fiziki Akademii Nauk Ukrainian SSR 4: 81–157 (in Ukrainian).↩
Dhont, An Introduction to Dynamics of Colloids, p. 183↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩




