   Circumflex      Circumflex   The circumflex is a diacritic in the Latin , Greek and Cyrillic scripts that is used in the written forms of many languages and in various romanization and transcription schemes. It received its English name from Latin  circumflexus "bent around"a translation of the Greek περισπωμένη ( perispōménē ). The circumflex in the Latin script is chevron -shaped ( ˆ ), while the Greek circumflex may be displayed either like a tilde ( ˜ ) or like an inverted breve (   ̑ ).  In English the circumflex, like other diacritics, is sometimes retained on loanwords that used it in the original language (for example, rôle ).  The diacritic is also used in mathematics , where it is typically called a hat or roof or house .  Uses  Phonetic marker  Pitch  The circumflex has its origins in the polytonic orthography of Ancient Greek , where it marked long vowels that were pronounced with high and then falling pitch . In a similar vein, the circumflex is today used to mark tone contour in the International Phonetic Alphabet .  The shape of the circumflex was originally a combination of the acute and grave accents (^), as it marked a syllable contracted from two vowels: an acute-accented vowel and a non-accented vowel (all non-accented syllables in Ancient Greek were once marked with a grave accent). Later a variant similar to the tilde (~) was also used.      νόος   contraction →  ( synaeresis )   ν- ´ō` -ς = νō͂ς = νοῦς     nóos   n- ´ō` -s = nō̂s = noûs     The term 'circumflex' is also used to describe similar tonal accents that result from combining two vowels in related languages such as Sanskrit and Latin.  Since Modern Greek has a stress accent instead of a pitch accent, the circumflex has been replaced with an acute accent in the modern monotonic orthography.  Length  The circumflex accent marks a long vowel in the orthography or transliteration of several languages.   Akkadian . In the transliteration of this language, the circumflex indicates a long vowel resulting from an aleph contraction.  French . In some varieties, such as in Belgian French , Swiss French and Acadian French , vowels with a circumflex are long: fête (party) is longer than faite . This length compensates for a deleted consonant, usually s .  Standard Friulian .  Japanese . In the Kunrei-shiki system of Romanization , and sometimes the Hepburn system, the circumflex is used as a replacement for the macron .  Jèrriais .  Ligurian language .  In Serbo-Croatian the circumflex can be used to distinguish homographs , and it is called the "genitive sign" or "length sign". Examples include sam "am" versus sâm "alone". For example, the phrase "I am alone" may be written Ja sam sâm to improve clarity. Another example: da "yes", dâ "gives". 1  Turkish . According to Turkish Language Association orthography, düzeltme işareti "correction mark" over a , i and u marks a long vowel to disambiguate similar words.For example, compare ama "but" and âmâ "blind", şura 'that place, there' and şûra "council". 2 In general, circumflexes only occur in Arabic and Persian  loanwords as vowel length in early Turkish was not phonemic. However, this standard was never applied entirely consistently 3 and by the early 21st century many publications had stopped using circumflexes almost entirely. 4  Welsh . The circumflex is known as hirnod "long sign", acen grom "crooked accent" and also colloquially as tô bach "little roof". It lengthens a vowel ( a, e, i, o, u, w, y ), and is used particularly to differentiate between homographs ; e.g. tan and tân , ffon and ffôn , gem and gêm , cyn and cŷn , or gwn and gŵn .  In Adûnaic , the Black Speech , and Khuzdul , constructed languages of J. R. R. Tolkien , all long vowels are transcribed with the circumflex. In Sindarin long vowels in monosyllabic words take the circumflex and long vowels in longer words take the acute .   Stress  The circumflex accent marks the stressed vowel of a word in some languages:   Portuguese  â , ê , and ô are stressed vowels. The circumflex further indicates their height (see below).  Welsh : the circumflex, due to its function as a disambiguating lengthening sign (see above), is used in polysyllabic words with word-final long vowels. The circumflex thus indicates the stressed syllable (which would normally be on the penultimate syllable ), since in Welsh, non-stressed vowels may not normally be long. This happens notably where the singular ends in an a , to, e.g. singular camera , drama , opera , sinema → plural camerâu , dramâu , operâu , sinemâu ; however, it also occurs in singular nominal forms, e.g. arwyddocâd ; in verbal forms, e.g. deffrônt , cryffânt ; etc.   Vowel quality   In Afrikaans , circumflex simply marks a vowel with an irregular pronunciation that is typically stressed. Examples of circumflex use in Afrikaans are sê 'to say', wêreld "world", môre "tomorrow", and brûe "bridges".  In Breton , it is used on an e to show that the letter is pronounced open instead of closed.  In Bulgarian , when transliterated into the Latin alphabet (in systems used prior to 1989), the sound represented in Bulgarian by â , although called a schwa (misleadingly suggesting an unstressed lax sound), is more accurately described as a mid back unrounded vowel . Unlike English or French , but similar to Romanian and Afrikaans , it can be stressed. The Cyrillic letter ъ ( er goljam ) is sometimes transliterated as â or ŭ ; often it is just written as a or u . (Though the list of unofficial transliterations for ъ does also include y and even 1 .)  In Pinyin romanized Mandarin Chinese , ê is used to represent the sound  in isolation, which occurs sometimes as an exclamation.  in French, the letter ê is normally pronounced open , like è . In the usual pronunciations of central and northern France , ô is pronounced close , like eau ; in Southern France, no distinction is made between close and open  o .  Portuguese  â , ê , and ô are stressed high vowels, in opposition to á , é , and ó , which are stressed low vowels.  In Romanian , the circumflex is used on the vowels â and î to mark the vowel , similar to Russian yery . The names of these accented letters are â din a and î din i , respectively. (The letter â only appears in the middle of words; thus, its majuscule version appears only in all-capitals inscriptions.)  In Slovak , the circumflex ( vokáň ) turns the letter o into a diphthong : ô .  In Swedish  dialect and folklore  literature the circumflex is used to indicate the phonemes  or (â) ,  or  ( ô ) and  ( û ) in dialects and regional accents where these are distinct from  ( a ),  ( ö ) or  ( o or å ) and  ( u ) respectively, unlike Standard Swedish where  and ,  and  are short and long allophones of the phonemes  and  respectively, and where Old Swedish short  ( ŏ ) has merged with  from Old Swedish  ( ā , Modern Swedish å ) instead of centralizing to  or fronting to  and remaining a distinct phoneme ( ô ) as in the dialects in question.  Vietnamese  â , ê , and ô are higher vowels than a , e , and o . The circumflex can appear together with a tone mark on the same vowel, as in the word Việt . Vowels with circumflex are considered separate letters from the base vowels.   Other articulatory features   In Chichewa , ŵ denotes the voiced bilabial fricative , hence the name of the country Malaŵi .  In Pinyin , romanized Mandarin Chinese , ẑ , ĉ , and ŝ are, albeit rarely, used to represent zh , ch , and sh , respectively.  In Esperanto , the circumflex is used on ĉ , ĝ , ĥ , ĵ , ŝ . Each indicates a different consonant from the unaccented form, and is considered a separate letter for purposes of collation . (See Esperanto orthography .)  In Nsenga , ŵ denotes the labiodental approximant .  In Philippine languages , the circumflex ( pakupyâ ) is used to represent the simultaneous occurrence of a stress and a glottal stop in the last vowel of the word. 5 6 7  In Old Tupi , the circumflex changed a vowel into a semivowel : î , û , and ŷ .  In Turkish , the circumflex over a and u is sometimes used in words of Arabic or Persian derivation to indicate when a preceding consonant ( k , g , l ) is to be pronounced as a palatal plosive; ,  ( kâğıt , gâvur , mahkûm , Gülgûn ). The circumflex over i is used to indicate a nisba suffix ( millî , dinî ). 8  In the 18th century, the Real Academia Española introduced the circumflex accent in Spanish to mark that a ch or x were pronounced [k] and [ks] respectively (instead of [tʃ] and [x], which were the default values): châracteres, exâcto (spelled today caracteres, exacto ). This usage was quickly abandoned during the same century, once the RAE decided to use ch and x with one assigned pronunciation only: [tʃ] and [ks] respectively.   Abbreviation, contraction, and disambiguation   In eighteenth-century British English , before the cheap Penny Post and during the time paper was taxed, the combination ough was shortened to ô when the gh was not pronounced, in order to save room in letters: thô for though , thorô for thorough , and brôt for brought .    In French , the circumflex generally marks the former presence of a consonant (usually s ) that was deleted and is no longer pronounced. (The corresponding English words frequently retain the lost consonant.)  ancêtre "ancestor"  hôpital "hospital"  hôtel "hostel"  forêt "forest"  rôtir "to roast"  côte "coast"  pâte "paste"  août "August"  dépôt (from the Latin depositum 'deposit', but now usually referring to a bus/rail terminal or garage)     Note that in current French, the English spellings, at least in terms of the syllable with the circumflex, could be pronounced the same as the French spellings, owing to the transformative effect of s on the preceding vowelfor example forêt "forest", as per est "is" (third person singular of être ). Conversely, in the homograph  est "east", the  sound is pronounced.    Some homophones (or near-homophones in some varieties of French) are distinguished by the circumflex, for instance cote "level, mark" and côte "rib, coast". (See also Use of the circumflex in French .)    In handwritten French, for example in taking notes, an m with a circumflex (m̂) is an informal abbreviation for même "same".    In Italian , î is occasionally used in the plural of nouns and adjectives ending with -io as a crasis mark. Other possible spellings are -ii and obsolete -j or -ij . For example, the plural of vario "various" can be spelt vari , varî , varii ; the pronunciation will usually stay  with only one . The plural forms of principe "prince" and of principio "principle, beginning" can be confusing. In pronunciation, they are distinguished by whether the stress is on the first or on the second syllable, but principi would be a correct spelling of both. When necessary to avoid ambiguity, it is advised to write the plural of principio as principî or as principii .    In Norwegian , the circumflex differentiates fôr "lining, fodder" from the preposition for . From a historical point of view, the circumflex also indicates that the word used to be spelled with the letter ð in Old Norse for example, fôr is derived from fóðr , lêr 'leather' from leðr , and vêr "weather, ram" from veðr (both lêr and vêr only occur in the Nynorsk spelling; in Bokmål these words are spelled lær and vær ). Before the ð disappeared, it was replaced by an ordinary d ( fodr, vedr ).   Mathematics  In mathematics, the circumflex is used to modify variable names; it is usually read "hat", e.g., î is "i hat". The Fourier transform of a function ƒ is often denoted by    f  ^     normal-^  f    \hat{f}   .  In the notation of sets , a hat above an element signifies that the element was removed from the set.  In vector notation, a hat above a letter indicates a unit vector (a dimensionless vector with a magnitude of 1). For instance,    ı  ^     normal-^  bold-ı    \hat{\mathbf{\imath}}   ,    𝐱  ^     normal-^  𝐱    \hat{\mathbf{x}}   , or     𝐞  ^   1     subscript   normal-^  𝐞   1    \hat{\mathbf{e}}_{1}   stands for a unit vector in the direction of the x-axis of a Cartesian coordinate system .  In statistics , the hat is used to denote an estimator or an estimated value, as opposed to its theoretical counterpart. For example, in errors and residuals , the hat in    ε  ^     normal-^  ε    \hat{\varepsilon}   indicates an observable estimate (the residual) of an unobservable quantity called   ε   ε   \varepsilon   (the statistical error). It is read x-hat or x-roof , where x represents the character under the hat.  Music  In music theory and musicology , a circumflex above a numeral is used to make reference to a particular scale degree .  In music notation , a chevron-shaped symbol placed above a note indicates marcato , a special form of emphasis or accent . In music for string instruments , a narrow inverted chevron indicates that a note should be performed up-bow.  Circumflex in digital character sets  The precomposed characters  Â/â , Ê/ê , Î/î , Ô/ô , and Û/û (which incorporate the circumflex) are included in the ISO-8859-1 character set, and dozens more are available in Unicode . In addition, Unicode has , which in principle allows adding the diacritic to any base letter.  For historical reasons, there is a similar but larger character, , which is also included in ASCII but often referred to as caret instead. It is, however, unsuitable for use as a diacritic on modern computer systems, as it is a spacing character. Another spacing circumflex character in Unicode is the smaller , mainly used in phonetic notationsor as a sample of the diacritic in isolation.  See also   Caret  Caron  Macron  Tilde  Turned v  Use of the circumflex in French   References    External links   Diacritics Project"All you need to design a font with correct accents"  Diacs and Quirks in a NutshellAfrikaans spelling explained  Keyboard Help Learn how to create world language accent marks and other diacriticals on a computer   "  Category:Alphabetic diacritics  Category:Greek alphabet     ↩  www.tdk.gov.tr ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩      