


GNU TeXmacs




GNU TeXmacs

GNU TeXmacs is a free scientific word processor and typesetting component of the GNU Project. It was inspired by TeX and GNU Emacs, though it shares no code with those programs. TeXmacs does use TeX fonts.1 It is written and maintained by Joris van der Hoeven. The program produces structured documents with a WYSIWYW user interface. New document styles can be created by the user. The editor provides high-quality typesetting algorithms and TeX fonts for publishing professional looking documents.
Features
TeXmacs can handle mathematical formulas and is used as a front-end to a number of computer algebra systems such as Maxima and Sage. TeXmacs also supports a Scheme extension language called Guile for customizing the program and writing extensions.
 Like many WYSIWYG editors (such as Microsoft Word), authors manipulate a document on screen which should print to a similar looking paper copy. The goal of TeXmacs is to provide a WYSIWYG editor that nevertheless makes it possible to write correctly structured documents with aesthetically pleasing typesetting results. TeXmacs is not a front-end to LaTeX but TeXmacs documents can be converted to either TeX or LaTeX. Support for HTML, MathML and XML is under development.
TeXmacs currently runs on most Unix-based architectures including Linux, FreeBSD, Cygwin and Mac OS X. Along with the Cygwin version, a native beta port is available for Microsoft Windows.
TeXmacs also features a presentation mode and there are plans to evolve towards a complete scientific office suite with spreadsheet capacities and a technical drawing editor.
Mathematical typography
With TeXmacs, it is easy and fast to type mathematical formulas. For example, the symbol 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by typing =>. Some variants, such as 
 
 
 
 , can be obtained using the tab key. Hence, a wide range of symbols are accessible easily using user-friendly keyboard shortcuts.2
Batch processing
It is possible to use TeXmacs as a batch processor (which is LaTeX's usual operation mode), using X virtual framebuffer to avoid opening unwanted windows while processing. For example, the command
xvfb-run texmacs --convert article.tm article.pdf --quit
generates a PDF file "article.pdf" from a TeXmacs document "article.tm".
Supported back ends
(Figure)
A TeXmacs session of Yacas

TeXmacs has back-ends supporting many technologies.
Programming languages: CLISP, CMUCL, Python, QCL, R, Shell
Computer algebra systems: Axiom, Giac, Macaulay 2, Mathematica, Maxima, Mupad, PARI/GP, Reduce, Sage, Yacas
Numeric matrix systems: GNU Octave, Matlab, Scilab
Plotting packages: gnuplot, Graphviz, XYpic, Mathemagix
Other: DraTeX, Eukleides, GTybalt, Lush
See also

Comparison of TeX editors
Comparison of word processors
List of word processors
LyX

References
External links



"
Category:GNU Project software Category:Free word processors Category:Windows word processors Category:OS X word processors Category:Linux word processors Category:Emacs Category:Cross-platform free software Category:Free TeX editors



Frequently asked questions (FSF GNU project)
See the user manual : « Typing mathematical symbols ».




