


Gauss–Markov theorem




Gauss–Markov theorem

In statistics, the Gauss–Markov theorem, named after Carl Friedrich Gauss and Andrey Markov, states that in a linear regression model in which the errors have expectation zero and are uncorrelated and have equal variances, the best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) of the coefficients is given by the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator. Here "best" means giving the lowest variance of the estimate, as compared to other unbiased, linear estimators. The errors do not need to be normal, nor do they need to be independent and identically distributed (only uncorrelated with mean zero and homoscedastic with finite variance). The requirement that the estimator be unbiased cannot be dropped, since biased estimators exist with lower variance. See, for example, the James–Stein estimator (which also drops linearity) or ridge regression.
Statement
Suppose we have in matrix notation,


 
  expanding to,



where 
 
 
 
  are non-random but unobservable parameters, 
 
 
 
  are non-random and observable (called the "explanatory variables"), 
 
 
 
  are random, and so 
 
 
 
  are random. The random variables 
 
 
 
  are called the "disturbance", "noise" or simply "error" (will be contrasted with "residual" later in the article; see errors and residuals in statistics). Note that to include a constant in the model above, one can choose to introduce the constant as a variable 
 
 
 
  with a newly introduced last column of X being unity i.e., 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
The Gauss–Markov assumptions are








(i.e., all disturbances have the same variance; that is "homoscedasticity"), and





for 
 
 
 
  that is, the error terms are uncorrelated. A linear estimator of 
 
 
 
  is a linear combination



in which the coefficients 
 
 
 
  are not allowed to depend on the underlying coefficients 
 
 
 
 , since those are not observable, but are allowed to depend on the values 
 
 
 
 , since these data are observable. (The dependence of the coefficients on each 
 
 
 
  is typically nonlinear; the estimator is linear in each 
 
 
 
  and hence in each random 
 
 
 
 , which is why this is "linear" regression.) The estimator is said to be unbiased if and only if



regardless of the values of 
 
 
 
 . Now, let 
 
 
 
  be some linear combination of the coefficients. Then the mean squared error of the corresponding estimation is



i.e., it is the expectation of the square of the weighted sum (across parameters) of the differences between the estimators and the corresponding parameters to be estimated. (Since we are considering the case in which all the parameter estimates are unbiased, this mean squared error is the same as the variance of the linear combination.) The best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) of the vector 
 
 
 
  of parameters 
 
 
 
  is one with the smallest mean squared error for every vector 
 
 
 
  of linear combination parameters. This is equivalent to the condition that



is a positive semi-definite matrix for every other linear unbiased estimator 
 
 
 
 .
The ordinary least squares estimator (OLS) is the function



of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  denotes the transpose of 
 
 
 
 ) that minimizes the sum of squares of residuals (misprediction amounts):



The theorem now states that the OLS estimator is a BLUE. The main idea of the proof is that the least-squares estimator is uncorrelated with every linear unbiased estimator of zero, i.e., with every linear combination 
 
 
 
  whose coefficients do not depend upon the unobservable 
 
 
 
  but whose expected value is always zero.
Proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be another linear estimator of 
 
 
 
  and let C be given by 
 
 
 
 , where D is a 
 
 
 
  nonzero matrix. As we're restricting to unbiased estimators, minimum mean squared error implies minimum variance. The goal is therefore to show that such an estimator has a variance no smaller than that of 
 
 
 
 , the OLS estimator.
The expectation of 
 
 
 
  is:



Therefore, 
 
 
 
  is unbiased if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
The variance of 
 
 
 
  is



Since DD' is a positive semidefinite matrix, 
 
 
 
  exceeds 
 
 
 
  by a positive semidefinite matrix.
Remarks on the proof
As it has been stated before, the condition of 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to the property that the best linear unbiased estimator of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  (best in the sense that it has minimum variance). To see this, let 
 
 
 
  another linear unbiased estimator of 
 
 
 
 .



Therefore, 
 
 
 
 .
Moreover, suppose that the equality holds (
 
 
 
 
 ). It happens if and only if 
 
 
 
 . Remembering that, from the proof above, we have 
 
 
 
 , then:



This proofs that the equality holds if and only if 
 
 
 
  which gives the unicity of the OLS estimator as a BLUE.
Generalized least squares estimator
The generalized least squares (GLS) or Aitken estimator extends the Gauss–Markov theorem to the case where the error vector has a non-scalar covariance matrixthe Aitken estimator is also a BLUE.1
Gauss–Markov theorem as stated in Econometrics
In most treatments of OLS, the data *X* is assumed to be fixed. This assumption is considered inappropriate for a predominantly nonexperimental science like econometrics.2 Instead, the assumptions of the Gauss–Markov theorem are stated conditional on *X*
Linearity
The dependent variable is assumed to be a linear function of the variables specified in the model. The specification must be linear in its parameters. This does not mean that there must be a linear relationship between the independent and dependent variables. The independent variables can take non-linear forms as long as the parameters are linear. The equation 
 
 
 
  qualifies as linear while 
 
 
 
  can be transformed to be linear by replacing (beta)^2 by another parameter, say gamma. An equation with a parameter dependent on an independent variable does not qualify as linear, for example y = alpha + beta(x) * x, where beta(x) is a function of x.
Data transformations are often used to convert an equation into a linear form (see, however, Santos Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). For example, the Cobb–Douglas function—often used in economics—is nonlinear:



But it can be expressed in linear form by taking the natural logarithm of both sides: 
 
 

This assumption also covers specification issues: assuming that the proper functional form has been selected and there are no omitted variables.
Spherical errors


 
  Error terms are assumed to be spherical otherwise the OLS estimator is inefficient. The OLS estimator remains unbiased, however. Spherical errors occur when errors have both uniform variance (homoscedasticity) and are uncorrelated with each other. The term "spherical errors" will describe the multivariate normal distribution: if 
 
 
 
  in the multivariate normal density, then the equation f(x)=c is the formula for a “ball” centered at μ with radius σ in n-dimensional space.
Heteroskedacity occurs when the amount of error is correlated with an independent variable. For example, in a regression on food expenditure and income, the error is correlated with income. Low income people generally spend a similar amount on food, while high income people may spend a very large amount or as little as low income people spend. Heteroskedacity can also be caused by changes in measurement practices. For example, as statistical offices improve their data, measurement error decreases, so the error term declines over time.
This assumption is violated when there is autocorrelation. Autocorrelation can be visualized on a data plot when a given observation is more likely to lie above a fitted line if adjacent observations also lie above the fitted regression line. Autocorrelation is common in time series data where a data series may experience "inertia." If a dependent variable takes a while to fully absorb a shock. Spatial autocorrelation can also occur geographic areas are likely to have similar errors. Autocorrelation may be the result of misspecification such as choosing the wrong functional form. In these cases, correcting the specification is one possible way to deal with autocorrelation.
In the presence of non-spherical errors, the generalized least squares estimator can be shown to be BLUE.
Exogeneity of independent variables


 
  This assumption is violated if the variables are endogenous. Endogeneity can be the result of simultaneity, where causality flows back and forth between both the dependent and independent variable. Instrumental variable techniques are commonly used to address this problem.
Full rank
The sample data matrix must have full rank or OLS cannot be estimated. There must be at least one observation for every parameter being estimated and the data cannot have perfect multicollinearity. Perfect multicollinearity will occur in a "dummy variable trap" when a base dummy variable is not omitted resulting in perfect correlation between the dummy variables and the constant term.
Multicollinearity (as long as it is not "perfect") can be present resulting in a less efficient, but still unbiased estimate.
See also

Independent and identically distributed random variables
Linear regression
Measurement uncertainty

Other unbiased statistics

Best linear unbiased prediction (BLUP)
Minimum-variance unbiased estimator (MVUE)

Notes


References


Greene, William H. (2012, 7th ed.) Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall.

Use of BLUE in physics




External links

Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics: G (brief history and explanation of the name)
Proof of the Gauss Markov theorem for multiple linear regression (makes use of matrix algebra)
A Proof of the Gauss Markov theorem using geometry

"
Category:Statistical theorems



A. C. Aitken, "On Least Squares and Linear Combinations of Observations", Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1935, vol. 55, pp. 42–48.
Hayashi, "Econometrics", 2000, p.13




