


Step function




Step function

In mathematics, a function on the real numbers is called a step function (or staircase function) if it can be written as a finite linear combination of indicator functions of intervals. Informally speaking, a step function is a piecewise constant function having only finitely many pieces. 
Definition and first consequences
A function 
 
 
 
  is called a step function if it can be written as 


 
  for all real numbers 
 
 

where 
 
 

 
  are real numbers, 
 
 
 
  are intervals, and 
 
 
 
  (sometimes written as 
 
 
 
 ) is the indicator function of 
 
 
 
 :



In this definition, the intervals 
 
 
 
  can be assumed to have the following two properties:

The intervals are disjoint, 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 

The union of the intervals is the entire real line, 
 
 


Indeed, if that is not the case to start with, a different set of intervals can be picked for which these assumptions hold. For example, the step function



can be written as



Examples
(Figure)
The Heaviside step function is an often used step function.


A constant function is a trivial example of a step function. Then there is only one interval, 
 
 

The Heaviside function H(x) is an important step function. It is the mathematical concept behind some test signals, such as those used to determine the step response of a dynamical system.

(Figure)
The rectangular function, the next simplest step function.


The rectangular function, the normalized boxcar function, is the next simplest step function, and is used to model a unit pulse.

Non-examples

The integer part function is not a step function according to the definition of this article, since it has an infinite number of intervals. However, some authors define step functions also with an infinite number of intervals.1

Properties

The sum and product of two step functions is again a step function. The product of a step function with a number is also a step function. As such, the step functions form an algebra over the real numbers.
A step function takes only a finite number of values. If the intervals 
 
 

 
  in the above definition of the step function are disjoint and their union is the real line, then 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

The Lebesgue integral of a step function 
 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the length of the interval 
 
 
 
  and it is assumed here that all intervals 
 
 
 
  have finite length. In fact, this equality (viewed as a definition) can be the first step in constructing the Lebesgue integral.2

See also

Crenel function
Simple function
Piecewise defined function
Sigmoid function
Step detection

References
"
Category:Special functions



for example see: ↩
↩




