


Root of unity




Root of unity

(Figure)
The 5th roots of unity in the complex plane

In mathematics, a root of unity, occasionally called a de Moivre number, is any complex number that gives 1 when raised to some integer power 
 
 
 
 . Roots of unity are used in many branches of mathematics, and are especially important in number theory, the theory of group characters, and the discrete Fourier transform.
In field theory and ring theory the notion of root of unity also applies to any ring with a multiplicative identity element. Any algebraically closed field has exactly 
 
 

 
 th roots of unity, if 
 
 
 
  is not divisible by the characteristic of the field.
General definition
An 

 
 th root of unity, where 
 
 
 
  is a positive integer (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ), is a number 
 
 
 
  satisfying the equation12


 
  Traditionally, 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be a complex number, and subsequent sections of this article will comply with this usage. Generally, 
 
 
 
  can be considered for any field

 
 , or even for a unital ring. In this general formulation, an 
 
 
 
 th root of unity is just an element of the group of units of order

 
 . Interesting cases are finite fields and modular arithmetics, for which the article root of unity modulo n contains some information.
An 
 
 
 
 th root of unity is  if it is not a 
 
 
 
 th root of unity for some smaller 
 
 
 
 :



Elementary facts
Every 
 
 
 
 th root of unity 
 
 
 
  is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity for some 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 : if  then 
 
 
 
  is a primitive first root of unity, otherwise if  then 
 
 
 
  is a primitive second (square) root of unity, otherwise, ..., and by assumption there must be a "1" at or before the 
 
 
 
 th term in the sequence.
If 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 th root of unity and 
 
 
 
  then . By the definition of congruence, 
 
 
 
  for some integer 
 
 
 
 . But then,



Therefore, given a power  of 
 
 
 
 , it can be assumed that 
 
 
 
 . This is often convenient.
Any integer power of an 
 
 
 
 th root of unity is also an 
 
 
 
 th root of unity:



Here 
 
 
 
  may be negative. In particular, the reciprocal of an 
 
 
 
 th root of unity is its complex conjugate, and is also an 
 
 
 
 th root of unity:



Let 
 
 
 
  be a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity. Then the powers 
 
 
 
 , , … , ,  are all distinct. Assume the contrary, that  where 
 
 

Since an 
 
 
 
 th degree polynomial equation can only have 
 
 
 
  distinct roots, this implies that the powers of a primitive root 
 
 
 
 , , … , ,  are in fact all of the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity.
From the preceding facts it follows that if 
 
 
 
  is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity:



If 
 
 
 
  is not primitive there is only one implication:



An example showing that the converse implication is false is given by:



Let 
 
 
 
  be a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity and let 
 
 
 
  be a positive integer. From the above discussion,  is a primitive root of unity for some 
 
 
 
 . Now if , 
 
 
 
  must be a multiple of 
 
 
 
 . The smallest number that is divisible by both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is their least common multiple, denoted by 
 
 
 
 . It is related to their greatest common divisor, 
 
 
 
 , by the formula:



i.e.



Therefore,  is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity where



Thus, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coprime,  is also a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity, and therefore there are 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is Euler's totient function) distinct primitive 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity. (This implies that if 
 
 
 
  is a prime number, all the roots except +1 are primitive).
In other words, if 
 
 
 
  is the set of all 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity and 
 
 
 
  is the set of primitive ones, 
 
 
 
  is a disjoint union of the 
 
 
 
 :



where the notation means that 
 
 
 
  goes through all the divisors of 
 
 
 
 , including 1 and 
 
 
 
 .
Since the cardinality of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , and that of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , this demonstrates the classical formula



Examples
 
De Moivre's formula, which is valid for all real 
 
 
 
  and integers 
 
 
 
 , is



Setting 
 
 
 
  gives a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity:



but for 
 
 
 
 ,



This formula shows that on the complex plane the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity are at the vertices of a regular 
 
 
 
 -sided polygon inscribed in the unit circle, with one vertex at 1. (See the plots for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on the right.) This geometric fact accounts for the term "cyclotomic" in such phrases as cyclotomic field and cyclotomic polynomial; it is from the Greek roots "cyclo" (circle) plus "tomos" (cut, divide).
Euler's formula



which is valid for all real 
 
 
 
 , can be used to put the formula for the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity into the form



It follows from the discussion in the previous section that this is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th-root if and only if the fraction 
 
 
 
  is in lowest terms, i.e. that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coprime.
The roots of unity are, by definition, the roots of a polynomial equation and are thus algebraic numbers. In fact, Galois theory can be used to show that they may be expressed as expressions involving integers and the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and the extraction of roots. (There are more details later in this article at Cyclotomic fields.)
The equation  obviously has only one solution, +1, which is therefore the only primitive first root of unity. It is a nonprimitive 2nd, 3rd, 4th, ... root of unity.
The equation  has two solutions, +1 and −1. +1 is the primitive first root of unity, leaving −1 as the only primitive second (square) root of unity. It is a nonprimitive 4th, 6th, 8th, ...root of unity.
The only real roots of unity are ±1; all the others are non-real complex numbers, as can be seen from de Moivre's formula or the figures.
The third (cube) roots satisfy the equation ; the non-principal root +1 may be factored out, giving . Therefore, the primitive cube roots of unity are the roots of a quadratic equation. (See Cyclotomic polynomial, below.)



The two primitive fourth roots of unity are the two square roots of the primitive square root of unity, −1



The four primitive fifth roots of unity are



The two primitive sixth roots of unity are the negatives (and also the square roots) of the two primitive cube roots:



Gauss observed that if a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity can be expressed using only square roots, then it is possible to construct the regular 
 
 
 
 -gon using only ruler and compass, and that if the root of unity requires third or fourth or higher radicals the regular polygon cannot be constructed. The 7th roots of unity are the first that require cube roots. Note that the real part and imaginary part are both real numbers, but complex numbers are buried in the expressions. They cannot be removed. See casus irreducibilis for details.
One of the primitive seventh roots of unity is



where 
 
 
 
  and  are the primitive cube roots of unity 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The four primitive eighth roots of unity are ± the square roots of the primitive fourth roots, 
 
 
 
 . One of them is:



See heptadecagon for the real part of a 17th root of unity.
Periodicity
If 
 
 
 
  is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity, then the sequence of powers




is 
 
 
 
 -periodic (because  for all values of 
 
 
 
 ), and the 
 
 
 
  sequences of powers




for 
 
 
 
  are all 
 
 
 
 -periodic (because ). Furthermore, the set } of these sequences is a basis of the linear space of all 
 
 
 
 -periodic sequences. This means that any

 
 -periodic sequence of complex numbers




can be expressed as a linear combination of powers of a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity:


 
  for some complex numbers  and every integer 
 
 
 
 .
This is a form of Fourier analysis. If 
 
 
 
  is a (discrete) time variable, then 
 
 
 
  is a frequency and  is a complex amplitude.
Choosing for the primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity




allows  to be expressed as a linear combination of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :

.
 

This is a discrete Fourier transform.
Summation
Let 
 
 
 
  be the sum of all the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity, primitive or not. Then



For 
 
 
 
  there is nothing to prove. For 
 
 
 
 , it is "intuitively obvious" from the symmetry of the roots in the complex plane. For a rigorous proof, let 
 
 
 
  be a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity. Then the set of all roots is given by , and their sum is given by the formula for a geometric series:



Let 
 
 
 
  be the sum of all the primitive 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity. Then



where 
 
 
 
  is the Möbius function.
In the section Elementary facts, it was shown that if 
 
 
 
  is the set of all 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity and 
 
 
 
  is the set of primitive ones, 
 
 
 
  is a disjoint union of the 
 
 
 
 :



This implies



Applying the Möbius inversion formula gives



In this formula, if 
 
 

This is the special case  of Ramanujan's sum , defined as the sum of the 
 
 
 
 th powers of the primitive 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity:



Orthogonality
From the summation formula follows an orthogonality relationship: for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 




where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta and 
 
 
 
  is any primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity.
The 

 
  matrix

 
  whose 
 
 
 
 th entry is



defines a discrete Fourier transform. Computing the inverse transformation using gaussian elimination requires  operations. However, it follows from the orthogonality that 
 
 
 
  is unitary. That is,



and thus the inverse of 
 
 
 
  is simply the complex conjugate. (This fact was first noted by Gauss when solving the problem of trigonometric interpolation). The straightforward application of 
 
 
 
  or its inverse to a given vector requires  operations. The fast Fourier transform algorithms reduces the number of operations further to 
 
 
 
 .
Cyclotomic polynomials
The zeroes of the polynomial


 
  are precisely the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity, each with multiplicity 1. The 
 
 
 
 th cyclotomic polynomial is defined by the fact that its zeros are precisely the primitive

 
 th roots of unity, each with multiplicity 1.


 
  where  are the primitive 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity, and 
 
 
 
  is Euler's totient function. The polynomial  has integer coefficients and is an irreducible polynomial over the rational numbers (i.e., it cannot be written as the product of two positive-degree polynomials with rational coefficients). The case of prime 
 
 
 
 , which is easier than the general assertion, follows by applying Eisenstein's criterion to the polynomial



and expanding via the binomial theorem.
Every 
 
 
 
 th root of unity is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity for exactly one positive divisor

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . This implies that



This formula represents the factorization of the polynomial  into irreducible factors.
















Applying Möbius inversion to the formula gives



where 
 
 
 
  is the Möbius function.
So the first few cyclotomic polynomials are













.
 

If 
 
 
 
  is a prime number, then all the 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity except 1 are primitive 
 
 
 
 th roots, and we have


 
  Substituting any positive integer ≥ 2 for 
 
 
 
 , this sum becomes a base 
 
 
 repunit. Thus a necessary (but not sufficient) condition for a repunit to be prime is that its length be prime.
Note that, contrary to first appearances, not all coefficients of all cyclotomic polynomials are 0, 1, or −1. The first exception is . It is not a surprise it takes this long to get an example, because the behavior of the coefficients depends not so much on 
 
 
 
  as on how many odd prime factors appear in 
 
 
 
 . More precisely, it can be shown that if 
 
 
 
  has 1 or 2 odd prime factors (e.g., 
 
 
 
 ) then the 
 
 
 
 th cyclotomic polynomial only has coefficients 0, 1 or −1. Thus the first conceivable 
 
 
 
  for which there could be a coefficient besides 0, 1, or −1 is a product of the three smallest odd primes, and that is 
 
 
 
 . This by itself doesn't prove the 105th polynomial has another coefficient, but does show it is the first one which even has a chance of working (and then a computation of the coefficients shows it does). A theorem of Schur says that there are cyclotomic polynomials with coefficients arbitrarily large in absolute value. In particular, if , where  are odd primes, , and t is odd, then 
 
 
 
  occurs as a coefficient in the 
 
 
 
 th cyclotomic polynomial.3
Many restrictions are known about the values that cyclotomic polynomials can assume at integer values. For example, if 
 
 
 
  is prime and , then either 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 .
Cyclotomic polynomials are solvable in radicals, as roots of unity are themselves radicals. Moreover, there exist more informative radical expressions for 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity with the additional property4 that every value of the expression obtained by choosing values of the radicals (for example, signs of square roots) is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity. This was already shown by Gauss in 1797.5 Efficient algorithms exist for calculating such expressions.6
Cyclic groups
The 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity form under multiplication a cyclic group of order

 
 , and in fact these groups comprise all of the finite subgroups of the multiplicative group of the complex number field. A generator for this cyclic group is a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity.
The 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity form an irreducible representation of any cyclic group of order 
 
 
 
 . The orthogonality relationship also follows from group-theoretic principles as described in character group.
The roots of unity appear as entries of the eigenvectors of any circulant matrix, i.e. matrices that are invariant under cyclic shifts, a fact that also follows from group representation theory as a variant of Bloch's theorem.7 In particular, if a circulant Hermitian matrix is considered (for example, a discretized one-dimensional Laplacian with periodic boundaries8), the orthogonality property immediately follows from the usual orthogonality of eigenvectors of Hermitian matrices.
Cyclotomic fields
By adjoining a primitive 
 
 
 
 th root of unity to Q, one obtains the 
 
 
 
 th cyclotomic field

 
 . This field contains all 
 
 
 
 th roots of unity and is the splitting field of the 
 
 
 
 th cyclotomic polynomial over Q. The field extension

 
  has degree φ(n) and its Galois group is naturally isomorphic to the multiplicative group of units of the ring 
 
 
 
 .
As the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  is abelian, this is an abelian extension. Every subfield of a cyclotomic field is an abelian extension of the rationals. It follows that every nth root of unity may be expressed in term of k-roots, with various k not exceeding φ(n). In these cases Galois theory can be written out explicitly in terms of Gaussian periods: this theory from the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae of Gauss was published many years before Galois.9
Conversely, every abelian extension of the rationals is such a subfield of a cyclotomic field – this is the content of a theorem of Kronecker, usually called the Kronecker–Weber theorem on the grounds that Weber completed the proof.
Relation to integer rings
For 
 
 
 
 , both roots of unity  and  belong to 

. For certain 
 
 
 
  corresponding roots of unity are quadratic integers:

For 
 
 
 
  they are Eisenstein integers (
 
 
 
 ).
For 
 
 
 
  they are Gaussian integers (
 
 
 
 ): see imaginary unit.

 For 
 
 
 
 , neither of non-real roots of unity (which satisfy a quartic equation) is a quadratic integer, but the sum 
 
 
 
  of each root with its complex conjugate (also a 5th root of unity) is an element of the ring Z[
 
 
] (
 
 
 
 ). For two pairs of non-real 5th roots of unity these sums are inverse golden ratio and minus golden ratio.
 For 
 
 
 
 , for any root: $z + \overline{z}$ equals to either ±2, 0, or ±$\sqrt{2}$ ($ D = 2$).
See also

Argand system
Circle group, the unit complex numbers
Group scheme of roots of unity
Primitive root modulo n
Dirichlet character
Ramanujan's sum

Notes
References









Further reading



"
Category:Algebraic numbers Category:Cyclotomic fields Category:Polynomials Category:1 (number) Category:Complex numbers



↩
↩
Emma Lehmer, On the magnitude of the coefficients of the cyclotomic polynomial, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 42 (1936), no. 6, pp. 389–392.↩
↩
↩
↩
T. Inui, Y. Tanabe, and Y. Onodera, Group Theory and Its Applications in Physics (Springer, 1996).↩
Gilbert Strang, "The discrete cosine transform," SIAM Review 41 (1), 135–147 (1999).↩
The Disquisitiones was published in 1801, Galois was born in 1811, died in 1832, but wasn't published until 1846.↩




