


Complex conjugate




Complex conjugate

 In mathematics, the complex conjugate of a complex number is the number with equal real part and imaginary part equal in magnitude but opposite in sign.12 For example, the complex conjugate of 3 + 4i is 3 − 4i.
In polar form, the conjugate of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . This can be shown using Euler's formula.
Complex conjugates are important for finding roots of polynomials. According to the complex conjugate root theorem, if a complex number is a root to a polynomial in one variable with real coefficients (such as the quadratic equation or the cubic equation), so is its conjugate.
Notation
The complex conjugate of a complex number 
 
 
 
  is written as 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . The first notation avoids confusion with the notation for the conjugate transpose of a matrix, which can be thought of as a generalization of the complex conjugate. The second is preferred in physics, where dagger is used for the conjugate transpose, while the bar-notation is more common in pure mathematics. If a complex number is represented as a 2×2 matrix, the notations are identical. In some texts, the complex conjugate of a previous known number is abbreviated as "c.c.". For example, writing 
 
 
 
  means 
 
 

Properties
The following properties apply for all complex numbers z and w, unless stated otherwise, and can be proven by writing z and w in the form a + ib.
A significant property of the complex conjugate is that a complex number is equal to its complex conjugate if its imaginary part is zero, that is, if the complex number is real. For any two complex numbers w,z:











 
  if w is nonzero


 
  if and only if z is real


 
  for any integer n








 
 , involution (i.e., the conjugate of the conjugate of a complex number z is z)


 
  if z is non-zero
The latter formula is the method of choice to compute the inverse of a complex number if it is given in rectangular coordinates.





 
  if z is non-zero
If 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial with real coefficients, and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  as well. Thus, non-real roots of real polynomials occur in complex conjugate pairs (see Complex conjugate root theorem).
In general, if 
 
 
 
  is a holomorphic function whose restriction to the real numbers is real-valued, and 
 
 
 
  is defined, then



The map 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is a homeomorphism (where the topology on 
 
 
 
  is taken to be the standard topology) and antilinear, if one considers 
 
 
 
  as a complex vector space over itself. Even though it appears to be a well-behaved function, it is not holomorphic; it reverses orientation whereas holomorphic functions locally preserve orientation. It is bijective and compatible with the arithmetical operations, and hence is a field automorphism. As it keeps the real numbers fixed, it is an element of the Galois group of the field extension

 
 . This Galois group has only two elements
 
 
 
  and the identity on 
 
 
 
 . Thus the only two field automorphisms of 
 
 
 
  that leave the real numbers fixed are the identity map and complex conjugation.
Use as a variable
Once a complex number 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is given, its conjugate is sufficient to reproduce the parts of the z-variable:

Real part
 
 

Imaginary part
 
 

Modulus (or absolute value)


Argument

 
 , so 
 
 


Thus the pair of variables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  also serve up the plane as do x,y and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, the 
 
 
 
  variable is useful in specifying lines in the plane:



is a line through the origin and perpendicular to 
 
 
 
  since the real part of 
 
 
 
  is zero only when the cosine of the angle between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is zero. Similarly, for a fixed complex unit u = exp(b i), the equation:



determines the line through 
 
 
 
  in the direction of u.
These uses of the conjugate of z as a variable are illustrated in Frank Morley's book Inversive Geometry (1933), written with his son Frank Vigor Morley.
Generalizations
The other planar real algebras, dual numbers, and split-complex numbers are also explicated by use of complex conjugation.
For matrices of complex numbers 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  represents the element-by-element conjugation of 
 
 
 
 .3 Contrast this to the property 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  represents the conjugate transpose of 
 
 
 
 .
Taking the conjugate transpose (or adjoint) of complex matrices generalizes complex conjugation. Even more general is the concept of adjoint operator for operators on (possibly infinite-dimensional) complex Hilbert spaces. All this is subsumed by the *-operations of C*-algebras.
One may also define a conjugation for quaternions and coquaternions: the conjugate of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Note that all these generalizations are multiplicative only if the factors are reversed:



Since the multiplication of planar real algebras is commutative, this reversal is not needed there.
There is also an abstract notion of conjugation for vector spaces

 
  over the complex numbers. In this context, any antilinear map

 
  that satisfies



 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the identity map on 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 ,

is called a complex conjugation, or a real structure. As the involution 
 
 
 
  is antilinear, it cannot be the identity map on 
 
 
 
 . Of course, 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -linear transformation of 
 
 
 
 , if one notes that every complex space V has a real form obtained by taking the same vectors as in the original space and restricting the scalars to be real. The above properties actually define a real structure on the complex vector space 
 
 
 
 .4 One example of this notion is the conjugate transpose operation of complex matrices defined above. It should be remarked that on generic complex vector spaces there is no canonical notion of complex conjugation.
See also

Complex conjugate vector space
Real structure

Notes
References

Budinich, P. and Trautman, A. The Spinorial Chessboard. Spinger-Verlag, 1988. ISBN 0-387-19078-3. (antilinear maps are discussed in section 3.3).

ru:Комплексное число#Сопряжённые числа"
Category:Complex numbers





Arfken, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 1985, pg. 201
Budinich, P. and Trautman, A. The Spinorial Chessboard. Spinger-Verlag, 1988, p. 29




