


Special unitary group




Special unitary group

In mathematics, the special unitary group of degree 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 , is the Lie group of 
 
 
unitary matrices with determinant 1 (i.e., real-valued determinant, not complex as for general unitary matrices). The group operation is that of matrix multiplication. The special unitary group is a subgroup of the unitary group

 
 , consisting of all 
 
 
 
  unitary matrices. As a compact classical group, 
 
 
 
  is the group that preserves the standard inner product on .1 It is itself a subgroup of the general linear group, 
 
 
 
 .
The 
 
 
 
  groups find wide application in the Standard Model of particle physics, especially 

 in the electroweak interaction and 

 in quantum chromodynamics.2
The simplest case, 
 
 
 
 , is the trivial group, having only a single element. The group 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the group of quaternions of norm 1, and is thus diffeomorphic to the 3-sphere. Since unit quaternions can be used to represent rotations in 3-dimensional space (up to sign), there is a surjective homomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to the rotation group 
 
 
 whose kernel is }.3

 
  is also identical to one of the symmetry groups of spinors, Spin(3), that enables a spinor presentation of rotations.
Properties
The special unitary group 
 
 
 
  is a real Lie group (though not a complex Lie group). Its dimension as a real manifold is . Topologically, it is compact and simply connected. Algebraically, it is a simple Lie group (meaning its Lie algebra is simple; see below). 4
The center of 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the cyclic group , and is composed of the diagonal matrices 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  an 
 
 
th root of unity and 
 
 
 
  the n×n identity matrix.
Its outer automorphism group, for , is , while the outer automorphism group of 
 
 
 
  is the trivial group.
A maximal torus, of rank 
 
 
 
 , is given by the set of diagonal matrices with determinant 1. The Weyl group is the symmetric group , which is represented by signed permutation matrices (the signs being necessary to ensure the determinant is 1).
The Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 , can be identified with the set of traceless antihermitian

 
  complex matrices, with the regular commutator as Lie bracket. Particle physicists often use a different, equivalent representation: the set of traceless hermitian

 
  complex matrices with Lie bracket given by 
 
 
 
  times the commutator.
Infinitesimal generators
The Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  can be generated by  operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , which satisfy the commutator relationships



for  = , where  denotes the Kronecker delta. Additionally, the operator



satisfies



which implies that the number of independent generators of the Lie algebra is .5
Fundamental representation
In the defining, or fundamental, representation of 
 
 
 
  the generators  are represented by traceless hermitian matrices complex 
 
 
 
  matrices, where:



where the 
 
 
 
  are the structure constants and are antisymmetric in all indices, while the 
 
 
 
 -coefficients are symmetric in all indices. As a consequence:






We also take



as a normalization convention.
Adjoint representation
In the -dimensional adjoint representation, the generators are represented by ×  matrices, whose elements are defined by the structure constants themselves:



== n = 2 ==  
 
 
 
  is the following group,


 
  where the overline denotes complex conjugation.
Now, consider the following map,


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of 2 by 2 complex matrices. By considering  diffeomorphic to  and 
 
 
 
  diffeomorphic to , we can see that 
 
 
 
  is an injective real linear map and hence an embedding. Now, considering the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to the 3-sphere (since modulus is 1), denoted , we can see that this is an embedding of the 3-sphere onto a compact submanifold of 
 
 
 
 . However, it is also clear that .
Therefore, as a manifold  is diffeomorphic to 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
  is a compact, connected Lie group.
The Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  is



It is easily verified that matrices of this form have trace zero and are antihermitian. The Lie algebra is then generated by the following matrices,


 
  which are easily seen to have the form of the general element specified above.
These satisfy  and . The commutator bracket is therefore specified by



The above generators are related to the Pauli matrices by  and . This representation is routinely used in quantum mechanics to represent the spin of fundamental particles such as electrons. They also serve as unit vectors for the description of our 3 spatial dimensions in loop quantum gravity.
The Lie algebra serves to work out the representations of 
 
 
. 
== n = 3 == The generators of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , in the defining representation, are:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  the Gell-Mann matrices, are the 
 
 
 
  analog of the Pauli matrices for 
 
 
 
 :















































These 
 
 
 
  span all traceless Hermitian matrices

 
  of the Lie algebra, as required.
They obey the relations





 
 ,

(or, equivalently, 
 
 
 
 ).
 

The 
 
 
 
  are the structure constants of the Lie algebra, given by:








 
  while all other 
 
 
 
  not related to these by permutation are zero.
The symmetric coefficients 
 
 
 
  take the values:









As a topological space, SU(3) is a direct product of a 3-sphere and a 5-sphere, S3⊗ S5.
A generic SU(3) group element generated by a traceless 3×3 hermitian matrix 
 
 
 
 , normalized as  2}} , is given by6











 
  where


 
  .
for elementary representation theory facts.
Lie algebra structure
The above representation bases generalize to , using generalized Pauli matrices.
If we choose an (arbitrary) particular basis, then the subspace of traceless diagonal

 
  matrices with imaginary entries forms an -dimensional Cartan subalgebra.
Complexify the Lie algebra, so that any traceless 
 
 
 
  matrix is now allowed. The weight eigenvectors are the Cartan subalgebra itself, as well as the matrices with only one nonzero entry which is off diagonal. Even though the Cartan subalgebra 
 
 
 
  is only , to simplify calculations, it is often convenient to introduce an auxiliary element, the unit matrix which commutes with everything else (which is not an element of the Lie algebra!) for the purpose of computing weights—and that only. So, we have a basis where the 
 
 
 
 -th basis vector is the matrix with 1 on the 
 
 
 
 -th diagonal entry and zero elsewhere. Weights would then be given by 
 
 
 
  coordinates and the sum over all 
 
 
 
  coordinates has to be zero (because the unit matrix is only auxiliary).
So, 
 
 
 
  is of rank  and its Dynkin diagram is given by , a chain of  vertices, o−o−o−o---o. Its root system consists of  roots spanning a  Euclidean space. Here, we use 
 
 
 
  redundant coordinates instead of  to emphasize the symmetries of the root system (the 
 
 
 
  coordinates have to add up to zero).
In other words, we are embedding this  dimensional vector space in an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional one. Thus, the roots consists of all the  permutations of 
 
 
 
 . The construction given above explains why. A choice of simple roots is



Its Cartan matrix is



Its Weyl group or Coxeter group is the symmetric group , the symmetry group of the -simplex.
Generalized special unitary group
For a field

 
 , the generalized special unitary group over F, 
 
 
 
 , is the group of all linear transformations of determinant 1 of a vector space of rank  over 
 
 
 
  which leave invariant a nondegenerate, Hermitian form of signature

 
 . This group is often referred to as the special unitary group of signature 
 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
. The field 
 
 
 
  can be replaced by a commutative ring, in which case the vector space is replaced by a free module.
Specifically, fix a Hermitian matrix

 
  of signature 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
 , then all



satisfy



Often one will see the notation 
 
 
 
  without reference to a ring or field; in this case, the ring or field being referred to is 
 
 
 
  and this gives one of the classical Lie groups. The standard choice for 
 
 
 
  when  is



However there may be better choices for 
 
 
 
  for certain dimensions which exhibit more behaviour under restriction to subrings of 
 
 
 
 .
Example
An important example of this type of group is the Picard modular group

 
  which acts (projectively) on complex hyperbolic space of degree two, in the same way that 
 
 
 
  acts (projectively) on real hyperbolic space of dimension two. In 2005 Gábor Francsics and Peter Lax computed an explicit fundamental domain for the action of this group on .7
A further example is 
 
 
 
 , which is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 .
Important subgroups
In physics the special unitary group is used to represent bosonic symmetries. In theories of symmetry breaking it is important to be able to find the subgroups of the special unitary group. Subgroups of 
 
 
 
  that are important in GUT physics are, for ,


 
 , where × denotes the direct product and 
 
 
 
 , known as the circle group, is the multiplicative group of all complex numbers with absolute value 1.
For completeness, there are also the orthogonal and symplectic subgroups,



Since the rank of 
 
 
 
  is  and of 
 
 
 
 
  is 1, a useful check is that the sum of the ranks of the subgroups is less than or equal to the rank of the original group. 
 
 
 
  is a subgroup of various other Lie groups,


 
 
  See spin group, and simple Lie groups for E6, E7, and G2.
There are also the accidental isomorphisms: , ,8 and .
One may finally mention that 
 
 
 
  is the double covering group of 
 
 
 
 , a relation that plays an important role in the theory of rotations of 2-spinors in non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
See also

Projective special unitary group, 
 
 

Generalizations of Pauli matrices

Remarks
References
 
"
Category:Lie groups



For a characterization of 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
  in terms of preservation of the standard inner product on , see Classical group.↩
↩
For an explicit description of the homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , see Connection between SO(3) and SU(2).↩
Wybourne, B G (1974). Classical Groups for Physicists, Wiley-Interscience. ISBN 0471965057 .↩
R.R. Puri, Mathematical Methods of Quantum Optics, Springer, 2001.↩
; ↩
↩


 
  is the compact real form of 
 
 
 
 . It is sometimes denoted 
 
 
 
 . The dimension of the 
 
 
 
 -matrices is 
 
 
 
 .↩




