


Dolly zoom




Dolly zoom

 
The dolly zoom is an unsettling in-camera effect that appears to undermine normal visual perception.
The effect is achieved by zooming a zoom lens to adjust the angle of view (often referred to as field of view or FOV) while the camera dollies (or moves) towards or away from the subject in such a way as to keep the subject the same size in the frame throughout. In its classic form, the camera angle is pulled away from a subject while the lens zooms in, or vice versa. Thus, during the zoom, there is a continuous perspective distortion, the most directly noticeable feature being that the background appears to change size relative to the subject.
The visual appearance for the viewer is that either the background suddenly grows in size and detail and overwhelms the foreground, or the foreground becomes immense and dominates its previous setting, depending on which way the dolly zoom is executed. As the human visual system uses both size and perspective cues to judge the relative sizes of objects, seeing a perspective change without a size change is a highly unsettling effect, often with strong emotional impact.
The effect was first imagined and patented by the Romanian Director of Photography Sergiu Huzum, but it was first used by Irmin Roberts, a Paramount second-unit cameraman, in Alfred Hitchcock's film Vertigo.
Alternative names
A dolly counter zoom is also variously known as:

A "zido"
A "zolly"
The "Hitchcock zoom" or the "Vertigo effect"
"Hitchcock shot" or "Hunter shot"12
Triple Reverse Zoom
Reverse Tracking Shot
Back Zoom Travelling
Hunter Smith Shot
"Smash Zoom" or "Smash Shot"
A "Jaws shot"
Vertigo zoom
Telescoping
Trombone shot
Push/pull
The Long Pull
The Trombone Effect
A Stretch shot
Reverse Pull
More technically as forward zoom / reverse tracking or zoom in / dolly out
Trans-trav (in Romanian and Russian), from trans-focal length operation and travelling movement
Contra-zoom

Purpose of the effect
The dolly zoom is commonly used by filmmakers to represent the sensation of vertigo, a "falling-away-from-oneself feeling" or a feeling of unreality, or to suggest that a character is undergoing a realization that causes him or her to reassess everything he or she had previously believed. After Hitchcock popularized the effect (he used it again for a climactic revelation in Marnie), the technique was used by many other filmmakers, and eventually became regarded as a gimmick or cliché. This was especially true after director Steven Spielberg repopularized the effect in his highly regarded film Jaws, in a memorable shot of a dolly zoom into Police Chief Brody's (Roy Scheider) stunned reaction at the climax of a shark attack on a beach (after a suspenseful build-up).
Optics
For most purposes, we can assume the image space and the object space are in the same medium. Thus, for an object in focus, the distance between the lens and image plane

 
 , the distance between lens and the object 
 
 
 
 , and the focal length

 
  are related by:



The transverse magnification 
 
 
 
  is related by



The axial magnification

 
  of an object at 
 
 
 
  is the rate of change of the lens-image distance 
 
 
 
  as the lens-object distance 
 
 
 
  changes. For an object of finite depth, one can conceive of the average axial magnification as the ratio of the depth of the image and the depth of the object:



One can see that if magnification remains constant, a longer focal length results in a smaller axial magnification, and a smaller focal length a larger axial magnification. That is, when using a longer focal length while moving the camera/lens away from the object to maintain the same magnification M, objects seem shallower, and the axial distances between objects seem shorter. The opposite—increased axial magnification—happens with shorter focal lengths while moving the camera/lens towards the object.
Calculating distances
To achieve the effect the camera needs to be positioned at a certain distance from the object that is supposed to remain still during the dolly zoom. The distance depends on how wide the scene is to be filmed, and on the field of view (FOV) of the camera lens. Before calculating the distances needed at the different fields of view, the constant width of the scene has to be calculated. For example, a FOV of 90° and a distance of two meters yield a constant width of four meters, allowing a four-meter-wide object to remain still inside the frame during the effect.



References
External links

Vertigo Effect article on TV Tropes - more examples

"
Category:Special effects Category:Cinematography Category:Film techniques Category:Articles containing video clips



↩
↩




