


Snub cube




Snub cube

In geometry, the snub cube, or snub cuboctahedron, is an Archimedean solid with 38 faces: 6 squares and 32 equilateral triangles. It has 60 edges and 24 vertices.
It is a chiral polyhedron, that is, it has two distinct forms, which are mirror images (or "enantiomorphs") of each other. The union of both forms is a compound of two snub cubes, and the convex hull of both sets of vertices is a truncated cuboctahedron.
Kepler first named it in Latin as cubus simus in 1619 in his Harmonices Mundi. H. S. M. Coxeter, noting it could be derived equally from the octahedron as the cube, called it snub cuboctahedron, with a vertical extended Schläfli symbol

 
 .
Dimensions
For a snub cube with edge length 1, its surface area is 
 
 
 
  and its volume is 
 
 
 
 , where t is the tribonacci constant

 
 .
If the original snub cube has edge length 1, its dual pentagonal icositetrahedron has side lengths 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Cartesian coordinates
Cartesian coordinates for the vertices of a snub cube are all the even permutations of

(±1, ±1/t, ±t)
 

with an even number of plus signs, along with all the odd permutations with an odd number of plus signs, where t is the tribonacci constant. Taking the even permutations with an odd number of plus signs, and the odd permutations with an even number of plus signs, gives a different snub cube, the mirror image. Taking all of them together yields the compound of two snub cubes.
This snub cube has edges of length α, a number which satisfies the equation



and can be written as






To get a snub cube with unit edge length, divide all the coordinates above by the value α given above.
Orthogonal projections
The snub cube has two special orthogonal projections, centered, on two types of faces: triangles, and squares, correspond to the A2 and B2 Coxeter planes.




Orthogonal projections



Centered by



Image



Projective
 symmetry



Dual
 image



Spherical tiling
The snub cube can also be represented as a spherical tiling, and projected onto the plane via a stereographic projection. This projection is conformal, preserving angles but not areas or lengths. Straight lines on the sphere are projected as circular arcs on the plane.



(Figure)
Spherical_snub_cube.png



square-centered



Orthographic projection

Stereographic projection



Geometric relations
 The snub cube can be generated by taking the six faces of the cube, pulling them outward so they no longer touch, then giving them each a small rotation on their centers (all clockwise or all counter-clockwise) until the spaces between can be filled with equilateral triangles.





 Cube


Rhombicuboctahedron
 (Expanded cube)


 Snub cube



It can also be constructed as an alternation of a nonuniform omnitruncated cube, deleting every other vertex and creating new triangles at the deleted vertices. A properly proportioned (nonuniform) great rhombicuboctahedron will create equilateral triangles at the deleted vertices. Depending on which set of vertices are alternated, the resulting snub cube can have a clockwise or counterclockwise twist.




A "improved" snub cube, with a slightly smaller square face and slightly larger triangular faces compared to Archimedes' uniform snub cube, is useful as a spherical design.1
Related polyhedra and tilings
The snub cube is one of a family of uniform polyhedra related to the cube and regular octahedron.
This semiregular polyhedron is a member of a sequence of snubbed polyhedra and tilings with vertex figure (3.3.3.3.n) and Coxeter–Dynkin diagram . These figures and their duals have (n32) rotational symmetry, being in the Euclidean plane for n=6, and hyperbolic plane for any higher n. The series can be considered to begin with n=2, with one set of faces degenerated into digons.
The snub cube is second in a series of snub polyhedra and tilings with vertex figure 3.3.4.3.n. 
Snub cubical graph
In the mathematical field of graph theory, a snub cubical graph is the graph of vertices and edges of the snub cube, one of the Archimedean solids. It has 24 vertices and 60 edges, and is an Archimedean graph.2




Orthogonal projection
(Figure)
Snub cube_A2.png




{{-}}
See also

Truncated cube
Compound of two snub cubes
Snub square tiling

References



(Section 3-9)


External links






The Uniform Polyhedra
Virtual Reality Polyhedra The Encyclopedia of Polyhedra
[http://www.dr-mikes-math-games-for-kids.com/polyhedral-nets.html?net=KPFQTjUF59q9qFlmEqGmbfyT4Ykrpg7vn7pPKHBbttGwDk2Z6dABBNQuTy7b46U3TTtKxWPq6lgrdE2qYMNpS5ceb5Ie9K4gQt25UcMlwmW6OKK3HtK2QvnmOLGTZFLfHD7hM4GN1modJYJ5PjowXOUDwYnjnCRQFA0vsrVIwFkFiIy7Pi9foWycmqdJAnWMMpuCxwRrcdA49hnAjViEzr&name;;=Snub+Cube#applet Editable printable net of a Snub Cube with interactive 3D view]

"
Category:Chiral polyhedra Category:Uniform polyhedra Category:Archimedean solids Category:Snub tilings



"Spherical Designs" by R.H. Hardin and N.J.A. Sloane





