


List of unsolved problems in mathematics




List of unsolved problems in mathematics

Since the Renaissance, every century has seen the solution of more mathematical problems than the century before, and yet many mathematical problems, both major and minor, still elude solution.1 Most graduate students, in order to earn a Ph.D. in mathematics, are expected to produce new, original mathematics. That is, they are expected to solve problems that are not routine, and which cannot be solved by standard methods.
An unsolved problem in mathematics does not refer to the kind of problem found as an exercise in a textbook, but rather to the answer to a major question or a general method that provides a solution to an entire class of problems. Prizes are often awarded for the solution to a long-standing problem, and lists of unsolved problems receive considerable attention. This article reiterates the Millennium Prize list of unsolved problems in mathematics as of October 2014, and lists further unsolved problems in algebra, additive and algebraic number theories, analysis, combinatorics, algebraic, discrete, and Euclidean geometries, dynamical systems, partial differential equations, and graph, group, model, number, set and Ramsey theories, as well as miscellaneous unsolved problems. A list of problems solved since 1975 also appears, alongside some sources, general and specific, for the stated problems.
Lists of unsolved problems in mathematics
Over the course of time, several lists of unsolved mathematical problems have appeared. The following is a listing of those lists.




List

Number of problems

Proposed by

Proposed in





Hilbert's problems

23

David Hilbert

1900



Landau's problems

4

Edmund Landau

1912



Taniyama's problems2

36

Yutaka Taniyama

1955



Smale's problems

18

Stephen Smale

1998



Millennium Prize problems

7

Clay Mathematics Institute

2000



Unsolved Problems on Mathematics for the 21st Century3

22

Jair Minoro Abe, Shotaro Tanaka

2001



DARPA's math challenges4{{cite web | title = Broad Agency Announcement (BAA 07-68) for Defense Sciences Office (DSO) | publisher = DARPA | date = 2007-09-10 | url = http://www.math.utk.edu/~vasili/refs/darpa07.MathChallenges.html | accessdate = 2013-06-25 | archiveurl = http://web.archive.org/web/20121001111057/http://www.math.utk.edu/~vasili/refs/darpa07.MathChallenges.html

archivedate = 2012-10-01}}

23

DARPA



Millennium Prize Problems
Of the seven Millennium Prize Problems set by the Clay Mathematics Institute, six have yet to be solved, as of June 2015,5

P versus NP
Hodge conjecture
Riemann hypothesis
Yang–Mills existence and mass gap
Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness
Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.

The seventh problem, the Poincaré conjecture, has been solved.6 The smooth four-dimensional Poincaré conjecture—that is, whether a four-dimensional topological sphere can have two or more inequivalent smooth structures—is still unsolved.7
Other still-unsolved problems
Additive number theory

Beal's conjecture
Fermat–Catalan conjecture
Goldbach's conjecture (Proof claimed for weak version in 2013)
The values of g(k) and G(k) in Waring's problem
Collatz conjecture (3n + 1 conjecture)
Lander, Parkin, and Selfridge conjecture
Diophantine quintuples
Gilbreath's conjecture
Erdős conjecture on arithmetic progressions
Erdős–Turán conjecture on additive bases
Pollock octahedral numbers conjecture

Algebra

Hilbert's sixteenth problem
Hadamard conjecture
Jacobson's conjecture
Existence of perfect cuboids
Zauner's conjecture: existence of SIC-POVMs in all dimensions

Algebraic geometry

André–Oort conjecture
Bass conjecture
Deligne conjecture
Fröberg conjecture
Fujita conjecture
Hartshorne conjectures
Jacobian conjecture
Manin conjecture
Nakai conjecture
Resolution of singularities in characteristic p
 Standard conjectures on algebraic cycles
Section conjecture
Tate conjecture
Virasoro conjecture
Witten conjecture
Zariski multiplicity conjecture

Algebraic number theory

Are there infinitely many real quadratic number fields with unique factorization?
Brumer–Stark conjecture
Characterize all algebraic number fields that have some power basis.

Analysis

The Jacobian conjecture
Schanuel's conjecture
Lehmer's conjecture
Pompeiu problem
Are 
 
 
 
  (the Euler–Mascheroni constant), 

 + e, 
 
 
 
  − e, 
 
 
e, 
 
 
 
 /e, 
 
 
e, 
 
 
√
 
 
, 
 
 


, e

2, ln 
 
 
 
 , 2e, ee, Catalan's constant or Khinchin's constant rational, algebraic irrational, or transcendental? What is the irrationality measure of each of these numbers?8910
The Khabibullin’s conjecture on integral inequalities

Combinatorics

Number of magic squares 
Finding a formula for the probability that two elements chosen at random generate the symmetric group


Frankl's union-closed sets conjecture: for any family of sets closed under sums there exists an element (of the underlying space) belonging to half or more of the sets
The Lonely runner conjecture: if 
 
 
 
  runners with pairwise distinct speeds run round a track of unit length, will every runner be "lonely" (that is, be at least a distance 
 
 
 
  from each other runner) at some time?
Singmaster's conjecture: is there a finite upper bound on the multiplicities of the entries greater than 1 in Pascal's triangle?
The 1/3–2/3 conjecture: does every finite partially ordered set that is not totally ordered contain two elements x and y such that the probability that x appears before y in a random linear extension is between 1/3 and 2/3?

Discrete geometry

Solving the happy ending problem for arbitrary 
 
 

Finding matching upper and lower bounds for K-sets and halving lines
The Hadwiger conjecture on covering n-dimensional convex bodies with at most 2n smaller copies
The Kobon triangle problem on triangles in line arrangements
The McMullen problem on projectively transforming sets of points into convex position
Ulam's packing conjecture about the identity of the worst-packing convex solid

Euclidean geometry

The einstein problem – does there exist a two-dimensional shape that forms the prototile for an aperiodic tiling, but not for any periodic tiling?11
Inscribed square problem – does every Jordan curve have an inscribed square?12
Moser's worm problem – what is the smallest area of a shape that can cover every unit-length curve in the plane?13
The moving sofa problem – what is the largest area of a shape that can be maneuvered through a unit-width L-shaped corridor?14
Shephard's problem (a.k.a. Dürer's conjecture) – does every convex polyhedron have a net?15
The Thomson problem - what is the minimum energy configuration of N particles bound to the surface of a unit sphere that repel each other with a 1/r potential (or any potential in general)?

Dynamical systems

Furstenberg conjecture – Is every invariant and ergodic measure for the 
 
 
 
  action on the circle either Lebesgue or atomic?
Margulis conjecture — Measure classification for diagonalizable actions in higher-rank groups
MLC conjecture – Is the Mandelbrot set locally connected ?
Weinstein conjecture - Does a regular compact contact type level set of a Hamiltonian on a symplectic manifold carry at least one periodic orbit of the Hamiltonian flow?

Graph theory

Barnette's conjecture that every cubic bipartite three-connected planar graph has a Hamiltonian cycle
The Erdős–Gyárfás conjecture on cycles with power-of-two lengths in cubic graphs
The Erdős–Hajnal conjecture on finding large homogeneous sets in graphs with a forbidden induced subgraph
The Hadwiger conjecture relating coloring to clique minors
The Erdős–Faber–Lovász conjecture on coloring unions of cliques
Harborth's conjecture that every planar graph can be drawn with integer edge lengths
The total coloring conjecture
The list coloring conjecture
The Ringel–Kotzig conjecture on graceful labeling of trees
The Hadwiger–Nelson problem on the chromatic number of unit distance graphs
Deriving a closed-form expression for the percolation threshold values, especially 
 
 
 
  (square site)
Tutte's conjectures that every bridgeless graph has a nowhere-zero 5-flow and every bridgeless graph without the Petersen graph as a minor has a nowhere-zero 4-flow
The reconstruction conjecture and new digraph reconstruction conjecture concerning whether or not a graph is recognizable by the vertex deleted subgraphs.
The cycle double cover conjecture that every bridgeless graph has a family of cycles that includes each edge twice.
Does a Moore graph with girth 5 and degree 57 exist?
Conway's thrackle conjecture
Negami's conjecture on the characterization of graphs with planar covers
The Blankenship–Oporowski conjecture on the book thickness of subdivisions

Group theory

Is every finitely presented periodic group finite?
The inverse Galois problem: is every finite group the Galois group of a Galois extension of the rationals?
For which positive integers m, n is the free Burnside group  finite? In particular, is  finite?
Is every group surjunctive?

Model theory

Vaught's conjecture
The Cherlin–Zilber conjecture: A simple group whose first-order theory is stable in 
 
 
 
  is a simple algebraic group over an algebraically closed field.
The Main Gap conjecture, e.g. for uncountable first order theories, for AECs, and for 
 
 
 
 -saturated models of a countable theory.16
Determine the structure of Keisler's order1718
The stable field conjecture: every infinite field with a stable first-order theory is separably closed.
Is the theory of the field of Laurent series over 
 
 
 
  decidable? of the field of polynomials over 
 
 
 
 ?
(BMTO) Is the Borel monadic theory of the real order decidable? (MTWO) Is the monadic theory of well-ordering consistently decidable?19
The Stable Forking Conjecture for simple theories20
For which number fields does Hilbert's tenth problem hold?
Assume K is the class of models of a countable first order theory omitting countably many types. If K has a model of cardinality 
 
 
 
  does it have a model of cardinality continuum?21
Is there a logic L which satisfies both the Beth property and Δ-interpolation, is compact but does not satisfy the interpolation property?22
If the class of atomic models of a complete first order theory is categorical in the 
 
 
 
 , is it categorical in every cardinal?2324
Is every infinite, minimal field of characteristic zero algebraically closed? (minimal = no proper elementary substructure)
Kueker's conjecture25
Does there exist an o-minimal first order theory with a trans-exponential (rapid growth) function?
Lachlan's decision problem
Does a finitely presented homogeneous structure for a finite relational language have finitely many reducts?
Do the Henson graphs have the finite model property? (e.g. triangle-free graphs)
The universality problem for C-free graphs: For which finite sets C of graphs does the class of C-free countable graphs have a universal member under strong embeddings?26
The universality spectrum problem: Is there a first-order theory whose universality spectrum is minimum?27

 Number theory (general)

abc conjecture (Proof claimed in 2012, currently under review.)
Carmichael's totient function conjecture
Erdős–Straus conjecture
Do any odd perfect numbers exist?
Are there infinitely many perfect numbers?
Do quasiperfect numbers exist?
Do any odd weird numbers exist?
Do any Lychrel numbers exist?
Is 10 a solitary number?
Do any Taxicab(5, 2, n) exist for n>1?
Brocard's problem: existence of integers, (n,m), such that n!+1 = m2 other than n=4, 5, 7
Distribution and upper bound of mimic numbers
Littlewood conjecture
Congruent number problem (a corollary to Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, per Tunnell's theorem)
Lehmer's totient problem: if φ(n) divides n − 1, must n be prime?
Are there infinitely many amicable numbers?
Are there any pairs of relatively prime amicable numbers?
The Gauss circle problem – how far can the number of integer points in a circle centered at the origin be from the area of the circle?

 Number theory (prime numbers)

Catalan's Mersenne conjecture
Goldbach's conjecture
Twin prime conjecture
Polignac's conjecture
Dickson's conjecture
Bunyakovsky conjecture
The Gaussian moat problem: is it possible to find an infinite sequence of distinct Gaussian prime numbers such that the difference between consecutive numbers in the sequence is bounded?
Are there infinitely many prime quadruplets?
Are there infinitely many cousin primes?
Are there infinitely many sexy primes?
Are there infinitely many Mersenne primes (Lenstra–Pomerance–Wagstaff conjecture); equivalently, infinitely many even perfect numbers?
Are there infinitely many Wagstaff primes?
Are there infinitely many Sophie Germain primes?
Are there infinitely many Pierpont primes?
Are there infinitely many regular primes, and if so is their relative density 
 
 
 
 ?
Are there infinitely many repunit primes to every base except perfect power?
Are there infinitely many Cullen primes?
Are there infinitely many Woodall primes?
Are there infinitely many palindromic primes to every base?
Are there infinitely many Fibonacci primes?
Are there infinitely many Lucas primes?
Are there infinitely many Pell primes?
Are there infinitely many Newman–Shanks–Williams primes?
Are all Mersenne numbers of prime index square-free?
Are there infinitely many Wieferich primes?
Are there any Wieferich prime in base 47?
Are there any composite c satisfying 2c - 1 ≡ 1 (mod c2)?
For any given integer a > 0, are there infinitely many primes p such that ap - 1 ≡ 1 (mod p2)?28
Can a prime p satisfy 2p − 1 ≡ 1 (mod p2) and 3p − 1 ≡ 1 (mod p2) simultaneously?29
Are there infinitely many Wilson primes?
Are there infinitely many Wolstenholme primes?
Are there any Wall–Sun–Sun primes?
Is every Fermat number 22n + 1 composite for 
 
 
 
 ?
Are all Fermat numbers square-free?
For any given integer a which is not a square and does not equal to -1. Are there infinitely many primes with a as a primitive root?
Artin's conjecture on primitive roots
Is 78,557 the lowest Sierpiński number?
Is 509,203 the lowest Riesel number?
Fortune's conjecture (that no Fortunate number is composite)
Landau's problems
Does every prime number appear in the Euclid–Mullin sequence?
Does the converse of Wolstenholme's theorem hold for all natural numbers?
Elliott–Halberstam conjecture

Partial differential equations

Regularity of solutions of Vlasov–Maxwell equations
Regularity of solutions of Euler equations

Ramsey theory

The values of the Ramsey numbers, particularly 
 
 

The values of the Van der Waerden numbers

Set theory

The problem of finding the ultimate core model, one that contains all large cardinals.
If ℵω is a strong limit cardinal, then 2ℵω ω1 (see Singular cardinals hypothesis). The best bound, ℵω4, was obtained by Shelah using his pcf theory.
Woodin's Ω-hypothesis.
Does the consistency of the existence of a strongly compact cardinal imply the consistent existence of a supercompact cardinal?
(Woodin) Does the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis below a strongly compact cardinal imply the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis everywhere?
Does there exist a Jónsson algebra on ℵω?
Without assuming the axiom of choice, can a nontrivial elementary embedding V→V exist?
Does the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis entail 

 for every singular cardinal

 
 ?

Other

Invariant subspace problem
Problems in Latin squares
Problems in loop theory and quasigroup theory
Dixmier conjecture
Baum–Connes conjecture
Novikov conjecture
Generalized star height problem
Assorted sphere packing problems, e.g. the densest irregular hypersphere packings
Closed curve problem: Find (explicit) necessary and sufficient conditions that determine when, given two periodic functions with the same period, the integral curve is closed.30
Toeplitz' conjecture (open since 1911)

Problems solved since 1975

Kadison–Singer problem (Adam Marcus, Daniel Spielman and Nikhil Srivastava, 2013)3132
Willmore conjecture (Fernando Codá Marques and André Neves, 2012)33
Gromov's problem on distortion of knots (John Pardon, 2011)
Circular law (Terence Tao and Van H. Vu, 2010)
Hirsch conjecture (Francisco Santos Leal, 2010)3435
Serre's modularity conjecture (Chandrashekhar Khare and Jean-Pierre Wintenberger, 2008)3637
Heterogeneous tiling conjecture (squaring the plane) (Frederick V. Henle and James M. Henle, 2007)
Weinstein conjecture for closed 3-dimensional manifolds (Clifford Taubes, 2007)
Road coloring conjecture (Avraham Trahtman, 2007)
The Angel problem (Various independent proofs, 2006)
The Langlands–Shelstad fundamental lemma (Ngô Bảo Châu and Gérard Laumon, 2004)
Stanley–Wilf conjecture (Gábor Tardos and Adam Marcus, 2004)
Green–Tao theorem (Ben J. Green and Terence Tao, 2004)
Cameron–Erdős conjecture (Ben J. Green, 2003, Alexander Sapozhenko, 2003)38
Strong perfect graph conjecture (Maria Chudnovsky, Neil Robertson, Paul Seymour and Robin Thomas, 2002)
Poincaré conjecture (Grigori Perelman, 2002)
Catalan's conjecture (Preda Mihăilescu, 2002)
Kato's conjecture (Auscher, Hofmann, Lacey, McIntosh, and Tchamitchian, 2001)
The Langlands correspondence for function fields (Laurent Lafforgue, 1999)
Taniyama–Shimura conjecture (Wiles, Breuil, Conrad, Diamond, and Taylor, 1999)
Kepler conjecture (Thomas Hales, 1998)
Milnor conjecture (Vladimir Voevodsky, 1996)
Fermat's Last Theorem (Andrew Wiles and Richard Taylor, 1995)
Bieberbach conjecture (Louis de Branges, 1985)
Princess and monster game (Shmuel Gal, 1979) 394041
Four-color theorem (Appel and Haken, 1977)

References
Further reading
Books discussing unsolved problems










Books discussing recently solved problems






Other works




External links

Unsolved Problems in Number Theory, Logic and Cryptography
Clay Institute Millennium Prize
List of links to unsolved problems in mathematics, prizes and research.
Open Problem Garden The collection of open problems in mathematics build on the principle of user editable ("wiki") site
AIM Problem Lists
Unsolved Problem of the Week Archive. MathPro Press.
The Open Problems Project (TOPP), discrete and computational geometry problems
Kirby's list of unsolved problems in low-dimensional topology
Erdös' Problems on Graphs

"
    Mathematics Category:Mathematics-related lists Category:Lists of lists



Eves, An Introduction to the History of Mathematics 6th Edition, Thomson, 1990, ISBN 978-0-03-029558-4.



http://claymath.org/millennium-problems

http://www.openproblemgarden.org/?q=op/smooth_4_dimensional_poincare_conjecture
For background on the numbers that are the focus of this problem, see articles by Eric W. Weisstein, on pi (1), e (2), Khinchin's Constant (3), irrational numbers (4), transcendental numbers (5), and irrationality measures (6) at Wolfram MathWorld, all articles accessed 15 December 2014.
Michel Waldschmidt, 2008, "An introduction to irrationality and transcendence methods," at The University of Arizona The Southwest Center for Arithmetic Geometry 2008 Arizona Winter School, March 15–19, 2008 (Special Functions and Transcendence), see 7, accessed 15 December 2014.
John Albert, posting date unknown, "Some unsolved problems in number theory" [from Victor Klee & Stan Wagon, "Old and New Unsolved Problems in Plane Geometry and Number Theory"], in University of Oklahoma Math 4513 course materials, see 8, accessed 15 December 2014.
.
.
.

.
Shelah S, Classification Theory, North-Holland, 1990
Keisler, HJ, "Ultraproducts which are not saturated." J. Symb Logic 32 (1967) 23—46.
Malliaris M, Shelah S, "A dividing line in simple unstable theories." http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.2140
Gurevich, Yuri, "Monadic Second-Order Theories," in J. Barwise, S. Feferman, eds., Model-Theoretic Logics (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985), 479–506.
Peretz, Assaf, "Geometry of forking in simple theories." J. Symbolic Logic Volume 71, Issue 1 (2006), 347–359.

Makowsky J, "Compactness, embeddings and definability," in Model-Theoretic Logics, eds Barwise and Feferman, Springer 1985 pps. 645–715.


Hrushovski, Ehud, "Kueker's conjecture for stable theories." Journal of Symbolic Logic Vol. 54, No. 1 (Mar., 1989), pp. 207–220.

Džamonja, Mirna, "Club guessing and the universal models." On PCF, ed. M. Foreman, (Banff, Alberta, 2004).


.







.
S. Gal, SEARCH GAMES, Academic Press, New York (1980).






