


Morlet wavelet




Morlet wavelet

 
In mathematics, the Morlet wavelet (or Gabor wavelet)1 is a wavelet composed of a complex exponential (carrier) multiplied by a Gaussian window (envelope). This wavelet is closely related to human perception, both hearing2 and vision.3
History
In 1946, physicist Dennis Gabor, applying ideas from quantum physics, introduced the use of Gaussian-windowed sinusoids for time-frequency decomposition, which he referred to as atoms, and which provide the best trade-off between spatial and frequency resolution.4 These are used in the Gabor transform, a type of short-time Fourier transform.5 In 1984, Jean Morlet introduced Gabor's work to the seismology community and, with Goupillaud and Grossmann, modified it to keep the same wavelet shape over equal octave intervals, resulting in the first formalization of the continuous wavelet transform.6 (See also Wavelet history)
Definition
The wavelet is defined as a constant 
 
 
 
  subtracted from a plane wave and then localised by a Gaussian window:7



where 
 
 
 
  is defined by the admissibility criterion and the normalisation constant 
 
 
 
  is:



The Fourier transform of the Morlet wavelet is:



The "central frequency" 
 
 
 
  is the position of the global maximum of 
 
 
 
  which, in this case, is given by the solution of the equation:



The parameter 
 
 
 
  in the Morlet wavelet allows trade between time and frequency resolutions. Conventionally, the restriction 
 
 
 
  is used to avoid problems with the Morlet wavelet at low 
 
 
 
  (high temporal resolution).
For signals containing only slowly varying frequency and amplitude modulations (audio, for example) it is not necessary to use small values of 
 
 
 
 . In this case, 
 
 
 
  becomes very small (e.g. 
 
 
 
 ) and is, therefore, often neglected. Under the restriction 
 
 
 
 , the frequency of the Morlet wavelet is conventionally taken to be 
 
 
 
 .
The wavelet exists as a complex version or a purely real-valued version. Some distinguish between the "real Morlet" vs the "complex Morlet".8 Others consider the complex version to be the "Gabor wavelet", while the real-valued version is the "Morlet wavelet".910
Matlab function
[PSI,X] = morlet(LB,UB,N) returns values of the Morlet wavelet on an N point regular grid in the interval [LB,UB].
Output arguments are the wavelet function PSI computed on the grid X, and the grid X.
This wavelet has [-4 4] as effective support. Although [-4 4] is the correct theoretical effective support, a wider effective support, [-8 8], is used in the computation to provide more accurate results. 11
Use in medicine
The Morlet wavelet transform method presented offers an intuitive bridge between frequency and time information which can clarify interpretation of complex head trauma spectra obtained with Fourier transform. The Morlet wavelet transform, however, is not intended as a replacement for the Fourier transform, but rather a supplement that allows qualitative access to time related changes and takes advantage of the multiple dimensions available in a free induction decay analysis.12
Use in music
The Morlet wavelet transform method is applied to music transcription. It produces very accurate result that is not possible before using Fourier transform. It is able to capture short bursts of repeating and alternate music note. Each note has a clear start and end time in Morlet transform.
Application in the electrocardiogram
The application of the Morlet wavelet analysis in the electrocardiogram (ECG) is mainly to discriminate the abnormal heartbeat behavior. Since the variation of the abnormal heartbeat is a non-stationary signal, then this signal is suitable for wavelet-based analysis. 13
See also

Constant Q transform

References



P. Goupillaud, A. Grossman, and J. Morlet. Cycle-Octave and Related Transforms in Seismic Signal Analysis. Geoexploration, 23:85-102, 1984
N. Delprat, B. Escudié, P. Guillemain, R. Kronland-Martinet, P. Tchamitchian, and B. Torrésani. Asymptotic wavelet and Gabor analysis: extraction of instantaneous frequencies. IEEE Trans. Inf. Th., 38:644-664, 1992

"
Category:Continuous wavelets



A Real-Time Gabor Primal Sketch for Visual Attention "The Gabor kernel satisfies the admissibility condition for wavelets, thus being suited for multi-resolution analysis. Apart from a scale factor, it is also known as the Morlet Wavelet."

J. G. Daugman. Uncertainty relation for resolution in space, spatial frequency, and orientation optimized by two-dimensional visual cortical filters. Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 2(7):1160–1169, July 1985.

Time-Frequency Dictionaries, Mallat
http://rocksolidimages.com/pdf/gabor.pdf

Matlab Wavelet Families - "Morlet Wavelet: morl" and "Complex Morlet Wavelets: cmor"
Mathematica documentation: GaborWavelet
Mathematica documentation: MorletWavelet

http://cds.ismrm.org/ismrm-2001/PDF3/0822.pdf





