


Complex geometry




Complex geometry

In mathematics, complex geometry is the study of complex manifolds and functions of many complex variables. Application of transcendental methods to algebraic geometry falls in this category, together with more geometric chapters of complex analysis.
Throughout this article, "analytic" is often dropped for simplicity; for instance, subvarieties or hypersurfaces refer to analytic ones. Following the convention in Wikipedia, varieties are assumed to be irreducible.
Definitions
An analytic subset of a complex-analytic manifold M is locally the zero-locus of some family of holomorphic functions on M. It is called an analytic subvariety if it is irreducible in the Zariski topology.
Line bundles and divisors
Throughout this section, X denotes a complex manifold. Accordance with the definitions of the paragraph "line bundles and divisors" in "projective varieties", let the regular functions on X denote 
 
 
 
  and its invertible subsheaf 
 
 
 
 .　And let　
 
 
 
  be the sheaf on X associated with 
 
 
 
 
  the total ring of fractions of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are the open affine charts. Then a global section of 
 
 
 
  (* means multiplicative group) is called a Cartier divisor on X.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of all isomorphism classes of line bundles on X. It is called the Picard group of X and is naturally isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 
 . Taking the short exact sequence of


 
  where the second map is 
 
 
 
  yields a homomorphism of groups:


 
  The image of a line bundle 
 
 
 
  under this map is denoted by 
 
 
 
 
  and is called the first Chern class of 
 
 
 
 .
A divisor D on X is a formal sum of hypersurfaces (subvariety of codimension one):


 
  that is locally a finite sum.1 The set of all divisors on X is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . It can be canonically identified with 
 
 
 
 . Taking the long exact sequence of the quotient 
 
 
 
 
 , one obtains a homomorphism:



A line bundle is said to be positive if its first Chern class is represented by a closed positive real 
 
 
 
 -form. Equivalently, a line bundle is positive if it admits a hermitian structure such that the induced connection has Griffiths-positive curvature. A complex manifold admitting a positive line bundle is kähler.
The Kodaira embedding theorem states that a line bundle on a compact kähler manifold is positive if and only if it is ample.
Complex vector bundles
Let X be a differentiable manifold. The basic invariant of a complex vector bundle 
 
 
 
  is the Chern class of the bundle. By definition, it is a sequence 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  is an element of 
 
 
 
  and that satisfies the following axioms:2



 
  for any differentiable map 
 
 
 
 .


 
  where F is another bundle and 
 
 



 
  for 
 
 
 
 .


 
  generates 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the canonical line bundle over 
 
 
 
 .

If L is a line bundle, then the Chern character of L is given by


 
 . More generally, if E is a vector bundle of rank r, then we have the formal factorization: 
 
 
 
  and then we set


 
 .
Methods from harmonic analysis
Some deep results in complex geometry are obtained with the aid of harmonic analysis.
Vanishing theorem
There are several versions of vanishing theorems in complex geometry for both compact and non-compact complex manifolds. They are however all based on the Bochner method.
See also

Bivector (complex)
Deformation Theory#Deformations of complex manifolds
Complex analytic space
GAGA
Several complex variables
Complex projective space
List of complex and algebraic surfaces
Enriques–Kodaira classification
Kähler manifold
Stein manifold
Pseudoconvexity
Kobayashi metric
Projective variety
Cousin problems
Cartan's theorems A and B
Hartogs' extension theorem
Calabi–Yau manifold
Mirror symmetry
Hermitian symmetric space
Complex Lie group
Hopf manifold
Hodge decomposition
Kobayashi–Hitchin correspondence
Lelong number
Multiplier ideal

References





E. H. Neville (1922) Prolegomena to Analytical Geometry in Anisotropic Euclidean Space of Three Dimensions, Cambridge University Press.

"
Category:Complex manifolds Category:Several complex variables



This last condition is automatic for a noetherian scheme or a compact complex manifold.↩
↩




