


Essential singularity




Essential singularity

 
In complex analysis, an essential singularity of a function is a "severe" singularity near which the function exhibits odd behavior.
The category essential singularity is a "left-over" or default group of singularities that are especially unmanageable: by definition they fit into neither of the other two categories of singularity that may be dealt with in some manner – removable singularities and poles.
Formal description
Consider an open subset U of the complex plane C. Let a be an element of U, and f : U \ {a} → C a meromorphic function. The point a is called an essential singularity of the function f if the singularity is neither a pole nor a removable singularity.
For example, the function f(z) = e1/z has an essential singularity at z = 0.
Alternate descriptions
Let a be a complex number, assume that f(z) is not defined at a but is analytic in some region U of the complex plane, and that every open neighbourhood of a has non-empty intersection with U.
If both


 
    and   
 
 
 
    exist, then a is a removable singularity of both f and 1/f.
If


 
    exists but   
 
 
 
    does not exist, then a is a zero of f and a pole of 1/f.
Similarly, if


 
    does not exist but   
 
 
 
    exists, then a is a pole of f and a zero of 1/f.
If neither


 
    nor   
 
 
 
    exists, then a is an essential singularity of both f and 1/f.
Another way to characterize an essential singularity is that the Laurent series of f at the point a has infinitely many negative degree terms (i.e., the principal part of the Laurent series is an infinite sum). A related definition is that if there is a point 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is not differentiable for any integer 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is an essential singularity of 
 
 
 
 .1
The behavior of holomorphic functions near their essential singularities is described by the Casorati–Weierstrass theorem and by the considerably stronger Picard's great theorem. The latter says that in every neighborhood of an essential singularity a, the function f takes on every complex value, except possibly one, infinitely many times.
References

Lars V. Ahlfors; Complex Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1979
Rajendra Kumar Jain, S. R. K. Iyengar; Advanced Engineering Mathematics. Page 920. Alpha Science International, Limited, 2004. ISBN 1-84265-185-4

External links

'' An Essential Singularity'' by Stephen Wolfram, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
Essential Singularity on Planet Math

"
Category:Complex analysis








