


42 (number)




42 (number)

42 (forty-two) is the natural number that succeeds 41 and precedes 43. The number has received considerable attention in popular culture resulting from its central appearance in The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy as the "Answer to The Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything".
Mathematics

Forty-two is a pronic number and an abundant number; its prime factorization 2 · 3 · 7 makes it the second sphenic number and also the second of the form { 2 · 3 · r }. As with all sphenic numbers of this form, the aliquot sum is abundant by 12. 42 is also the second sphenic number to be bracketed by twin primes; 30 is also a pronic number and also rests between two primes. 42 has a 14-member aliquot sequence 42, 54, 66, 78, 90, 144, 259, 45, 33, 15, 9, 4, 3, 1, 0 and is itself part of the aliquot sequence commencing with the first sphenic number 30. Further, 42 is the 10th member of the 3-aliquot tree.
It is the third primary pseudoperfect number.
It is a Catalan number. Consequently, 42 is the number of noncrossing partitions of a set of five elements, the number of triangulations of a heptagon, the number of rooted ordered binary trees with six leaves, the number of ways in which five pairs of nested parentheses can be arranged, etc.
It is an alternating sign matrix number, that is, the number of 4-by-4 alternating sign matrices.
It is the number of partitions of 10—the number of ways of expressing 10 as a sum of positive integers (note a different sense of partition from that above).

(Figure)
The 3 × 3 × 3 magic cube with rows summing to 42.


Given 27 same-size cubes whose nominal values progress from 1 to 27, a 3×3×3 magic cube can be constructed such that every row, column, and corridor, and every diagonal passing through the center, is composed of 3 cubes whose sum of values is 42.
It is the third pentadecagonal number. It is a meandric number and an open meandric number.
It is conjectured to be the scaling factor in the leading order term of the "sixth moment of the Riemann zeta function". In particular, Conrey & Ghosh have conjectured that
 
 



.
 
where the infinite product is over all prime numbers, p.12


42 is a Størmer number.
42 is the only known value that is the number of sets of four distinct positive integers a,b,c,d, each less than the value itself, such that ab-cd, ac-bd, and ad-bc are each multiples of the value. Whether there are other values remains an open question.3
42 is a (2,6)-perfect number (super-multiperfect), as 
 
 
4
42 is the resulting number of the original Smith number (4937775): Both the sum of its digits (4+9+3+7+7+7+5) and the sum of the digits in its prime factorization (3+5+5+(6+5+8+3+7)) result in 42.
The dimension of the Borel subalgebra in the exceptional Lie algebra e6 is 42.
42 is the largest number n such that there exist positive integers p,q,r with 1 - 1/n = 1/p + 1/q + 1/r
42 is the smallest number k such that for every Riemann surface C, #Aut(C) C) = k (2g -2) (Hurwitz's automorphisms theorem)
In base 10, this number is a Harshad number and a self number, while it is a repdigit in base 4 (as 222).
42 is a perfect score on the USA Math Olympiad (USAMO)5 and International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO).6
42 is the maximum of core points awarded in International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme.

Science

The atomic number of molybdenum.
The angle rounded to whole degrees for which a rainbow appears (the critical angle).
In 1966, mathematician Paul Cooper theorized that the fastest, most efficient way to travel across continents would be to bore a straight hollow tube directly through the Earth, connecting a set of antipodes, remove the air from the tube and fall through.7 The first half of the journey consists of free-fall acceleration, while the second half consists of an exactly equal deceleration. The time for such a journey works out to be 42 minutes. Even if the tube does not pass through the exact center of the Earth, the time for a journey powered entirely by gravity (known as a gravity train) always works out to be 42 minutes, so long as the tube remains friction-free, as while the force of gravity would be lessened, the distance traveled is reduced at an equal rate.89 (The same idea was proposed, without calculation by Lewis Carroll in 1893 in Sylvie and Bruno Concluded.10)

Technology

Magic numbers used by programmers:
 
In the TIFF image file format, the second 16-bit word of every file is 42, which is used together with the first word to indicate byte order.
In the reiser4 file system, 42 is the inode number of the root directory.
In the military IRIG 106 Chapter 10 data recording standard, the hex value 0x464F52545974776F (ASCII "FORTYtwo") is used as a magic number to identify directory blocks.

The GNU C Library, a set of standard routines available for use in computer programming, contains a function—memfrob()—which performs an XOR combination of a given variable and the binary pattern 00101010 (42) as an XOR cipher.
42 is the result given by the web search engines Google and Wolfram Alpha when the query "the answer to life the universe and everything" is entered as a search.
Tiling a plane using regular hexagons, which is honeycomb in appearance, is approximated in a topological sense to an accuracy of better than 1% using a stretcher bond brick pattern with bricks of 42 squares (6 by 7).11
The password expiration policy for a Microsoft Windows domain defaults to 42 days.12

Astronomy

Messier object M42, a magnitude 5.0 diffuse nebula in the constellation Orion, also known as the Orion Nebula
The New General Catalogue object NGC 42, a spiral galaxy in the constellation Pegasus
In January 2004, asteroid  was given the permanent name 25924 Douglasadams, for the author Douglas Adams who popularized the number 42 and died in 2001. Brian G. Marsden, the director of the Minor Planet Center and the secretary for the naming committee, remarked that, with even his initials in the provisional designation, "This was sort of made for him, wasn't it?"
Kepler-42, a red dwarf in the constellation Cygnus around which orbits the three smallest exoplanets found to date.

Religion

In Japanese culture, the number 42 is considered unlucky because the numerals when pronounced separately—"shi ni" (four two)—sound like the phrase, "unto death".13
There are 42 principles of Ma'at, the Ancient Egyptian personification of physical and moral law, order, and truth. In the judgment scene described in the Egyptian and the Book of the Coming/Going Forth by Day (the Book of the Dead (which evolved from the Coffin Texts and the Pyramid Texts)), there are 42 gods and goddesses of Egypt, personifying the principles of Ma'at. These 42 correspond to the 42 Nomes (Governmental Units) of Egypt. If the departed successfully answers all 42, s/he becomes an Osiris.
42 is the number with which God creates the Universe in Kabbalistic tradition. In Kabbalah, the most significant name is that of the En Sof (also known as "Ein Sof", "Infinite" or "Endless"), who is above the Sefirot (sometimes spelled "Sephirot").14 The Forty-Two-Lettered Name contains four combined names which are spelled in Hebrew letters (spelled in letters = 42 letters), which is the name of Azilut (or "Atziluth" "Emanation"). While there are obvious links between the Forty-Two Lettered Name of the Babylonian Talmud and the Kabbalah's Forty-Two Lettered Name, they are probably not identical because of the Kabbalah's emphasis on numbers. The Kabbalah also contains a Forty-Five Lettered Name and a Seventy-Two Lettered Name.
The number 42 appears in various contexts in Christianity. There are 42 generations (names) in the Gospel of Matthew's version of the Genealogy of Jesus; it is prophesied that for 42 months the Beast will hold dominion over the Earth (Revelation 13:5); 42 men of Beth-azmaveth were counted in the census of men of Israel upon return from exile (Ezra 2:24); God sent bears to maul 42 of the teenage boys who mocked Elisha for his baldness (2 Kings 2:23), etc.
In Judaism, the number (in the Babylonian Talmud, compiled 375 AD to 499 AD) of the "Forty-Two Lettered Name" ascribed to God. Rab (or Rabhs), a 3rd-century source in the Talmud stated "The Forty-Two Lettered Name is entrusted only to him who is pious, meek, middle-aged, free from bad temper, sober, and not insistent on his rights". [Source: Talmud Kidduschin 71a, Translated by Rabbi Dr. I. Epstein]. Maimonides felt that the original Talmudic Forty-Two Lettered Name was perhaps composed of several combined divine names [Maimonides "Moreh"]. The apparently unpronouncable Tetragrammaton provides the backdrop from the Twelve-Lettered Name and the Forty-Two Lettered Name of the Talmud.
The Gutenberg Bible is also known as the "42-line Bible", as the book contained 42 lines per page.
The Forty-Two Articles (1552), largely the work of Thomas Cranmer, were intended to summarise Anglican doctrine, as it now existed under the reign of Edward VI.
The Sutra of 42 Sections is a Buddhist scripture.

Popular culture
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
The number 42 is, in The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams, "The Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything", calculated by an enormous supercomputer over a period of 7.5 million years. Unfortunately, no one knows what the question is. Thus, to calculate the Ultimate Question, a special computer the size of a small planet was built from organic components and named "Earth". This appeared first in the radio play and later in the novelization of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. The fact that Adams named the episodes of the radio play "fits", the same archaic title for a chapter or section used by Lewis Carroll in "The Hunting of the Snark", suggests that Adams was influenced by Carroll's fascination with and frequent use of the number. The fourth book in the series, , contains 42 chapters. According to , 42 is the street address of Stavromula Beta. In 1994 Adams created the 42 Puzzle, a game based on the number 42. The phrase 'the answer to life, the universe and everything is' has exactly 42 characters, including the comma after 'life'.
The book 42: Douglas Adams' Amazingly Accurate Answer to Life, the Universe and Everything15 examines Adams' choice of the number 42 and also contains a compendium of some instances of the number in science, popular culture, and humour.
Works of Lewis Carroll
Lewis Carroll, who was a mathematician,16 made repeated use of this number in his writings.17
Examples of Carroll's use of 42:

Alice's Adventures in Wonderland has 42 illustrations.
Alice's attempts at multiplication (chapter two of Adventures in Wonderland) work if one uses base 18 to write the first answer, and increases the base by threes to 21, 24, etc. (the answers working up to 4 × 12 = "19" in base 39), but "breaks" precisely when one reaches base 42, leading Alice to declare "oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate!"
Rule Forty-two in Alice's Adventures in Wonderland ("All persons more than a mile high to leave the court").
Rule 42 of the Code in the preface18 to The Hunting of the Snark ("No one shall speak to the Man at the Helm").
In "fit the first" of The Hunting of the Snark the Baker had "forty-two boxes, all carefully packed, With his name painted clearly on each."19
The White Queen announces her age as "one hundred and one, five months and a day", which—if the best possible date is assumed for the action of Through the Looking-Glass—gives a total of 37,044 days. If the Red Queen, as part of the same chess set, is regarded as the same age, their combined age is 74,088 days, or 42 × 42 × 42. Some commentators have asserted that this is deliberate on Carroll's part.20

Music

Level 42 is an English pop/rock music band.
"42" is one of the tracks on Coldplay's 2008 album Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends.
"Channel 42" is a track from deadmau5' 2012 album Album Title Goes Here.
"42" is a track by The Disco Biscuits and was written by Marc Brownstein.

Television and film

The Kumars at No. 42 television series. In 2003, Sanjeev Bhaskar hosted a BBC show nominating The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy as Britain's Best Loved Book.
A made for TV movie 42: Forty Two Up—an installment in a series of documentaries wherein the director revisits the same group of British-born individuals every 7 years.21
"42" is an episode of Doctor Who, set in real time lasting approximately 42 minutes.
On the game show Jeopardy!, "Watson" the IBM supercomputer, has 42 "threads" in its avatar.22
42 (film) is a film on the life of American baseball player Jackie Robinson.
42 is one of the numbers in the television series Lost, showing up frequently in various aspects of the show.

Video games

42 Entertainment is the company responsible for several alternate reality games, including I Love Bees, Year Zero, and Why So Serious.
In Spore, reaching the center of the galaxy yields a powerful item known as the "Staff of Life" which has a limited 42 uses. It also grants the player an achievement titled "42".
In Left 4 Dead 2, 42 is the number of Moustachios that must be shot in the Dark Carnival campaign's Whack-a-Mole style mini-game in order to unlock the STACH WACKER achievement.

Sports
(Figure)
Jackie Robinson in his now-retired number 42 jersey.


The jersey number of Jackie Robinson, which is the only number retired by all Major League Baseball teams. Although the number was retired in 1997, Mariano Rivera of the New York Yankees, the last professional baseball player to wear number 42, continued to wear it until he retired at the end of the 2013 season. As of the 2014 season, no player will ever again wear the number 42 in Major League Baseball except on Jackie Robinson Day (April 15), when all uniformed personnel (players, managers, coaches, and umpires) wear the number.
The jersey number of basketball Hall of Famer and one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History James Worthy, small forward for the Los Angeles Lakers, who retired his jersey number in 1995.
The jersey number of American football Hall of Fame, Ronnie Lott, safety for the San Francisco 49ers, who retired his jersey number in 2003.
The jersey number of Chicago Bears legend Sid Luckman, which was retired by the Bears.
The jersey number of American football player Pat Tillman, which was retired on November 13, 2004 by Arizona State University.
The jersey number of baseball Hall of Famer Bruce Sutter, retired by the St. Louis Cardinals on September 17, 2006.
The number of laws of cricket
Rule 42 is the historic name of a Gaelic Athletic Association rule (now codified in Rule 5.1 and Rule 44) that in practice prohibits the playing of "foreign sports" (generally association football and the rugby codes) at GAA grounds.
42 is the number of a NASCAR car owned by Chip Ganassi Racing. , it is driven by Kyle Larson.

Gaming

The name of a Texan trick-taking game played with dominoes (see 42 (dominoes)).
The number of spots (or pips, circular patches or pits) on a pair of standard six-sided dice.
There are 42 eyes in a standard deck of playing cards.

Other fields

+42 is the historic Country calling code for the former country of Czechoslovakia.
There are 42 US gallons in a barrel of oil.
42 is the number of the French department of Loire. The number is also reflected in the postal code for that area.
Bill Clinton is the 42nd president of the United States of America.
The board game Risk (game) has forty-two territories
Tower 42 is a skyscraper in the City of London, formerly known as the NatWest Tower.
In New York City, 42nd Street is a main and very popular two-way thoroughfare. Landmarks on it include the Chrysler Building, Grand Central Terminal, the main branch of the New York Public Library, and Times Square. The Headquarters of the United Nations is at the east end of the street. The New York City street is also the setting for a movie by the same name (which also gave fame to its eponymous title song), and which later inspired a musical adaptation, 42nd Street.
The jersey number of Michael J. Fox's character, Scott Howard in the 1985 film Teen Wolf.

Other languages




Language

Translation





Afrikaans

twee-en-veertig



Arabic

إثنان و أربعون



Basque

Berrogeita bi



Belarusian

Сорак два



Bulgarian

четиридесет и две



Catalan

quaranta-dos



Chinese

四十二 (肆拾贰)



Chuvash

хĕрĕх иккĕ (IIXXXX)



Croatian

četrdesetdva



Czech

čtyřicet dva



Danish

toogfyrre



Dutch

tweeënveertig



Esperanto

kvardek du



Estonian

nelikümmend kaks



Finnish

neljäkymmentäkaksi



Filipino

apatnapu't dalawa



French

quarante-deux



Frisian

twaenfjirtich



Georgian

ორმოცდაორი [ormocdaori]



German

zweiundvierzig



Greek

σαράντα δύο



Hebrew

ארבעים ושתיים (arbayim u-shtayim)



Hindi

बयालीस, ४२



Hungarian

negyvenkettő



Icelandic

fjörutíu og tveir



Indonesian

empat puluh dua



Irish

daichead ceathar



Italian

quarantadue



Japanese

四十二 (よんじゅうに)



Kazakh

Қырық екі



Korean

사십이 (마흔둘)



Kannada

Nalavath yeradu



Latvian

četrdesmit divi



Livonian

nēļakimdõ kakš



Lietuvių

keturiasdešimt du



Lojban

vore



Luxembourgish

zweeavéierzeg



Macedonian

четириесет и два



Malayalam

നാല്പത്തിരണ്ടു



Maltese

tnejn u erbgħin



Māori

whā tekau ma rua



Marathi

bechalis



Mongolian

дөчин хоёр



Norwegian

førtito



Persian

چهل و دو



Polish

czterdzieści dwa



Portuguese

quarenta e dois



Romanian

patruzeci și doi



Russian

сорок два



Serbian

четрдесет и два (alt. четрдесет два)



Sinhala

හතලිස් දෙක (Hathalis Deka)



Slovene

dvainštirideset



Slovak

štyridsaťdva



Somali

laba iyo afartan



Spanish

cuarenta y dos



Swedish

fyrtiotvå



Tagalog

apatnapu't dalawa



Tamil

நாற்பத்திரண்டு (Narpatti Errundu)



Telugu

నలభై రెండు (Nalabai Rendu)



Thai

สี่สิบสอง



Turkish

kırk iki



Ukrainian

Сорок два



Urdu

بیالیس



Vietnamese

bốn mươi hai



Welsh

pedwar-deg-dau, dau-ar-ddeugain



References
External links


My latest favorite Number: 42, John C. Baez

"
4 2 Category:In-jokes



J. B. Conrey & A. Ghosh, "A conjecture for the sixth power moment of the Riemann zeta-function" International Mathematics Research Notices (1998)
J. B. Conrey & S. M. Gonek, "High moments of the Riemann zeta-function" Duke Math J. 107 3 (2001): 577–604
Differently Perfect – mathpages.com
Sequence A019283 in OEIS
Alex Zhai ties for second-highest score in 2007 USA Mathematical Olympiad – By Andrew Lovdahl Gargoyle staff reporter Posted Monday, May 7, 2007, The OG, news & student awards – Online Gargoyle
CBC News staff, "Canadian math champ's skills add up to a perfect score" CBC News July 20, 2004. "A 16-year-old Canadian was one of four students who achieved a perfect score at an international mathematics competition. Jacob Tsimerman of Toronto scored 42 out of 42, making him one of 45 individual gold medallists at the 45th International Mathematical Olympiad in Athens."






Niiya, Brian. Japanese American history: an A-to-Z reference from 1868 to the present. Facts on File, Inc., 1993, p. 352


Lewis Carroll and Douglas Adams
The Mystery of Lewis Carroll, Jenny Woolf
The Hunting of the Snark, by Lewis Carroll
The Hunting of the Snark, by Lewis Carroll
What Lewis Carroll Taught Us: Alice's creator knew all about role-playing. by Seth Lerer, March 4, 2010
42: Forty Two Up at IMDb
http://www.slate.com/id/2284721/ Ken Jennings




