


Tangent vector




Tangent vector


For a more general, but much more technical, treatment of tangent vectors, see tangent space.


In mathematics, a tangent vector is a vector that is tangent to a curve or surface at a given point. Tangent vectors are described in the differential geometry of curves in the context of curves in Rn. More generally, tangent vectors are elements of a tangent space of a differentiable manifold. Tangent vectors can also be described in terms of germs. In other words, a tangent vector at the point 
 
 
 
  is a linear derivation of the algebra defined by the set of germs at 
 
 
 
 .
Motivation
Before proceeding to a general definition of the tangent vector, we discuss its use in calculus and its tensor properties.
Calculus
Let 
 
 
 
  be a parametric smooth curve. The tangent vector is given by 
 
 
 
 , where we have used the a prime instead of the usual dot to indicate differentiation with respect to parameter t.1 the unit tangent vector is given by



Example
Given the curve


 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the unit tangent vector at time 
 
 
 
  is given by



Contravariance
If 
 
 
 
  is given parametrically in the n-dimensional coordinate system xi (here we have used superscripts as an index instead of the usual subscript) by 
 
 
 
  or


 
  then the tangent vector field 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  Under a change of coordinates


 
  the tangent vector 
 
 
 
  in the ui-coordinate system is given by


 
  where we have used the Einstein summation convention. Therefore, a tangent vector of a smooth curve will transform as a contravariant tensor of order one under a change of coordinates.2
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a differentiable function and let 
 
 
 
  be a vector in 
 
 
 
 . We define the directional derivative in the 
 
 
 
  direction at a point 
 
 
 
  by


 
  The tangent vector at the point 
 
 
 
  may then be defined3 as



Properties
Let 
 
 
 
  be differentiable functions, let 
 
 
 
  be tangent vectors in 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
 . Then











Tangent Vector on Manifolds
Let 
 
 
 
  be a differentiable manifold and let 
 
 
 
  be the algebra of real-valued differentiable functions 
 
 
 
 . Then the tangent vector to 
 
 
 
  at a point 
 
 
 
  in the manifold is given by the derivation

 
  which shall be linear — i.e., for any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  Note that the derivation will by defintion have the Leibniz property



References


Bibliography


.

.

.

"
Category:Vectors



J. Stewart (2001)↩
D. Kay (1988)↩
A. Gray (1993)↩




