


Pole (complex analysis)




Pole (complex analysis)

 In the mathematical field of complex analysis, a pole of a meromorphic function is a certain type of singularity that behaves like the singularity of 
 
 
 
  at z = 0. For a pole of the function f(z) at point a the function approaches infinity as z approaches a.
Definition
Formally, suppose U is an open subset of the complex plane C, a is an element of U and f : U \ {a} → C is a function which is holomorphic over its domain. If there exists a holomorphic function g : U → C, such that g(a) is nonzero, and a positive integer n, such that for all z in U \ {a}


 
  holds, then a is called a pole of f. The smallest such n is called the order of the pole. A pole of order 1 is called a simple pole.
A few authors allow the order of a pole to be zero, in which case a pole of order zero is either a regular point or a removable singularity. However, it is more usual to require the order of a pole to be positive.
From above several equivalent characterizations can be deduced:
If n is the order of pole a, then necessarily g(a) ≠ 0 for the function g in the above expression. So we can put



for some h that is holomorphic in an open neighborhood of a and has a zero of order n at a. So informally one might say that poles occur as reciprocals of zeros of holomorphic functions.
Also, by the holomorphy of g, f can be expressed as:



This is a Laurent series with finite principal part. The holomorphic function 
 
 
 
  (on U) is called the regular part of f. So the point a is a pole of order n of f if and only if all the terms in the Laurent series expansion of f around a below degree −n vanish and the term in degree −n is not zero.
Pole at infinity
A complex function can be defined as having a pole at the point at infinity. In this case U has to be a neighborhood of infinity, such as the exterior of any closed ball. To use the previous definition, a meaning for g being holomorphic at ∞ is needed. Alternately, a definition can be given starting from the definition at a finite point by suitably mapping the point at infinity to a finite point. The map 
 
 
 
  does that. Then, by definition, a function f holomorphic in a neighborhood of infinity has a pole at infinity if the function 
 
 
 
  (which will be holomorphic in a neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 ), has a pole at 
 
 
 
 , the order of which will be regarded as the order of the pole of f at infinity.
Pole of a function on a complex manifold
In general, having a function 
 
 
 
  that is holomorphic in a neighborhood, 
 
 
 
 , of the point 
 
 
 
 , in the complex manifold M, it is said that f has a pole at a of order n if, having a chart

 
 , the function 
 
 
 
  has a pole of order n at 
 
 
 
  (which can be taken as being zero if a convenient choice of the chart is made). ] The pole at infinity is the simplest nontrivial example of this definition in which M is taken to be the Riemann sphere and the chart is taken to be 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

The function










has a pole of order 1 or simple pole at 
 
 
 
 .
 


The function










has a pole of order 2 at 
 
 
 
  and a pole of order 3 at 
 
 
 
 .
 


The function










has poles of order 1 at 
 
 
 
  To see that, write 
 
 
 
  in Taylor series around the origin.
 


The function










has a single pole at infinity of order 1.
 

Terminology and generalizations
If the first derivative of a function f has a simple pole at a, then a is a branch point of f. (The converse need not be true).
A non-removable singularity that is not a pole or a branch point is called an essential singularity.
A complex function which is holomorphic except for some isolated singularities and whose only singularities are poles is called meromorphic.
See also

Control theory#Stability
Filter design
Filter (signal processing)
Nyquist stability criterion
Pole–zero plot
Residue (complex analysis)
Zero (complex analysis)

External links


Module for Zeros and Poles by John H. Mathews

"
Category:Meromorphic functions


