


Removable singularity




Removable singularity

 In complex analysis, a removable singularity of a holomorphic function is a point at which the function is undefined, but it is possible to define the function at that point in such a way that the function is regular in a neighbourhood of that point.
For instance, the (unnormalized) sinc function



has a singularity at z = 0. This singularity can be removed by defining f(0) := 1, which is the limit of f as z tends to 0. The resulting function is holomorphic. In this case the problem was caused by f being given an indeterminate form. Taking a power series expansion for 
 
 
 
  shows that



Formally, if 
 
 
 
  is an open subset of the complex plane

 
 , 
 
 
 
  a point of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a holomorphic function, then 
 
 
 
  is called a removable singularity for 
 
 
 
  if there exists a holomorphic function 
 
 
 
  which coincides with 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . We say 
 
 
 
  is holomorphically extendable over 
 
 
 
  if such a 
 
 
 
  exists.
Riemann's theorem
Riemann's theorem on removable singularities states when a singularity is removable:
' Theorem.' Let 
 
 
 
  be an open subset of the complex plane, 
 
 
 
  a point of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  a holomorphic function defined on the set 
 
 
 
 . The following are equivalent:



 
  is holomorphically extendable over 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is continuously extendable over 
 
 
 
 .
There exists a neighborhood of 
 
 
 
  on which 
 
 
 
  is bounded.


 
 .

The implications 1 ⇒ 2 ⇒ 3 ⇒ 4 are trivial. To prove 4 ⇒ 1, we first recall that the holomorphy of a function at 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to it being analytic at 
 
 
 
  (proof), i.e. having a power series representation. Define



Clearly, h is holomorphic on D \ {a}, and there exists


 
  by 4, hence h is holomorphic on D and has a Taylor series about a:



We have c0 = h(a) = 0 and c1 = h{{'}}(a) = 0; therefore



Hence, where z≠a, we have:



However,



is holomorphic on D, thus an extension of f.
Other kinds of singularities
Unlike functions of a real variable, holomorphic functions are sufficiently rigid that their isolated singularities can be completely classified. A holomorphic function's singularity is either not really a singularity at all, i.e. a removable singularity, or one of the following two types:

In light of Riemann's theorem, given a non-removable singularity, one might ask whether there exists a natural number 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . If so, 
 
 
 
  is called a pole of 
 
 
 
  and the smallest such 
 
 
 
  is the order of 
 
 
 
 . So removable singularities are precisely the poles of order 0. A holomorphic function blows up uniformly near its poles.
If an isolated singularity 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is neither removable nor a pole, it is called an essential singularity. The Great Picard Theorem shows that such an 
 
 
 
  maps every punctured open neighborhood 
 
 
 
  to the entire complex plane, with the possible exception of at most one point.

See also

Analytic capacity
Removable discontinuity

External links

Removable singular point at Encyclopedia of Mathematics

"
Category:Analytic functions Category:Meromorphic functions


