


Gradian




Gradian

The gradian is a unit of plane angle, equivalent to 
 
 
 
  of a turn.1
It is also known as gon, grad, or grade. One grad equals 
 
 
 
  of a degree or 
 
 
 
  of a radian. In continental Europe, the French term centigrade was in use for one hundredth of a grad, and the term myriograde was in use for one ten-thousandth of a grad. This was one reason for the adoption of the term Celsius to replace centigrade as the name of the temperature scale.23
History
The unit originated in France as the grade, along with the metric system, hence it is occasionally referred to a "metric degree." Due to confusion with existing grad(e) units of northern Europe, the name gon was later adopted, first in those regions, later as the international standard. In German, the unit was formerly also called Neugrad (new degree), likewise Nygrad in Swedish, Danish and Norwegian (also Gradian), and Nýgráða in Icelandic.
Although attempts at a general introduction were made, the unit was only adopted in some countries and for specialised areas such as surveying. The French artillery has used the grad for decades. The degree, 
 
 
 
  of a circle, or the mathematically more convenient radian, 
 
 
 
  of a circle (used in the SI system of units) are generally used instead.
In the 1970s and 80s most scientific calculators offered the grad as well as radians and degrees for their trigonometric functions4 In the 2010s most scientific calculators have tended to offer degrees and radians only, but retained the ability to convert to Grad.5
The international standard symbol for this unit today is "gon" (see ISO 31-1). Other symbols used in the past include "gr", "grd", and "g", the last sometimes written as a superscript, similarly to a degree sign: 50g = 45°. "Grad" was commonly used on calculators with LCD displays, as "DEG", "GRAD", and "RAD" could all be represented as a subsection of a panel with the letters "DEGRAD".
Benefits
Each quadrant is assigned a range of 100 gon, which eases recognition of the four quadrants, as well as arithmetic involving perpendicular or opposite angles.




0°

=

0 gradians



90°

=

100 grad



180°

=

200 grade



270°

=

300 gon



360°

=

400 gradians





One advantage of this unit is that right angles to a given angle are easily determined. If one is sighting down a compass course of 117 grad, the direction to one's left is 17 grad, to one's right 217 grad and behind one 317 grad. A disadvantage is that the common angles of 30° and 60° in geometry must be expressed in fractions (33
 
 
 
  grad and 66
 
 
 
  grade, respectively). Similarly, in one hour (
 
 
 
  day), Earth rotates by 15° or 16
 
 
 
  gon.
Originally, 1 gradians of arc along the Earth's surface was equal to 100 kilometers of distance at the equator; therefore 1 centigrad of arc equals 1 kilometer.6
Gradians are also convenient when working with vectors on the complex plane. The exponent of the imaginary unit on any given vector is equal to its angle (argument) in hectogradians (100 grad) from the positive x-axis
 
 
 
  has an argument of 
 
 
 
  grade.
Use in surveying
In surveying, the gradian is the default unit of angles in many parts of the world.7 Subdivisions of gradian used in surveying can be referred to as c and cc (1 c = 0.01 grad; 1 cc = 0.0001 grad).
Conversion of some common angles




Units

Values





Turns  

0



Radians

0



Degrees  

0°



Gon

0g



See also

Angular frequency
Angular mil (military measurement)
Harmonic analysis
Steradian (the "square radian")
Trigonometry
cent (music)
centitone

References


External links

Gradian at MathWorld
Ask Dr Math
grade
gon
centigrade
Dictionary of Units

"
Category:Units of angle Category:Decimalisation



↩
. On [http://books.google.com/books?id=IwwAAAAAMBAJ&pg;;=PA42 p. 42] Frasier argues for using grads instead of radians as a standard unit of angle, but for renaming grads to "radials" instead of renaming the temperature scale.↩
↩
↩
↩
Cartographie – lecture de carte – Partie H Quelques exemples à retenir↩
.↩




