


Adjugate matrix




Adjugate matrix

In linear algebra, the adjugate, classical adjoint, or adjunct of a square matrix is the transpose of the cofactor matrix.
The adjugate has sometimes been called the "adjoint", but today the "adjoint" of a matrix normally refers to its corresponding adjoint operator, which is its conjugate transpose.
Definition
The adjugate of A is the transpose of the cofactor matrix C of A:


 
 .
In more detail: suppose R is a commutative ring and A is an n×n matrix with entries from R.

The (i,j) minor of A, denoted Aij, is the determinant of the (n − 1)×(n − 1) matrix that results from deleting row i and column j of A.


The cofactor matrix of A is the n×n matrix C whose (i,j) entry is the (i,j) cofactor of A:





 
 .
 




The adjugate of A is the transpose of C, that is, the n×n matrix whose (i,j) entry is the (j,i) cofactor of A:





 
 .
 



The adjugate is defined as it is so that the product of A and its adjugate yields a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are det(A):


 
 .
A is invertible if and only if det(A) is an invertible element of R, and in that case the equation above yields:


 
 ,


 
 .
Examples
2 × 2 generic matrix
The adjugate of the 2 × 2 matrix


 
  is


 
 . It is seen that det(adj(A)) = det(A) and adj(adj(A)) = A.
3 × 3 generic matrix
Consider the 
 
 
 
  matrix


 
  Its adjugate is the transpose of the cofactor matrix


 
  So that we have


 
  where


 
 .
Therefore C, the matrix of cofactors for A, is



The adjugate is the transpose of the cofactor matrix. Thus, for instance, the (3,2) entry of the adjugate is the (2,3) cofactor of A. (In this example, C happens to be its own transpose, so adj(A) = C.)
3 × 3 numeric matrix
As a specific example, we have


 
 .
The −6 in the third row, second column of the adjugate was computed as follows:



Again, the (3,2) entry of the adjugate is the (2,3) cofactor of A. Thus, the submatrix


 
  was obtained by deleting the second row and third column of the original matrix A.
Properties
The adjugate has the properties








 
  for n×n matrices A and B. The second line follows from equations adj(B)adj(A) = det(B)B−1 det(A)A−1 = det(AB)(AB)−1. Substituting in the second line B = Am − 1 and performing the recursion, one gets for all integer m


 
  The adjugate preserves transposition:



Furthermore,





 
  so if n = 2 and A is invertible, then det(adj(A)) = det(A) and adj(adj(A)) = A.
Taking the adjugate 
 
 
 
  times of an invertible matrix 
 
 
 
  yields:






Inverses
As a consequence of Laplace's formula for the determinant of an n×n matrix A, one has  where 
 
 
 
  is the n×n identity matrix. Indeed, the (i,i) entry of the product A adj(A) is the scalar product of row i of A with row i of the cofactor matrix C, which is simply the Laplace formula for det(A) expanded by row i.
Moreover, for i ≠ j the (i,j) entry of the product is the scalar product of row i of A with row j of C, which is the Laplace formula for the determinant of a matrix whose i and j rows are equal and is therefore zero.
From this formula follows one of the most important results in matrix algebra: A matrix A over a commutative ring 
 
 
 
  is invertible if and only if det(A) is invertible in 
 
 
 
 .
For, if A is an invertible matrix, then


 
  and equation (*) above implies



Similarly, the resolvent of A is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the characteristic polynomial of A. .
Characteristic polynomial
If p(t) = det(A − t I) is the characteristic polynomial of A and we define the polynomial 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the coefficients of p(t),



(NB. The 
 
 
 
  defined here differs by an over-all factor of (−)n from the conventional definition linked and the one utilized in the previous subsection.)
Jacobi's formula
The adjugate also appears in Jacobi's formula for the derivative of the determinant:



Cayley–Hamilton formula
Cayley–Hamilton theorem allows the adjugate of A to be represented in terms of traces and powers of A:


 
  where n is the dimension of A, and the sum is taken over s and all sequences of kl ≥ 0 satisfying the linear Diophantine equation


 
  For the 2×2 case this gives


 
  For the 3×3 case this gives


 
  For the 4×4 case this gives



See also

Trace diagram

References



External links

Matrix Reference Manual
Online matrix calculator (determinant, track, inverse, adjoint, transpose) Compute Adjugate matrix up to order 8


"
Category:Matrix theory Category:Linear algebra


