


Four-momentum




Four-momentum

In special relativity, four-momentum is the generalization of the classical three-dimensional momentum to four-dimensional spacetime. Momentum is a vector in three dimensions; similarly four-momentum is a four-vector in spacetime. The contravariant four-momentum of a particle with energy 
 
 
 
  and three-momentum , where 
 
 
 
  is the particles  and 
 
 
 
  the Lorentz factor, is



The quantity 
 
 
 
  of above is ordinary non-relativistic momentum of the particle and 
 
 
 
  its rest mass. The four-momentum is useful in relativistic calculations because it is a Lorentz vector. This means that it is easy to keep track of how it transforms under Lorentz transformations.
The above definition applies under the coordinate convention that . Some authors use the convention , which yields a modified definition with . It is also possible to define covariant four-momentum  where the sign of the energy is reversed.
Minkowski norm
Calculating the Minkowski norm of the four-momentum gives a Lorentz invariant quantity equal (up to factors of the speed of light

 
 ) to the square of the particle's proper mass:



where we use the convention that



is the metric tensor of special relativity. The fact that the norm is negative reflects that the momentum is a timelike  for massive particles.
The Minkowski norm is Lorentz invariant, meaning its value is not changed by Lorentz transformations/boosting into different frames of reference. More generally, for any two  
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the quantity 
 
 
 
  is invariant.
Relation to four-velocity
For a massive particle, the four-momentum is given by the particle's invariant mass m multiplied by the particle's four-velocity,



where the four-velocity 
 
 
 
  is



and



is the Lorentz factor, 
 
 
 
  is the speed of light.
Conservation of four-momentum
The conservation of the four-momentum yields two conservation laws for "classical" quantities:

The total energy  is conserved.
The classical three-momentum p is conserved.

Note that the invariant mass of a system of particles may be more than the sum of the particles' rest masses, since kinetic energy in the system center-of-mass frame and potential energy from forces between the particles contribute to the invariant mass. As an example, two particles with four-momenta  and  each have (rest) mass 3 GeV/c2 separately, but their total mass (the system mass) is 10 GeV/c2. If these particles were to collide and stick, the mass of the composite object would be 10 GeV/c2.
One practical application from particle physics of the conservation of the invariant mass involves combining the four-momenta  and  of two daughter particles produced in the decay of a heavier particle with four-momentum  to find the mass of the heavier particle. Conservation of four-momentum gives , while the mass 
 
 
 
  of the heavier particle is given by . By measuring the energies and three-momenta of the daughter particles, one can reconstruct the invariant mass of the two-particle system, which must be equal to 
 
 
 
 . This technique is used, e.g., in experimental searches for Z′ bosons at high-energy particle colliders, where the Z′ boson would show up as a bump in the invariant mass spectrum of electron–positron or muon–antimuon pairs.
If the mass of an object does not change, the Minkowski inner product of its four-momentum and corresponding four-acceleration  is simply zero. The four-acceleration is proportional to the proper time derivative of the four-momentum divided by the particle's mass, so



Canonical momentum in the presence of an electromagnetic potential
For a charged particle of charge

 
 , moving in an electromagnetic field given by the electromagnetic four-potential:



where 
 
 
 
  is the scalar potential and  the vector potential, the components of the canonical momentum four-vector 
 
 
 
  is



This, in turn, allows the potential energy from the charged particle in an electrostatic potential and the Lorentz force on the charged particle moving in a magnetic field to be incorporated in a compact way, in relativistic quantum mechanics.
See also

Four-force
Pauli–Lubanski pseudovector

References





"
Category:Minkowski spacetime Category:Theory of relativity


