


Spectrum (functional analysis)




Spectrum (functional analysis)

In functional analysis, the concept of the spectrum of a bounded operator is a generalisation of the concept of eigenvalues for matrices. Specifically, a complex number λ is said to be in the spectrum of a bounded linear operator T if λI − T is not invertible, where I is the identity operator. The study of spectra and related properties is known as spectral theory, which has numerous applications, most notably the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics.
The spectrum of an operator on a finite-dimensional vector space is precisely the set of eigenvalues. However an operator on an infinite-dimensional space may have additional elements in its spectrum, and may have no eigenvalues. For example, consider the right shift operator R on the Hilbert space ℓ2,


 
  This has no eigenvalues, since if Rx=λx then by expanding this expression we see that x1=0, x2=0, etc. On the other hand 0 is in the spectrum because the operator R − 0 (i.e. R itself) is not invertible: it is not surjective since any vector with non-zero first component is not in its range. In fact every bounded linear operator on a complex Banach space must have a non-empty spectrum.
The notion of spectrum extends to densely defined unbounded operators. In this case a complex number λ is said to be in the spectrum of such an operator T:D→X (where D is dense in X) if there is no bounded inverse (λI − T)−1:X→D. If T is a closed operator (which includes the case that T is a bounded operator), boundedness of such inverses follows automatically if the inverse exists at all.
The space of bounded linear operators B(X) on a Banach space X is an example of a unital Banach algebra. Since the definition of the spectrum does not mention any properties of B(X) except those that any such algebra has, the notion of a spectrum may be generalised to this context by using the same definition verbatim.
Spectrum of a bounded operator
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a bounded linear operator acting on a Banach space 
 
 
 
  over the scalar field 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  be the identity operator on 
 
 
 
 . The spectrum of 
 
 
 
  is the set of all 
 
 
 
  for which the operator 
 
 
 
  does not have an inverse that is a bounded linear operator.
Since 
 
 
 
  is a linear operator, the inverse is linear if it exists; and, by the bounded inverse theorem, it is bounded. Therefore the spectrum consists precisely of those scalars 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is not bijective.
The spectrum of a given operator 
 
 
 
  is often denoted 
 
 
 
 , and its complement, the resolvent set, is denoted 
 
 
 
 .
Spectrum and eigenvalues
If 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
 , then the operator 
 
 
 
  is not one-to-one, and therefore its inverse 
 
 
 
  is not defined. However, the converse statement is not true: the operator 
 
 
 
  may not have an inverse, even if 
 
 
 
  is not an eigenvalue. Thus the spectrum of an operator always contains all its eigenvalues, but is not limited to them.
For example, consider the Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 , that consists of all bi-infinite sequences of real numbers


 
  that have a finite sum of squares 
 
 
 
 . The bilateral shift operator 
 
 
 
  simply displaces every element of the sequence by one position; namely if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  for every integer 
 
 
 
 . The eigenvalue equation 
 
 
 
  has no solution in this space, since it implies that all the values 
 
 
 
  have the same absolute value (if 
 
 
 
 ) or are a geometric progression (if 
 
 
 
 ); either way, the sum of their squares would not be finite. However, the operator 
 
 
 
  is not invertible if 
 
 
 
 . For example, the sequence 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
 ; but there is no sequence 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  (that is, 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 ).
Basic properties
The spectrum of a bounded operator T is always a closed, bounded and non-empty subset of the complex plane.
If the spectrum were empty, then the resolvent function



would be defined everywhere on the complex plane and bounded. But it can be shown that the resolvent function R is holomorphic on its domain. By the vector-valued version of Liouville's theorem, this function is constant, thus everywhere zero as it is zero at infinity. This would be a contradiction.
The boundedness of the spectrum follows from the Neumann series expansion in λ; the spectrum σ(T) is bounded by ||T||. A similar result shows the closedness of the spectrum.
The bound ||T|| on the spectrum can be refined somewhat. The spectral radius, r(T), of T is the radius of the smallest circle in the complex plane which is centered at the origin and contains the spectrum σ(T) inside of it, i.e.



The spectral radius formula says1 that for any element 
 
 
 
  of a Banach algebra,



Classification of points in the spectrum of an operator
A bounded operator 
 
 
 
  on a Banach space is invertible, i.e. has a bounded inverse, if and only if 
 
 
 
  is bounded below and has dense range. Accordingly, the spectrum of 
 
 
 
  can be divided into the following parts:



 
 , if 
 
 
 
  is not bounded below. In particular, this is the case if 
 
 
 
  is not injective, that is, 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue. The set of eigenvalues is called the point spectrum of 
 
 
 
  and denoted by 
 
 
 
 . Alternatively, 
 
 
 
  could be one-to-one but still not be bounded below. Such 
 
 
 
  is not an eigenvalue but still an approximate eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
  (eigenvalues themselves are also approximate eigenvalues). The set of approximate eigenvalues (which includes the point spectrum) is called the approximate point spectrum of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 .


 
 , if 
 
 
 
  does not have dense range. No notation is used to describe the set of all 
 
 
 
  which satisfy this condition, but for a subset: If 
 
 
 
  does not have dense range but is injective, 
 
 
 
  is said to be in the residual spectrum of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 .

Note that the approximate point spectrum and residual spectrum are not necessarily disjoint (however, the point spectrum and the residual spectrum are).
The following subsections provide more details on the three parts of 
 
 
 
  sketched above.
Point spectrum
If an operator is not injective (so there is some nonzero 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 ), then it is clearly not invertible. So if 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
 , one necessarily has 
 
 
 
 . The set of eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  is also called the point spectrum of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
Approximate point spectrum
More generally, T is not invertible if it is not bounded below; that is, if there is no c > 0 such that ||Tx|| ≥ c||x|| for all . So the spectrum includes the set of approximate eigenvalues, which are those λ such that  is not bounded below; equivalently, it is the set of λ for which there is a sequence of unit vectors x1, x2, ... for which


 
 .
The set of approximate eigenvalues is known as the approximate point spectrum, denoted by σap(T).
It is easy to see that the eigenvalues lie in the approximate point spectrum.
Example Consider the bilateral shift T on l2(Z) defined by



where the ˆ denotes the zero-th position. Direct calculation shows T has no eigenvalues, but every λ with |λ| = 1 is an approximate eigenvalue; letting xn be the vector



then ||xn|| = 1 for all n, but



Since T is a unitary operator, its spectrum lie on the unit circle. Therefore the approximate point spectrum of T is its entire spectrum. This is true for a more general class of operators.
A unitary operator is normal. By spectral theorem, a bounded operator on a Hilbert space is normal if and only if it is a multiplication operator. It can be shown that, in general, the approximate point spectrum of a bounded multiplication operator is its spectrum.
Residual spectrum
An operator may be injective, even bounded below, but not invertible. The unilateral shift on l 2(N) is such an example. This shift operator is an isometry, therefore bounded below by 1. But it is not invertible as it is not surjective. The set of λ for which λI - T is injective but does not have dense range is known as the residual spectrum or compression spectrum of T and is denoted by σr(T).
Continuous spectrum
The set of all λ for which λI - T is injective and has dense range, but is not surjective, is called the continuous spectrum of T, denoted by σc(T) . The continuous spectrum therefore consists of those approximate eigenvalues which are not eigenvalues and do not lie in the residual spectrum. That is,


 
 .
Peripheral spectrum
The peripheral spectrum of an operator is defined as the set of points in its spectrum which have modulus equal to its spectral radius.
Example
The hydrogen atom provides an example of this decomposition. The eigenfunctions of the hydrogen atom Hamiltonian are called eigenstates and are grouped into two categories. The bound states of the hydrogen atom correspond to the discrete part of the spectrum (they have a discrete set of eigenvalues that can be computed by Rydberg formula) while the ionization processes are described by the continuous part (the energy of the collision/ionization is not quantized).
Further results
If T is a compact operator, then it can be shown that any nonzero λ in the spectrum is an eigenvalue. In other words, the spectrum of such an operator, which was defined as a generalization of the concept of eigenvalues, consists in this case only of the usual eigenvalues, and possibly 0.
If X is a Hilbert space and T is a normal operator, then a remarkable result known as the spectral theorem gives an analogue of the diagonalisation theorem for normal finite-dimensional operators (Hermitian matrices, for example).
Spectrum of an unbounded operator
One can extend the definition of spectrum for unbounded operators on a Banach space X, operators which are no longer elements in the Banach algebra B(X). One proceeds in a manner similar to the bounded case. A complex number λ is said to be in the resolvent set, that is, the complement of the spectrum of a linear operator



if the operator



has a bounded inverse, i.e. if there exists a bounded operator



such that



A complex number λ is then in the spectrum if this property fails to hold. One can classify the spectrum in exactly the same way as in the bounded case.
The spectrum of an unbounded operator is in general a closed, possibly empty, subset of the complex plane.
For λ to be in the resolvent (i.e. not in the spectrum), as in the bounded case λI − T must be bijective, since it must have a two-sided inverse. As before if an inverse exists then its linearity is immediate, but in general it may not be bounded, so this condition must be checked separately.
However, boundedness of the inverse does follow directly from its existence if one introduces the additional assumption that T is closed; this follows from the closed graph theorem. Therefore, as in the bounded case, a complex number λ lies in the spectrum of a closed operator T if and only if λI − T is not bijective. Note that the class of closed operators includes all bounded operators.
Via its spectral measures, one can define a decomposition of the spectrum of any self adjoint operator, bounded or otherwise into absolutely continuous, pure point, and singular parts.
Spectrum of a unital Banach algebra
Let B be a complex Banach algebra containing a unit e. Then we define the spectrum σ(x) (or more explicitly σB(x)) of an element x of B to be the set of those complex numbers λ for which λe − x is not invertible in B. This extends the definition for bounded linear operators B(X) on a Banach space X, since B(X) is a Banach algebra.
See also

Essential spectrum
Self-adjoint operator
Pseudospectrum
Resolvent set

References

Dales et al., Introduction to Banach Algebras, Operators, and Harmonic Analysis, ISBN 0-521-53584-0


"
Category:Spectral theory



Theorem 3.3.3 of Kadison & Ringrose, 1983, Fundamentals of the Theory of Operator Algebras, Vol. I: Elementary Theory, New York: Academic Press, Inc.↩




