


Weibull distribution




Weibull distribution

& x\geq0\\ 0 & x|
 cdf        =

|
 mean       =

|
 median     =

|
 mode       =

| 
 arg mode   =

 if 

|
 variance   =

|
 skewness   =

|
 kurtosis   =(see text)|
 entropy    =

|
 mgf        = 

|
 char       = 


}}
In probability theory and statistics, the Weibull distribution  is a continuous probability distribution. It is named after Waloddi Weibull, who described it in detail in 1951, although it was first identified by  and first applied by  to describe a particle size distribution.
Definition
The probability density function of a Weibull random variable is:1



where k > 0 is the shape parameter and λ > 0 is the scale parameter of the distribution. Its complementary cumulative distribution function is a stretched exponential function. The Weibull distribution is related to a number of other probability distributions; in particular, it interpolates between the exponential distribution (k = 1) and the Rayleigh distribution (k = 2 and 
 
 
2).
If the quantity X is a "time-to-failure", the Weibull distribution gives a distribution for which the failure rate is proportional to a power of time. The shape parameter, k, is that power plus one, and so this parameter can be interpreted directly as follows:

A value of k < 1 indicates that the failure rate decreases over time. This happens if there is significant "infant mortality", or defective items failing early and the failure rate decreasing over time as the defective items are weeded out of the population.
A value of k = 1 indicates that the failure rate is constant over time. This might suggest random external events are causing mortality, or failure.
A value of k > 1 indicates that the failure rate increases with time. This happens if there is an "aging" process, or parts that are more likely to fail as time goes on.

In the field of materials science, the shape parameter k of a distribution of strengths is known as the Weibull modulus.
Properties
Density function
The form of the density function of the Weibull distribution changes drastically with the value of k. For 0  1, the density function tends to zero as x approaches zero from above, increases until its mode and decreases after it. It is interesting to note that the density function has infinite negative slope at x = 0 if 0  2. For k = 2 the density has a finite positive slope at x = 0. As k goes to infinity, the Weibull distribution converges to a Dirac delta distribution centered at x = λ. Moreover, the skewness and coefficient of variation depend only on the shape parameter.
Distribution function
The cumulative distribution function for the Weibull distribution is



for x ≥ 0, and F(x; k; λ) = 0 for x Q(p;k,\lambda) = \lambda {(-\ln(1-p))}^{1/k}
for 0 ≤ p  h(x;k,\lambda) = {k \over \lambda} \left({x \over \lambda}\right)^{k-1}.
Moments
The moment generating function of the logarithm of a Weibull distributed random variable is given by3



where 
 
 
 
  is the gamma function. Similarly, the characteristic function of log X is given by



In particular, the nth raw moment of X is given by



The mean and variance of a Weibull random variable can be expressed as



and



The skewness is given by



where the mean is denoted by 
 
 
 
  and the standard deviation is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
The excess kurtosis is given by



where 
 
 
 
 . The kurtosis excess may also be written as:



Moment generating function
A variety of expressions are available for the moment generating function of X itself. As a power series, since the raw moments are already known, one has



Alternatively, one can attempt to deal directly with the integral



If the parameter k is assumed to be a rational number, expressed as k = p/q where p and q are integers, then this integral can be evaluated analytically.4 With t replaced by −t, one finds


 
  where G is the Meijer G-function.
The characteristic function has also been obtained by . The characteristic function and moment generating function of 3-parameter Weibull distribution have also been derived by  by a direct approach.
Information entropy
The information entropy is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the Euler–Mascheroni constant.
Parameter estimation
Maximum likelihood
The maximum likelihood estimator for the 
 
 
 
  parameter given 
 
 
 
  is,



The maximum likelihood estimator for 
 
 
 
  is,



This being an implicit function, one must generally solve for 
 
 
 
  by numerical means.
When 
 
 
 
  are the 
 
 
 
  largest observed samples from a dataset of more than 
 
 
 
  samples, then the maximum likelihood estimator for the 
 
 
 
  parameter given 
 
 
 
  is,5



Also given that condition, the maximum likelihood estimator for 
 
 
 
  is,



Again, this being an implicit function, one must generally solve for 
 
 
 
  by numerical means.
Weibull plot
The fit of data to a Weibull distribution can be visually assessed using a Weibull Plot.6 The Weibull Plot is a plot of the empirical cumulative distribution function

 
  of data on special axes in a type of Q-Q plot. The axes are 
 
 
 
  versus 
 
 
 
 . The reason for this change of variables is the cumulative distribution function can be linearized:


 
 
  which can be seen to be in the standard form of a straight line. Therefore if the data came from a Weibull distribution then a straight line is expected on a Weibull plot.
There are various approaches to obtaining the empirical distribution function from data: one method is to obtain the vertical coordinate for each point using 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the rank of the data point and 
 
 
 
  is the number of data points.7
Linear regression can also be used to numerically assess goodness of fit and estimate the parameters of the Weibull distribution. The gradient informs one directly about the shape parameter 
 
 
 
  and the scale parameter 
 
 
 
  can also be inferred.
The Weibull distribution is used

In survival analysis8
In reliability engineering and failure analysis
In electrical engineering to represent overvoltage occurring in an electrical system
In industrial engineering to represent manufacturing and delivery times
In extreme value theory
In weather forecasting

To describe wind speed distributions, as the natural distribution often matches the Weibull shape9

In communications systems engineering
 
In radar systems to model the dispersion of the received signals level produced by some types of clutters
To model fading channels in wireless communications, as the Weibull fading model seems to exhibit good fit to experimental fading channel measurements


(Figure)
Fitted cumulative Weibull distribution to maximum one-day rainfalls using CumFreq, see also distribution fitting 


In general insurance to model the size of reinsurance claims, and the cumulative development of asbestosis losses
In forecasting technological change (also known as the Sharif-Islam model)10


In hydrology the Weibull distribution is applied to extreme events such as annual maximum one-day rainfalls and river discharges. The blue picture illustrates an example of fitting the Weibull distribution to ranked annually maximum one-day rainfalls showing also the 90% confidence belt based on the binomial distribution. The rainfall data are represented by plotting positions as part of the cumulative frequency analysis.


In describing the size of particles generated by grinding, milling and crushing operations, the 2-Parameter Weibull distribution is used, and in these applications it is sometimes known as the Rosin-Rammler distribution. In this context it predicts fewer fine particles than the Log-normal distribution and it is generally most accurate for narrow particle size distributions. The interpretation of the cumulative distribution function is that F(x; k; λ) is the mass fraction of particles with diameter smaller than x, where λ is the mean particle size and k is a measure of the spread of particle sizes.

Related distributions

The translated Weibull distribution (or 3-parameter Weibull) contains an additional parameter.11 It has the probability density function




for 
 
 
 
  and f(x; k, λ, θ) = 0 for x k >0 is the shape parameter, 
 
 
 
  is the scale parameter and 
 
 
 
  is the location parameter of the distribution. When θ=0, this reduces to the 2-parameter distribution.

The Weibull distribution can be characterized as the distribution of a random variable W such that the random variable



 
  is the standard exponential distribution with intensity 1.12

This implies that the Weibull distribution can also be characterized in terms of a uniform distribution: if U is uniformly distributed on (0,1), then the random variable 
 
 
 
  is Weibull distributed with parameters k and λ. (Note that 
 
 
 
  here is equivalent to 
 
 
 
  just above.) This leads to an easily implemented numerical scheme for simulating a Weibull distribution.


The Weibull distribution interpolates between the exponential distribution with intensity 1/λ when k = 1 and a Rayleigh distribution of mode 
 
 
 
  when k = 2.


The Weibull distribution (usually sufficient in reliability engineering) is a special case of the three parameter exponentiated Weibull distribution where the additional exponent equals 1. The exponentiated Weibull distribution accommodates unimodal, bathtub shaped*13 and monotone failure rates.


The Weibull distribution is a special case of the generalized extreme value distribution. It was in this connection that the distribution was first identified by Maurice Fréchet in 1927.14 The closely related Fréchet distribution, named for this work, has the probability density function





The distribution of a random variable that is defined as the minimum of several random variables, each having a different Weibull distribution, is a poly-Weibull distribution.


The Weibull distribution was first applied by  to describe particle size distributions. It is widely used in mineral processing to describe particle size distributions in comminution processes. In this context the cumulative distribution is given by



 
  where


 
 : Particle size


 
 : 80th percentile of the particle size distribution


 
 : Parameter describing the spread of the distribution

Because of its availability in Spreadsheets, it is also used where the underlying behavior is actually better modeled by an Erlang distribution.15

See also

Fisher–Tippett–Gnedenko theorem
Logistic distribution
Rosin–Rammler distribution for particle size analysis

References
Bibliography


.



.

.


.



External links


Mathpages - Weibull Analysis
The Weibull Distribution
Reliability Analysis with Weibull
Interactive graphic: Univariate Distribution Relationsqrhips

"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Survival analysis Category:Exponential family distributions Category:Probability distributions



↩
http://www.mathworks.com.au/help/stats/rayleigh-distribution.html↩
↩
See  for the case when k is an integer, and  for the rational case.↩
.↩
The Weibull plot↩
Wayne Nelson (2004) Applied Life Data Analysis. Wiley-Blackwell ISBN 0-471-64462-5↩
Survival/Failure Time Analysis↩
Wind Speed Distribution Weibull↩
↩


↩
↩
↩




