


Reflexive operator algebra




Reflexive operator algebra

In functional analysis, a reflexive operator algebra A is an operator algebra that has enough invariant subspaces to characterize it. Formally, A is reflexive if it is equal to the algebra of bounded operators which leave invariant each subspace left invariant by every operator in A.
This should not be confused with a reflexive space.
Examples
Nest algebras are examples of reflexive operator algebras. In finite dimensions, these are simply algebras of all matrices of a given size whose nonzero entries lie in an upper-triangular pattern.
In fact if we fix any pattern of entries in an n by n matrix containing the diagonal, then the set of all n by n matrices whose nonzero entries lie in this pattern forms a reflexive algebra.
An example of an algebra which is not reflexive is the set of 2 by 2 matrices



This algebra is smaller than the Nest algebra



but has the same invariant subspaces, so it is not reflexive.
If T is a fixed n by n matrix then the set of all polynomials in T and the identity operator forms a unital operator algebra. A theorem of Deddens and Fillmore states that this algebra is reflexive if and only if the largest two blocks in the Jordan normal form of T differ in size by at most one. For example, the algebra



which is equal to the set of all polynomials in



and the identity is reflexive.
Hyper-reflexivity
Let 
 
 
 
  be a weak*-closed operator algebra contained in B(H), the set of all bounded operators on a Hilbert space H and for T any operator in B(H), let


 
 .
Observe that P is a projection involved in this supremum precisely if the range of P is an invariant subspace of 
 
 
 
 .
The algebra 
 
 
 
  is reflexive if and only if for every T in B(H):


 
 .
We note that for any T in B(H) the following inequality is satisfied:


 
 .
Here 
 
 
 
  is the distance of T from the algebra, namely the smallest norm of an operator T-A where A runs over the algebra. We call 
 
 
hyperreflexive if there is a constant K such that for every operator T in B(H),


 
 .
The smallest such K is called the distance constant for 
 
 
 
 . A hyper-reflexive operator algebra is automatically reflexive.
In the case of a reflexive algebra of matrices with nonzero entries specified by a given pattern, the problem of finding the distance constant can be rephrased as a matrix-filling problem: if we fill the entries in the complement of the pattern with arbitrary entries, what choice of entries in the pattern gives the smallest operator norm?
Examples

Every finite-dimensional reflexive algebra is hyper-reflexive. However, there are examples of infinite-dimensional reflexive operator algebras which are not hyper-reflexive.


The distance constant for a one-dimensional algebra is 1.


Nest algebras are hyper-reflexive with distance constant 1.


Many von Neumann algebras are hyper-reflexive, but it is not known if they all are.


A type I von Neumann algebra is hyper-reflexive with distance constant at most 2.

See also

Invariant subspace
subspace lattice
reflexive subspace lattice
nest algebra

References

William Arveson, Ten lectures on operator algebras, ISBN 0-8218-0705-6
H. Radjavi and P. Rosenthal, Invariant Subspaces, ISBN 0-486-42822-2

"
Category:Operator theory Category:Operator algebras Category:Invariant subspaces


