


Von Neumann bicommutant theorem




Von Neumann bicommutant theorem

In mathematics, specifically functional analysis, the von Neumann bicommutant theorem relates the closure of a set of bounded operators on a Hilbert space in certain topologies to the bicommutant of that set. In essence, it is a connection between the algebraic and topological sides of operator theory.
The formal statement of the theorem is as follows:

Von Neumann Bicommutant Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  be an algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 , containing the identity operator and closed under taking adjoints. Then the closures of 
 
 
 
  in the weak operator topology and the strong operator topology are equal, and are in turn equal to the bicommutant

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . This algebra is the von Neumann algebra generated by 
 
 
 
 .
 

There are several other topologies on the space of bounded operators, and one can ask what are the *-algebras closed in these topologies. If 
 
 
 
  is closed in the norm topology then it is a C*-algebra, but not necessarily a von Neumann algebra. One such example is the C*-algebra of compact operators (on an infinite dimensional Hilbert space). For most other common topologies the closed *-algebras containing 1 are still von Neumann algebras; this applies in particular to the weak operator, strong operator, *-strong operator, ultraweak, ultrastrong, and *-ultrastrong topologies.
It is related to the Jacobson density theorem.
Proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hilbert space and 
 
 
 
  the bounded operators on 
 
 
 
 . Consider a self-adjoint unital subalgebra

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . (this means that 
 
 
 
  contains the adjoints of its members, and the identity operator on 
 
 
 
 )
The theorem is equivalent to the combination of the following three statements:

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 


where the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  subscripts stand for closures in the weak and strong operator topologies, respectively.
Proof of (i)
By definition of the weak operator topology, for any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the map T →  is continuous in this topology. Therefore, for any operator 
 
 
 
  (and by substituting once  and once 
 
 
 
 ), so is the map



Let S be any subset of 
 
 
 
 , and S’ its commutant. For any operator 
 
 
 
  not in S’,  -  is nonzero for some O in S and some x and y in 
 
 
 
 , and so it has a nonzero open neighborhood. By the continuity of the abovementioned mapping, there is an open neighborhood of 
 
 
 
  in the weak operator topology for which this is nonzero, therefore this open neighborhood is also not in S’. Thus S’ is closed in this topology (i.e. it is weakly closed). Thus every commutant is weakly closed, and so is 
 
 
 
 ; since it contains 
 
 
 
 , it also contains its weak closure.
Proof of (ii)
This follows directly from the weak operator topology being coarser than the strong operator topology: for every point 
 
 
 
  in , every open neighborhood of 
 
 
 
  in the weak operator topology is also open in the strong operator topology and therefore contains a member of 
 
 
 
 ; therefore 
 
 
 
  is also a member of .
Proof of (iii)
Let 
 
 
 
 , we will show . Every open neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  in the strong operator topology, is the preimage of V, an open neighborhood of 
 
 
 
  for some h in 
 
 
 
 , so that for every O in 
 
 
 
 , O is in 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is in V. Since V is open, it contains an open ball of radius 
 
 
 
  centered at 
 
 
 
 .
Consider the closure

 
  of  It is a vector space that is complete (being a closed subset of a complete space 
 
 
 
 ), and so has a corresponding orthogonal projection which we denote 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is bounded, so it is in 
 
 
 
 . Next we prove:

Lemma.

 
 .
 


Proof. For every 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  so it is the limit of a series  with  in 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , hence for all 
 
 
 
 ,  is also in 
 
 
 
  and thus its limit is in 
 
 
 
 . By continuity of 
 
 
 
  (since it is in 
 
 
 
  and thus Lipschitz continuous), this limit is 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 , PTPx = TPx. From this it follows that PTP = TP for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
 


By using the closure of 
 
 
 
  under the adjoint we further have, for every 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
 :
 










thus TP = PT and P lies in 
 
 
 
 .
 

By definition of the bicommutant XP = PX. Since 
 
 
 
  is unital, 
 
 
 
 , hence 
 
 
 
  and for every 
 
 
 
 , there exists T in 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 

Thus in every open neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  in the strong operator topology there is a member of 
 
 
 
 , and so 
 
 
 
  is in the strong operator topology closure of 
 
 
 
 .
Non-unital case
The algebra 
 
 
 
  is said to be non-degenerate if for all h in 
 
 
 
 ,  implies 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is non-degenerate and a sub C*-algebra of 
 
 
 
 , it can be shown using an approximate identity in 
 
 
 
  that the identity operator I lies in the strong closure of $\mathbf{ M } $. Therefore the bicommutant theorem still holds.
References

W.B. Arveson, An Invitation to C*-algebras, Springer, New York, 1976.

"
Category:Operator theory Category:Von Neumann algebras Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in functional analysis


