


Integral test for convergence




Integral test for convergence

 
In mathematics, the integral test for convergence is a method used to test infinite series of non-negative terms for convergence. It was developed by Colin Maclaurin and Augustin-Louis Cauchy and is sometimes known as the Maclaurin–Cauchy test.
Statement of the test
Consider an integer

 
  and a non-negative function 
 
 
 
  defined on the unbounded interval

 
 , on which it is monotone decreasing. Then the infinite series



converges to a real number if and only if the improper integral



is finite. In other words, if the integral diverges, then the series diverges as well.
Remark
If the improper integral is finite, then the proof also gives the lower and upper bounds
for the infinite series.
Proof
The proof basically uses the comparison test, comparing the term 
 
 
 
  with the integral of 
 
 
 
  over the intervals 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
Since 
 
 
 
  is a monotone decreasing function, we know that



and



Hence, for every integer 
 
 
 
 ,
and, for every integer 
 
 
 
 ,
By summation over all 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to some larger integer 
 
 
 
 , we get from ()



and from ()



Combining these two estimates yields



Letting 
 
 
 
  tend to infinity, the bounds in () and the result follow.
Applications
The harmonic series


 
  diverges because, using the natural logarithm, its derivative, and the fundamental theorem of calculus, we get


 
  Contrary, the series


 
  (cf. Riemann zeta function) converges for every 
 
 
 
 , because by the power rule


 
  From () we get the upper estimate


 
  which can be compared with some of the particular values of Riemann zeta function.
Borderline between divergence and convergence
The above examples involving the harmonic series raise the question, whether there are monotone sequences such that 
 
 
 
  decreases to 0 faster than 
 
 
 
  but slower than  in the sense that


 
  for every 
 
 
 
 , and whether the corresponding series of the 
 
 
 
 
  still diverges. Once such a sequence is found, a similar question can be asked with 
 
 
 
  taking the role of 
 
 
 
 , and so on. In this way it is possible to investigate the borderline between divergence and convergence of infinite series.
Using the integral test for convergence, one can show (see below) that, for every natural number

 
 , the series  still diverges (cf. proof that the sum of the reciprocals of the primes diverges for 
 
 
 
 ) but  |5}} converges for every 
 
 
 
 
 . Here  denotes the 
 
 
 
 -fold composition of the natural logarithm defined recursively by


 
  Furthermore,  denotes the smallest natural number such that the 
 
 
 
 -fold composition is well-defined and , i.e.


 
  using tetration or Knuth's up-arrow notation.
To see the divergence of the series () using the integral test, note that by repeated application of the chain rule


 
  hence


 
  To see the convergence of the series (), note that by the power rule, the chain rule and the above result


 
  hence


 
  and () gives bounds for the infinite series in ().
References

Knopp, Konrad, "Infinite Sequences and Series", Dover publications, Inc., New York, 1956. (§ 3.3) ISBN 0-486-60153-6
Whittaker, E. T., and Watson, G. N., A Course in Modern Analysis, fourth edition, Cambridge University Press, 1963. (§ 4.43) ISBN 0-521-58807-3
Ferreira, Jaime Campos, Ed Calouste Gulbenkian, 1987, ISBN 972-31-0179-3



"
Category:Integral calculus Category:Mathematical series Category:Convergence tests Category:Articles containing proofs


