


Shift operator




Shift operator

In mathematics, and in particular functional analysis, the shift operator or translation operator is an operator that takes a function 
 
 
 
  to its translation

 
 .1 In time series analysis, the shift operator is called the lag operator.
Shift operators are examples of linear operators, important for their simplicity and natural occurrence. The shift operator action on functions of a real variable plays an important role in harmonic analysis, for example, it appears in the definitions of almost periodic functions, positive definite functions, and convolution.2 Shifts of sequences (functions of an integer variable) appear in diverse areas such as Hardy spaces, the theory of abelian varieties, and the theory of symbolic dynamics, for which the baker's map is an explicit representation.
Definition
Functions of a real variable
The shift operator  (
 
 
 
 ) takes a function 
 
 
 
  on R to its translation ,



A practical representation of the linear operator  in terms of the plain derivative  was introduced by Lagrange,


 
  which may be interpreted operationally through its formal Taylor expansion in t; and whose action on the monomial xn is evident by the binomial theorem, and thus on all series in x.3
Sequences
The left shift operator acts on one-sided infinite sequence of numbers by



and on two-sided infinite sequences by



The right shift operator acts on one-sided infinite sequence of numbers by



and on two-sided infinite sequences by



The right and left shift operators acting on two-sided infinite sequences are called bilateral shifts.
Abelian groups
In general, if 
 
 
 
  is a function on an Abelian group

 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is an element of 
 
 
 
 , the shift operator  maps 
 
 
 
  to


4
Properties of the shift operator
The shift operator acting on real- or complex-valued functions or sequences is a linear operator which preserves most of the standard norms which appear in functional analysis. Therefore it is usually a continuous operator with norm one.
Action on Hilbert spaces
The shift operator acting on two-sided sequences is a unitary operator on . The shift operator acting on functions of a real variable is a unitary operator on .
In both cases, the (left) shift operator satisfies the following commutation relation with the Fourier transform:



where  is the multiplication operator by 
 
 
 
 . Therefore the spectrum of  is the unit circle.
The one-sided shift 
 
 
 
  acting on  is a proper isometry with range equal to all vectors which vanish in the first coordinate. The operator S is a compression of T−1, in the sense that



where 
 
 
 
  is the vector in  with  =  for 
 
 
 
  and  = 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 

The spectrum of S is the unit disk. The shift S is one example of a Fredholm operator; it has Fredholm index −1.
Generalisation
Jean Delsarte introduced the notion of generalised shift operator (also called generalised displacement operator); it was further developed by Boris Levitan.567
A family of operators  acting on a space 
 
 
 
  of functions from a set 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is called a family of generalised shift operators if the following properties hold:

Associativity: let  = . Then  = .
There exists 
 
 
 
  such that  is the identity operator.

In this case, the set $\mathbf{ X } $ is called a hypergroup.
See also

Arithmetic shift
Logical shift
Finite difference

Notes
Bibliography

Jonathan R. Partington, Linear Operators and Linear Systems, An Analytical Approach to Control Theory, (2004) London Mathematical Society Student Texts 60, Cambridge University Press.
Marvin Rosenblum and James Rovnyak, Hardy Classes and Operator Theory, (1985) Oxford University Press.

[[Category:Isometric operato"
Category:Unitary operators



↩
↩
Jordan, Charles, (1939/1965). "Calculus of Finite Differences", Chelsea Publishing.↩
↩

↩
↩




