


Ideal norm




Ideal norm

In commutative algebra, the norm of an ideal is a generalization of a norm of an element in the field extension. It is particularly important in number theory since it measures the size of an ideal of a complicated number ring in terms of an ideal in a less complicated ring. When the less complicated number ring is taken to be the ring of integers, Z, then the norm of a nonzero ideal I of a number ring R is simply the size of the finite quotient ring R/I.
Relative norm
Let A be a Dedekind domain with field of fractions K and integral closure of B in a finite separable extension L of K. (this implies that B is also a Dedekind domain.) Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the ideal groups of A and B, respectively (i.e., the sets of nonzero fractional ideals.) Following , the norm map


 
  is the unique group homomorphism that satisfies


 
  for all nonzero prime ideals 
 
 
 
  of B, where 
 
 
 
  is the prime ideal of A lying below 
 
 
 
 .
Alternatively, for any 
 
 
 
  one can equivalently define 
 
 
 
  to be the fractional ideal of A generated by the set 
 
 
 
  of field norms of elements of B.1
For 
 
 
 
 , one has 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . The ideal norm of a principal ideal is thus compatible with the field norm of an element
 
 
2
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Galois extension of number fields with rings of integers

 
 . Then the preceding applies with 
 
 
 
 , and for any 
 
 
 
  we have



which is an element of 
 
 
 
 . The notation 
 
 
 
  is sometimes shortened to 
 
 
 
 , an abuse of notation that is compatible with also writing 
 
 
 
  for the field norm, as noted above.
In the case 
 
 
 
 , it is reasonable to use positive rational numbers as the range for 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  has trivial ideal class group and unit group

 
 , thus each nonzero fractional ideal of 
 
 
 
  is generated by a uniquely determined positive rational number. Under this convention the relative norm from 
 
 
 
  down to 
 
 
 
  coincides with the absolute norm defined below.
Absolute norm
Let 
 
 
 
  be a number field with ring of integers 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  a nonzero (integral) ideal of 
 
 
 
 . The absolute norm of 
 
 
 
  is


 
  By convention, the norm of the zero ideal is taken to be zero.
If 
 
 
 
  is a principal ideal, then 
 
 
 
 .3
The norm is completely multiplicative: if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are ideals of 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .4 Thus the absolute norm extends uniquely to a group homomorphism


 
  defined for all nonzero fractional ideals of 
 
 
 
 .
The norm of an ideal 
 
 
 
  can be used to give an upper bound on the field norm of the smallest nonzero element it contains: there always exists a nonzero 
 
 
 
  for which


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the discriminant of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the number of pairs of (non-real) complex embeddings of 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  (the number of complex places of 
 
 
 
 ).5
See also

Field norm
Dedekind zeta function

References






"
Category:Algebraic number theory Category:Commutative algebra Category:Ideals



Janusz, Proposition I.8.2↩
Serre, 1.5, Proposition 14.↩
Marcus, Theorem 22c, pp. 65-66.↩
Marcus, Theorem 22a, pp. 65-66↩
Neukirch, Lemma 6.2↩




