


Sallen–Key topology




Sallen–Key topology
The '''Sallen–Key topology''' is an [[electronic filter topology]] used to implement [[Low-pass filter#Continuous-time low-pass filters|second-order]] [[active filter]]s that is particularly valued for its simplicity.[https://ccnet.stanford.edu/cgi-bin/course.cgi?cc=ee315a&action;=handout_download&handout;_id=ID126954294624704 "EE315A Course Notes - Chapter 2"-B. Murmann] It is a [[degeneracy (mathematics)|degenerate]] form of a '''voltage-controlled voltage-source''' ('''VCVS''
 ') filter topology. A VCVS filter uses a super-unity-gain voltage amplifier with practically infinite input impedance and zero output impedance to implement a 2-pole (12 dB/octave) low-pass, high-pass, or bandpass response. The super-unity-gain amplifier allows for very high Q factor and passband gain without the use of inductors. A Sallen–Key filter is a variation on a VCVS filter that uses a unity-gain amplifier (i.e., a pure buffer amplifier with 0 dB gain). It was introduced by R. P. Sallen and E. L. Key of MIT Lincoln Laboratory in 1955.1
Because of its high input impedance and easily selectable gain, an operational amplifier in a conventional non-inverting configuration is often used in VCVS implementations. Implementations of Sallen–Key filters often use an operational amplifier configured as a voltage follower; however, emitter or source followers are other common choices for the buffer amplifier.
VCVS filters are relatively resilient to component tolerance, but obtaining high Q factor may require extreme component value spread or high amplifier gain.2 Higher-order filters can be obtained by cascading two or more stages.
Generic Sallen–Key topology
The generic unity-gain Sallen–Key filter topology implemented with a unity-gain operational amplifier is shown in Figure 1. The following analysis is based on the assumption that the operational amplifier is ideal.
(Figure)
Figure 1: The generic Sallen–Key filter topology.

Because the operational amplifier (OA) is in a negative-feedback configuration, its v+ and v- inputs must match (i.e., v+ = v-). However, the inverting input v- is connected directly to the output vout, and so













By Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) applied at the vx node,













By combining Equations (1) and (2),



Applying Equation (1) and KCL at the OA's non-inverting input v+ gives



which means that













Combining Equations (2) and (3) gives













Rearranging Equation (4) gives the transfer function













which typically describes a second-order LTI system.
Interpretation
If the 
 
 
 
 
  component were connected to ground, the filter would be a voltage divider composed of the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  components cascaded with another voltage divider composed of the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  components. The buffer bootstraps the "bottom" of the 
 
 
 
 
  component to the output of the filter, which will improve upon the simple two divider case. This interpretation is the reason why Sallen–Key filters are often drawn with the operational amplifier's non-inverting input below the inverting input, thus emphasizing the similarity between the output and ground.
Branch impedances
By choosing different passive components (e.g., resistors and capacitors) for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , the filter can be made with low-pass, bandpass, and high-pass characteristics. In the examples below, recall that a resistor with resistance

 
 
  has impedance

 
  of


 
  and a capacitor with capacitance

 
  has impedance 
 
 
 
  of


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the complex angular frequency and 
 
 
 
  is the frequency of a pure sine wave input. That is, a capacitor's impedance is frequency dependent and a resistor's impedance is not.
Application: Low-pass filter
An example of a unity-gain low-pass configuration is shown in Figure 2.
(Figure)
Figure 2: A unity-gain low-pass filter implemented with a Sallen–Key topology.

An operational amplifier is used as the buffer here, although an emitter follower is also effective. This circuit is equivalent to the generic case above with



The transfer function for this second-order unity-gain low-pass filter is



where the undamped natural frequency

 
 
 , attenuation

 
 , and Q factor

 
  (i.e., damping ratio

 
 ) are given by



and



So,



The 
 
 
 
  factor determines the height and width of the peak of the frequency response of the filter. As this parameter increases, the filter will tend to "ring" at a single resonant frequency near 
 
 
 
  (see "LC filter" for a related discussion).
Poles and zeros
This transfer function has no (finite) zeros and two poles located in the complex s-plane:



There are two zeros at infinity (the transfer function goes to zero for each of the s terms in the denominator)
Design choices
A designer must choose the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  appropriate for their application. The 
 
 
 
  value is critical in determining the eventual shape. For example, a second-order Butterworth filter, which has maximally flat passband frequency response, has a 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . By comparison, a value of 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the series of two identical simple low-pass filters.
Because there are two parameters and four unknowns, the design procedure typically fixes one resistor as a ratio of the other resistor and one capacitor as a ratio of the other capacitor. One possibility is to set the ratio between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  and the ratio between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . So,












Therefore, the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  expressions are



and



In practice, certain choices of component values will perform better than others due to the non-idealities of real operational amplifiers.3
Example
For example, the circuit in Figure 3 has an 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and a 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . The transfer function is given by



and, after substitution, this expression is equal to



which shows how every 
 
 
 
  combination comes with some 
 
 
 
  combination to provide the same 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for the low-pass filter. A similar design approach is used for the other filters below.
Input Impedance
The input impedance of the second-order unity-gain Sallen-Key low-pass filter is also of interest to designers. It is given by Eq. (3) in Cartwright and Kaminsky 4 as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Furthermore, for 
 
 
 
 , there is a minimum value of the magnitude of the impedance, given by Eq. (16) of Cartwright and Kaminsky,5 which states that


 
 .
Fortunately, this equation is well-approximated by6


 
 , for 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
  values outside of this range, the 0.34 constant has to be modified for minimum error.
Also, the frequency at which the minimum impedance magnitude occurs is given by Eq. (15) of Cartwright and Kaminsky,7 i.e.,


 
 .
This equation can also be well approximated using Eq. (20) of Cartwright and Kaminsky,8 which states that


 
 .
Application: High-pass filter
 A second-order unity-gain high-pass filter with 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is shown in Figure 4.
A second-order unity-gain high-pass filter has the transfer function



where undamped natural frequency 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  factor are discussed above in the low-pass filter discussion. The circuit above implements this transfer function by the equations



(as before), and



So



Follow an approach similar to the one used to design the low-pass filter above.
Application: Bandpass filter
 An example of a non-unity-gain bandpass filter implemented with a VCVS filter is shown in Figure 5. Although it uses a different topology and an operational amplifier configured to provide non-unity-gain, it can be analyzed using similar methods as with the generic Sallen–Key topology. Its transfer function is given by:



The center frequency

 
  (i.e., the frequency where the magnitude response has its peak) is given by:



The Q factor

 
  is given by



The voltage divider in the negative feedback loop controls the "inner gain" 
 
 
 
  of the operational amplifier:



If the inner gain 
 
 
 
  is too high the filter will oscillate.
See also

Filter design
Electronic filter topology
Damping
Harmonic oscillator
Resonance

References
External links

Texas Instruments Application Report: Analysis of the Sallen–Key Architecture
Analog Devices filter design applet – A simple online tool for designing active filters using voltage-feedback op-amps.
TI active filter design source FAQ
Op Amps for Everyone – Chapter 16
High frequency modification of Sallen-Key filter - improving the stopband attenuation floor
Online Calculation Tool for Sallen–Key Low-pass/High-pass Filters
Online Calculation Tool for Filter Design and Analysis
ECE 327: Procedures for Output Filtering Lab – Section 3 ("Smoothing Low-Pass Filter") discusses active filtering with Sallen–Key Butterworth low-pass filter.
Filtering 101: Multi Pole Filters with Sallen-Key, Matt Duff of Analog Devices explains how Sallen Key circuit works

"
Category:Linear filters Category:Electronic filter topology





Stop-band limitations of the Sallen-Key low-pass filter









