


Field trace




Field trace


For other uses, see Trace


In mathematics, the field trace is a particular function defined with respect to a finite field extension L/K, which is a K-linear map from L to K.
Definition
Let K be a field and L a finite extension (and hence an algebraic extension) of K. L can be viewed as a vector space over K. Multiplication by α, an element of L,


 
 , is a K-linear transformation of this vector space into itself. The trace, TrL/K(α), is defined as the (linear algebra) trace of this linear transformation.1
For α in L, let σ
 
 
 
 (α), ..., σ
 
 
 
 (α) be the roots (counted with multiplicity) of the minimal polynomial of α over K (in some extension field of L), then


 
 . If L/K is separable then each root appears only once and the coefficient above is one.2
More particularly, if L/K is a Galois extension and α is in L, then the trace of α is the sum of all the Galois conjugates of α, i.e.


 
 ,
where Gal(L/K) denotes the Galois group of L/K.
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  be a quadratic extension of 
 
 
 
 . Then a basis of 
 
 
 
  If 
 
 
 
 
  then the matrix of 
 
 
 
  is:


 
 , and so, 
 
 
 
 .3 The minimal polynomial of α is X2 - 2a X + a2 - d b2.
Properties of the trace
Several properties of the trace function hold for any finite extension.4
The trace  is a K-linear map (a K-linear functional), that is


 
 .
If α ∈ K then 
 
 

Additionally, trace behaves well in towers of fields: if M is a finite extension of L, then the trace from M to K is just the composition of the trace from M to L with the trace from L to K, i.e.


 
 .
Finite fields
Let L = GF(qn) be a finite extension of a finite field K = GF(q). Since L/K is a Galois extension, if α is in L, then the trace of α is the sum of all the Galois conjugates of α, i.e.5


 
 .
In this setting we have the additional properties,6








And,7
Theorem. For b ∈ L, let Fb be the map 
 
 
 
 
  Then Fb ≠ Fc if b ≠ c. Moreover the K-linear transformations from L to K are exactly the maps of the form Fb as b varies over the field L.
When K is the prime subfield of L, the trace is called the absolute trace and otherwise it is a relative trace.8
Application
A quadratic equation, 
 
 
 
  and coefficients in the finite field 
 
 
 
  has either 0, 1 or 2 roots in GF(q) (and two roots, counted with multiplicity, in the quadratic extension GF(q2)). If the characteristic of GF(q) is odd, the discriminant, Δ = b2 - 4ac indicates the number of roots in GF(q) and the classical quadratic formula gives the roots. However, when GF(q) has even characteristic (i.e., q = 2h for some positive integer h), these formulas are no longer applicable.
Consider the quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0 with coefficients in the finite field GF(2h).9 If b = 0 then this equation has the unique solution 
 
 
 
  in GF(q). If b ≠ 0 then the substitution  converts the quadratic equation to the form:


 
 . This equation has two solutions in GF(q) if and only if the absolute trace 
 
 
 
 
  In this case, if y = s is one of the solutions, then y = s + 1 is the other. Let k be any element of GF(q) with 
 
 
 
  Then a solution to the equation is given by:


 
 . When h = 2m + 1, a solution is given by the simpler expression:


 
 .
Trace form
When L/K is separable, the trace provides a duality theory via the trace form: the map from  to K sending (x, y) to Tr
 
 
 
 (xy) is a nondegenerate, symmetric, bilinear form called the trace form. An example of where this is used is in algebraic number theory in the theory of the different ideal.
The trace form for a finite degree field extension L/K has non-negative signature for any field ordering of K.10 The converse, that every Witt equivalence class with non-negative signature contains a trace form, is true for algebraic number fields K.11
If L/K is an inseparable extension, then the trace form is identically 0.12
See also

Field norm
Reduced trace

Notes
References









Further reading


Section VI.5 of 

"
Category:Field theory













Lorenz (2008) p.38
 as footnoted in 




