


Discretization




Discretization

 In mathematics, discretization concerns the process of transferring continuous functions, models and equations into discrete counterparts. This process is usually carried out as a first step toward making them suitable for numerical evaluation and implementation on digital computers. Processing on a digital computer requires another process called quantization. Dichotomization is the special case of discretization in which the number of discrete classes is 2, which can approximate a continuous variable as a binary variable (creating a dichotomy for modeling purposes).

Euler–Maruyama method
Zero-order hold

Discretization is also related to discrete mathematics, and is an important component of granular computing. In this context, discretization may also refer to modification of variable or category granularity, as when multiple discrete variables are aggregated or multiple discrete categories fused.
Whenever continuous data is discretized, there is always some amount of discretization error. The goal is to reduce the amount to a level considered negligible for the modeling purposes at hand.
Discretization of linear state space models 
Discretization is also concerned with the transformation of continuous differential equations into discrete difference equations, suitable for numerical computing.
The following continuous-time state space model






where v and w are continuous zero-mean white noise sources with covariances






can be discretized, assuming zero-order hold for the input u and continuous integration for the noise v, to






with covariances






where





 
 , if 
 
 
 
  is nonsingular












and 
 
 
 
  is the sample time, although 
 
 
 
  is the transposed matrix of 
 
 
 
 .
A clever trick to compute Ad and Bd in one step is by utilizing the following property:1



and then having






Discretization of process noise
Numerical evaluation of 
 
 
 
  is a bit trickier due to the matrix exponential integral. It can, however, be computed by first constructing a matrix, and computing the exponential of it (Van Loan, 1978):





 
  The discretized process noise is then evaluated by multiplying the transpose of the lower-right partition of G with the upper-right partition of G:



Derivation
Starting with the continuous model


 
  we know that the matrix exponential is


 
  and by premultiplying the model we get


 
  which we recognize as


 
  and by integrating..





 
  which is an analytical solution to the continuous model.
Now we want to discretise the above expression. We assume that u is constant during each timestep.











 
  We recognize the bracketed expression as 
 
 
 
 , and the second term can be simplified by substituting 
 
 
 
 . We also assume that 
 
 
 
  is constant during the integral, which in turn yields


 
  which is an exact solution to the discretization problem.
Approximations
Exact discretization may sometimes be intractable due to the heavy matrix exponential and integral operations involved. It is much easier to calculate an approximate discrete model, based on that for small timesteps 
 
 
 
 . The approximate solution then becomes:



Other possible approximations are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Each of them have different stability properties. The last one is known as the bilinear transform, or Tustin transform, and preserves the (in)stability of the continuous-time system.
Discretization of continuous features
In statistics and machine learning, discretization refers to the process of converting continuous features or variables to discretized or nominal features. This can be useful when creating probability mass functions.
See also

Discrete space
Time-scale calculus
Discrete event simulation
Stochastic simulation
Finite volume method for unsteady flow

References








External links
de:Diskretisierung hr:Diskretizacija it:Discretizzazione pl:Dyskretyzacja (matematyka) zh:离散化"
Category:Numerical analysis Category:Applied mathematics Category:Functional analysis Category:Iterative methods Category:Control theory



Raymond DeCarlo: Linear Systems: A State Variable Approach with Numerical Implementation, Prentice Hall, NJ, 1989




