


Intrinsic metric




Intrinsic metric

In the mathematical study of metric spaces, one can consider the arclength of paths in the space. If two points are at a given distance from each other, it is natural to expect that one should be able to get from one point to another along a path whose arclength is equal to (or very close to) that distance. The distance between two points of a metric space relative to the intrinsic metric is defined as the infimum of the length of all paths from one point to the other. A metric space is a length metric space if the intrinsic metric agrees with the original metric of the space.
Definitions
Let 
 
 
 
  be a metric space. We define a new metric 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , known as the induced intrinsic metric, as follows: 
 
 
 
  is the infimum of the lengths of all paths from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Here, a path from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is a continuous map


 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The length of such a path is defined as explained for rectifiable curves. We set 
 
 
 
  if there is no path of finite length from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . If


 
  for all points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , we say that 
 
 
 
  is a length space or a path metric space and the metric 
 
 
 
  is intrinsic.
We say that the metric 
 
 
 
  has approximate midpoints if for any 
 
 
 
  and any pair of points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both smaller than


 
 .
Examples

Euclidean space

 
  with the ordinary Euclidean metric is a path metric space. 
 
 
 
  is as well.
The unit circle

 
  with the metric inherited from the Euclidean metric of 
 
 
 
  (the chordal metric) is not a path metric space. The induced intrinsic metric on 
 
 
 
  measures distances as angles in radians, and the resulting length metric space is called the Riemannian circle. In two dimensions, the chordal metric on the sphere is not intrinsic, and the induced intrinsic metric is given by the great-circle distance.
Every Riemannian manifold can be turned into a path metric space by defining the distance of two points as the infimum of the lengths of continuously differentiable curves connecting the two points. (The Riemannian structure allows one to define the length of such curves.) Analogously, other manifolds in which a length is defined included Finsler manifolds and sub-Riemannian manifolds.
Any complete and convex metric space is a length metric space , a result of Karl Menger. The converse does not hold in general, however: there are length metric spaces which are not convex.

Properties

In general, we have 
 
 
 
  and the topology defined by 
 
 
 
  is therefore always finer than or equal to the one defined by 
 
 
 
 .
The space 
 
 
 
  is always a path metric space (with the caveat, as mentioned above, that 
 
 
 
  can be infinite).
The metric of a length space has approximate midpoints. Conversely, every complete metric space with approximate midpoints is a length space.
The Hopf–Rinow theorem states that if a length space 
 
 
 
  is complete and locally compact then any two points in 
 
 
 
  can be connected by a minimizing geodesic and all bounded closed sets in 
 
 
 
  are compact.

References




"
Category:Metric geometry


