


Tetration




Tetration

   In mathematics, tetration (or hyper-4) is the next hyperoperator after exponentiation, and is defined as iterated exponentiation. The word was coined by Reuben Louis Goodstein, from tetra- (four) and iteration. Tetration is used for the notation of very large numbers. Shown here are examples of the first four hyperoperators, with tetration as the fourth (and succession, the unary operation denoted 
 
 
 
  taking 
 
 
 
  and yielding the number after 
 
 
 
 , as the 0th):

Addition





n copies of 1 added to a.
 



Multiplication





n copies of a combined by addition.
 



Exponentiation





n copies of a combined by multiplication.
 



Tetration
 
 




n copies of a combined by exponentiation, right-to-left.
 




where each operation is defined by iterating the previous one (the next operation in the sequence is pentation). Tetration is not an elementary function or an elementary recursive function.1
Here, succession (
 
 
 
 ) is the most basic operation; addition (
 
 
 
 ) is a primary operation, though for natural numbers it can be thought of as a chained succession of n successors of a; multiplication (
 
 
 
 ) is also a primary operation, though for natural numbers it can be thought of as a chained addition involving n numbers a; and exponentiation (
 
 
 
 ) can be thought of as a chained multiplication involving n numbers a. Analogously, tetration (
 
 
 
 ) can be thought of as a chained power involving n numbers a. The parameter a may be called the base-parameter in the following, while the parameter n in the following may be called the height-parameter (which is integral in the first approach but may be generalized to fractional, real and complex heights, see below).
Definition
For any positive real

 
  and non-negative integer

 
 , we define 
 
 
 
  by:



Iterated powers vs. iterated bases/exponentiation
As we can see from the definition, when evaluating tetration expressed as an "exponentiation tower", the exponentiation is done at the deepest level first (in the notation, at the highest level). In other words:



Note that exponentiation is not associative, so evaluating the expression in the other order will lead to a different answer:



Thus, the exponential towers must be evaluated from top to bottom (or right to left). Computer programmers refer to this choice as right-associative.
When a and 10 are coprime, we can compute the last m decimal digits of 
 
 
 
  using Euler's theorem.
Terminology
There are many terms for tetration, each of which has some logic behind it, but some have not become commonly used for one reason or another. Here is a comparison of each term with its rationale and counter-rationale.

The term tetration, introduced by Goodstein in his 1947 paper Transfinite Ordinals in Recursive Number Theory2 (generalizing the recursive base-representation used in Goodstein's theorem to use higher operations), has gained dominance. It was also popularized in Rudy Rucker's Infinity and the Mind.
The term superexponentiation was published by Bromer in his paper Superexponentiation in 1987.3 It was used earlier by Ed Nelson in his book Predicative Arithmetic, Princeton University Press, 1986.
The term hyperpower4 is a natural combination of hyper and power, which aptly describes tetration. The problem lies in the meaning of hyper with respect to the hyperoperator hierarchy. When considering hyperoperators, the term hyper refers to all ranks, and the term super refers to rank 4, or tetration. So under these considerations hyperpower is misleading, since it is only referring to tetration.
The term power tower5 is occasionally used, in the form "the power tower of order n" for 
 
 


Owing in part to some shared terminology and similar notational symbolism, tetration is often confused with closely related functions and expressions. Here are a few related terms:






Form

Terminology









Tetration







Iterated exponentials







Nested exponentials (also towers)







Infinite exponentials (also towers)





In the first two expressions a is the base, and the number of times a appears is the height (add one for x). In the third expression, n is the height, but each of the bases is different.
Care must be taken when referring to iterated exponentials, as it is common to call expressions of this form iterated exponentiation, which is ambiguous, as this can either mean iterated powers or iterated exponentials.
Notation
There are many different notation styles that can be used to express tetration (also known as hyper-4; some of them can be used as well for hyper-5, hyper-6, and higher hyperoperations).






Name

Form

Description





Standard notation





Used by Maurer [1901] and Goodstein [1947]; Rudy Rucker's book Infinity and the Mind popularized the notation.



Knuth's up-arrow notation





Allows extension by putting more arrows, or, even more powerfully, an indexed arrow.



Conway chained arrow notation





Allows extension by increasing the number 2 (equivalent with the extensions above), but also, even more powerfully, by extending the chain



Ackermann function





Allows the special case 
 
 
 
  to be written in terms of the Ackermann function.



Iterated exponential notation





Allows simple extension to iterated exponentials from initial values other than 1.



Hooshmand notations{{cite journal

author=M. H. Hooshmand,

year=2006



Hyperoperator notations







Allows extension by increasing the number 4; this gives the family of hyperoperations



ASCII notation

a^^n

Since the up-arrow is used identically to the caret (^), the tetration operator may be written as (^^).



Bowers' array notation

{a,b,2}







One notation above uses iterated exponential notation; in general this is defined as follows:


 
  with n "a"s.
There are not as many notations for iterated exponentials, but here are a few:






Name

Form

Description





Standard notation





Euler coined the notation 
 
 
 
 , and iteration notation 
 
 
 
  has been around about as long.



Knuth's up-arrow notation





Allows for super-powers and super-exponential function by increasing the number of arrows; used in the article on large numbers.



Ioannis Galidakis' notation





Allows for large expressions in the base.6



ASCII (auxiliary)

a^^n@x

Based on the view that an iterated exponential is auxiliary tetration.



ASCII (standard)

exp_a^n(x)

Based on standard notation.



J Notation

x^^:(n-1)x

Repeats the exponentiation. See J (programming language)7





Examples
In the following table, most values are too large to write in scientific notation, so iterated exponential notation is employed to express them in base 10. The values containing a decimal point are approximate.






























1

1

1

1

1



2

4

16

65,536







3

27

7,625,597,484,987








4

256

1.34078 × 10154








5

3,125















6

46,656












7

823,543












8

16,777,216












9

387,420,489












10

10,000,000,000














Extensions
Tetration can be extended to define 
 
 
 
  and other domains as well.
Extension of domain for bases
Extension to base zero
The exponential 
 
 
 
  is not consistently defined. Thus, the tetrations 
 
 
 
  are not clearly defined by the formula given earlier. However, 
 
 
 
  is well defined, and exists:


 
  Thus we could consistently define 
 
 
 
 . This is equivalent to defining 
 
 
 
 .
Under this extension, 
 
 
 
 , so the rule 
 
 
 
  from the original definition still holds.
Extension to complex bases
 
Since complex numbers can be raised to powers, tetration can be applied to bases of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . For example, 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , tetration is achieved by using the principal branch of the natural logarithm, and using Euler's formula we get the relation:



This suggests a recursive definition for 
 
 
 
  given any 
 
 
 
 :



The following approximate values can be derived:










Approximate Value

































































































Solving the inverse relation as in the previous section, yields the expected 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , with negative values of n giving infinite results on the imaginary axis. Plotted in the complex plane, the entire sequence spirals to the limit 
 
 
 
 , which could be interpreted as the value where n is infinite.
Such tetration sequences have been studied since the time of Euler but are poorly understood due to their chaotic behavior. Most published research historically has focused on the convergence of the power tower function. Current research has greatly benefited by the advent of powerful computers with fractal and symbolic mathematics software. Much of what is known about tetration comes from general knowledge of complex dynamics and specific research of the exponential map.
Extensions of the domain for (iteration) "heights"
Extension to infinite heights
(Figure)
The function 
 
 
 
  on the complex plane, showing infinite real power towers (black curve)

Tetration can be extended to infinite heights (n in 
 
 
 
 ). This is because for bases within a certain interval, tetration converges to a finite value as the height tends to infinity. For example, 
 
 
 
  converges to 2, and can therefore be said to be equal to 2. The trend towards 2 can be seen by evaluating a small finite tower:



In general, the infinite power tower 
 
 
 
 , defined as the limit of 
 
 
 
  as n goes to infinity, converges for e−e ≤ x ≤ e1/e, roughly the interval from 0.066 to 1.44, a result shown by Leonhard Euler.8 The limit, should it exist, is a positive real solution of the equation y = xy. Thus, x = y1/y. The limit defining the infinite tetration of x fails to converge for x > e1/e because the maximum of y1/y is e1/e.
This may be extended to complex numbers z with the definition:


 
  where W(z) represents Lambert's W function.
As the limit y = ∞x (if existent, i.e. for e−e 1/e) must satisfy xy = y we see that x ↦ y = ∞x is (the lower branch of) the inverse function of y ↦ x = y1/y.
(Limited) extension to negative heights
In order to preserve the original rule:


 
  for negative values of 
 
 
 
  we must use the recursive relation:



Thus:



However smaller negative values cannot be well defined in this way because


 
  which is not well defined.
Note further that for 
 
 
 
  any definition of 
 
 
 
  is consistent with the rule because


 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .
Extension to real heights
At this time there is no commonly accepted solution to the general problem of extending tetration to the real or complex values of 
 
 
 
 . Various approaches are mentioned below.
In general the problem is finding, for any real a > 0, a super-exponential function

 
  over real x > −2 that satisfies










A fourth requirement that is usually one of:

:*A continuity requirement (usually just that 
 
 
 
  is continuous in both variables for 
 
 
 
 ).
:*A differentiability requirement (can be once, twice, k times, or infinitely differentiable in x).
:*A regularity requirement (implying twice differentiable in x) that:




 
  for all 
 
 




The fourth requirement differs from author to author, and between approaches. There are two main approaches to extending tetration to real heights, one is based on the regularity requirement, and one is based on the differentiability requirement. These two approaches seem to be so different that they may not be reconciled, as they produce results inconsistent with each other.
When 
 
 
 
  is defined for an interval of length one, the whole function easily follows for all x > −2.
Linear approximation for the extension to real heights
 A linear approximation (solution to the continuity requirement, approximation to the differentiability requirement) is given by:


 
  hence:






Approximation

Domain









for 







for 







for 






and so on. However, it is only piecewise differentiable; at integer values of x the derivative is multiplied by 
 
 
 
 .
Examples



A main theorem in Hooshmand's paper9 states: Let 
 
 
 
 
  is continuous and satisfies the conditions:






 
  is differentiable on 
 
 



 
  is a nondecreasing or nonincreasing function on 
 
 





then 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined through the equation



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the fractional part of x and 
 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -iterated function of the function 
 
 
 
 .
The proof is that the second through fourth conditions trivially imply that f is a linear function on [−1, 0].
The linear approximation to natural tetration function 
 
 
 
  is continuously differentiable, but its second derivative does not exist at integer values of its argument. Hooshmand derived another uniqueness theorem for it which states:
If 
 
 
 
  is a continuous function that satisfies:






 
  is convex on 
 
 





then 
 
 
 
 . [Here 
 
 
 
 
  is Hooshmand's name for the linear approximation to the natural tetration function.]
The proof is much the same as before; the recursion equation ensures that 
 
 
 
  and then the convexity condition implies that 
 
 
 
  is linear on (−1, 0).
Therefore the linear approximation to natural tetration is the only solution of the equation 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which is convex on 
 
 
 
 . All other sufficiently-differentiable solutions must have an inflection point on the interval (−1, 0).
Higher order approximations for the extension to real heights
A quadratic approximation (to the differentiability requirement) is given by:


 
  which is differentiable for all 
 
 
 
 , but not twice differentiable. If 
 
 
 
  this is the same as the linear approximation.
Note that this function does not satisfy condition that tetration "cancels out" (for example as in raising to power
 
 
 
 ), because it is calculated top-down (as explained in section Iterated powers above) namely:


 
 .
A cubic approximation and a method for generalizing to approximations of degree n are given at.10
Extension to complex heights
(Figure)
Drawing of the analytic extension 
 
 
 
  of tetration to the complex plane. Levels 
 
 
 
  and levels 
 
 
 
  are shown with thick curves.

There is a conjecture11 that there exists a unique function F which is a solution of the equation  and satisfies the additional conditions that F(0)=1 and F(z) approaches the fixed points of the logarithm (roughly 0.318 ± 1.337i) as z approaches ±i∞ and that F is holomorphic in the whole complex z-plane, except the part of the real axis at z≤−2. This function is shown in the figure at right. The complex double precision approximation of this function is available online.12
The requirement of holomorphism of tetration is important for the uniqueness. Many functions 
 
 
 
  can be constructed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real sequences which decay fast enough to provide the convergence of the series, at least at moderate values of 
 
 
 
 .
The function S satisfies the tetration equations , S(0)=1, and if αn and βn approach 0 fast enough it will be analytic on a neighborhood of the positive real axis. However, if some elements of {α} or {β} are not zero, then function S has multitudes of additional singularities and cutlines in the complex plane, due to the exponential growth of sin and cos along the imaginary axis; the smaller the coefficients {α} and {β} are, the further away these singularities are from the real axis.
The extension of tetration into the complex plane is thus essential for the uniqueness; the real-analytic tetration is not unique.
Open questions

It is not known whether n

 or n

 is an integer for any positive integer n. Particularly, it is not known whether 4

 
  is an integer.
It is not known whether nq is an integer for any positive integer n and positive non-integer rational q.13 Particularly, it is not known whether the positive root of the equation  is a rational number.

Inverse relations
Exponentiation has two inverse relations; roots and logarithms. Analogously, the inverse relations of tetration are often called the super-root, and the super-logarithm.
Super-root
The super-root is the inverse relation of tetration with respect to the base: if 
 
 
 
 , then y is an nth super root of x. For example,



so 2 is the 4th super-root of 65,536 and



so 3 is the 3rd super-root (or super cube root) of 7,625,597,484,987.
Square super-root
 The 2nd-order super-root, square super-root, or super square root has two equivalent notations, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It is the inverse of 
 
 
 
  and can be represented with the Lambert W function:14



The function also illustrates the reflective nature of the root and logarithm functions as the equation below only holds true when 
 
 
 
 :



Like square roots, the square super-root of x may not have a single solution. Unlike square roots, determining the number of square super-roots of x may be difficult. In general, if 
 
 
 
 , then x has one positive square super-root greater than 1. If x is positive and less than 
 
 
 
  it doesn't have any real square super-roots, but the formula given above yields countably infinitely many complex ones for any finite x not equal to 1.15 The function has been used to determine the size of data clusters.16
Other super-roots
For each integer , the function nx is defined and increasing for , and , so that the nth super-root of x, 
 
 
 
 , exists for .
However, if the linear approximation above is used, then  if −1  ^y \sqrt{y + 1}_s }} cannot exist.
Other super-roots are expressible under the same basis used with normal roots: super cube roots, the function that produces y when 
 
 
 
 , can be expressed as 
 
 
 
 ; the 4th super-root can be expressed as 
 
 
 
 ; and it can therefore be said that the nth super-root is 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  may not be uniquely defined, because there may be more than one nth root. For example, x has a single (real) super-root if n is odd, and up to two if n is even.
The super-root can be extended to 
 
 
 
 , and this shows a link to the mathematical constant e as it is only well-defined if 1/e ≤ x ≤ e (see extension of tetration to infinite heights). Note that 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
  and thus that 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, when it is well defined, 
 
 
 
  and thus it is an elementary function. For example, 
 
 
 
 .
It follows from the Gelfond–Schneider theorem that super-root 
 
 
 
  for any positive integer n is either integer or transcendental, and 
 
 
 
  is either integer or irrational.17 But it is still an open question whether irrational super-roots are transcendental in the latter case.
Super-logarithm
Once a continuous increasing (in x) definition of tetration, xa, is selected, the corresponding super-logarithm  is defined for all real numbers x, and .
The function 
 
 
 
  satisfies:












See also

Ackermann function
Double exponential function
Hyperoperation
Iterated logarithm
Symmetric level-index arithmetic

References

Daniel Geisler, tetration.org
Ioannis Galidakis, On extending hyper4 to nonintegers (undated, 2006 or earlier) (A simpler, easier to read review of the next reference)
Ioannis Galidakis, On Extending hyper4 and Knuth's Up-arrow Notation to the Reals (undated, 2006 or earlier).
Robert Munafo, Extension of the hyper4 function to reals (An informal discussion about extending tetration to the real numbers.)
Lode Vandevenne, Tetration of the Square Root of Two, (2004). (Attempt to extend tetration to real numbers.)
Ioannis Galidakis, Mathematics, (Definitive list of references to tetration research. Lots of information on the Lambert W function, Riemann surfaces, and analytic continuation.)
Galidakis, Ioannis and Weisstein, Eric W. Power Tower
Joseph MacDonell, Some Critical Points of the Hyperpower Function.
Dave L. Renfro, Web pages for infinitely iterated exponentials (Compilation of entries from questions about tetration on sci.math.)
R. Knobel. "Exponentials Reiterated." American Mathematical Monthly 88, (1981), p. 235–252.
Hans Maurer. "Über die Funktion 
 
 
 
  für ganzzahliges Argument (Abundanzen)." Mittheilungen der Mathematische Gesellschaft in Hamburg 4, (1901), p. 33–50. (Reference to usage of 
 
 
 
  from Knobel's paper.)

External links

Daniel Geisler's site on tetration
Tetration Forum
Tetration - TORI - Mizugadro, the research site by Dmitrii Kouznetsov
Gottfried Helms' site on tetration

"
Category:Exponentials Category:Binary operations Category:Large numbers



It is easy to prove that for every elementary function f, there is a constant c s.t. $f(x) \leq \underbrace{2^{2^{\cdot^{\cdot^{x}}}}}_c$. We can show (by using diagonal argument and above fact) that $(c, x) \mapsto \underbrace{2^{2^{\cdot^{\cdot^{x}}}}}_c$ is non-elementary, and so is tetration.↩
↩
↩
 |journal=International Journal of Mathematical Education |year=1989 |volume=20 |issue=2 |pages=297–305 |mr=994348 |url=http://www.faculty.fairfield.edu/jmac/ther/tower.htm |doi=10.1080/0020739890200210}}↩
↩
Ioannis Galidakis. On Extending hyper4 and Knuth’s Up-arrow Notation to the Reals.↩
↩
Euler, L. "De serie Lambertina Plurimisque eius insignibus proprietatibus." Acta Acad. Scient. Petropol. 2, 29–51, 1783. Reprinted in Euler, L. Opera Omnia, Series Prima, Vol. 6: Commentationes Algebraicae. Leipzig, Germany: Teubner, pp. 350–369, 1921. (facsimile)↩

Andrew Robbins. Solving for the Analytic Piecewise Extension of Tetration and the Super-logarithm.↩
↩
Mathematica code for evaluation and plotting of the tetration and its derivatives.↩
Marshall, Ash J., and Tan, Yiren, "A rational number of the form aa with a irrational", Mathematical Gazette 96, March 2012, pp. 106-109.↩
↩

[http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:r1eNe1n4ZA8J:citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download%3Fdoi%3D10.1.1.10.8594%26rep%3Drep1%26type%3Dps+%221.559610%22+nasa&cd;;=8&hl;=en&ct;=clnk≷=uk BOSTON UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING – EFFICIENT SELF-ORGANIZATION OF LARGE WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS]↩





