


Mathematics of oscillation




Mathematics of oscillation

(Figure)
Oscillation of a sequence (shown in blue) is the difference between the limit superior and limit inferior of the sequence.

The mathematics of oscillation deals with the quantification of the amount that a sequence or function tends to move between extremes. There are several related notions: oscillation of a sequence of real numbers, oscillation of a real valued function at a point, and oscillation of a function on an interval (or open set).
Definitions
Oscillation of a sequence
Let (
 
 
 
 ) be a sequence of real numbers. The oscillation 
 
 
 
  of that sequence is defined as the difference (possibly infinite) between the limit superior and limit inferior of 
 
 
 
 :



The oscillation is zero if and only if the sequence converges. It is undefined if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both equal to +∞ or both equal to −∞, that is, if the sequence tends to +∞ or −∞.
Oscillation of a function on an open set
Let 
 
 
 
  be a real-valued function of a real variable. The oscillation of 
 
 
 
  on an interval 
 
 
 
  in its domain is the difference between the supremum and infimum of 
 
 
 
 :


 
  More generally, if 
 
 
 
  is a function on a topological space

 
  (such as a metric space), then the oscillation of 
 
 
 
  on an open set

 
  is



Oscillation of a function at a point
The oscillation of a function 
 
 
 
  of a real variable at a point 
 
 
 
  is defined as the limit as 
 
 
 
  of the oscillation of 
 
 
 
  on an 
 
 
 
 -neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 :


 
  This is the same as the difference between the limit superior and limit inferior of the function at 
 
 
 
 , provided the point 
 
 
 
  is not excluded from the limits.
More generally, if 
 
 
 
  is a real-valued function on a metric space, then the oscillation is



Examples
(Figure)
As the argument of ƒ approaches point P, ƒ oscillates from ƒ(a) to ƒ(b) infinitely many times, and does not converge.


1/x has oscillation ∞ at x = 0, and oscillation 0 at other finite x and at −∞ and +∞.
sin (1/x) (the topologist's sine curve) has oscillation 2 at x = 0, and 0 elsewhere.
sin x has oscillation 0 at every finite x, and 2 at −∞ and +∞.
The sequence 1, −1, 1, −1, 1, −1, ... has oscillation 2.

In the last example the sequence is periodic, and any sequence that is periodic without being constant will have non-zero oscillation. However, non-zero oscillation does not usually indicate periodicity.
Geometrically, the graph of an oscillating function on the real numbers follows some path in the xy-plane, without settling into ever-smaller regions. In well-behaved cases the path might look like a loop coming back on itself, that is, periodic behaviour; in the worst cases quite irregular movement covering a whole region.
Continuity
Oscillation can be used to define continuity of a function, and is easily equivalent to the usual ε-δ definition (in the case of functions defined everywhere on the real line): a function ƒ is continuous at a point x0 if and only if the oscillation is zero;1 in symbols, 
 
 
 
  A benefit of this definition is that it quantifies discontinuity: the oscillation gives how much the function is discontinuous at a point.
For example, in the classification of discontinuities:

in a removable discontinuity, the distance that the value of the function is off by is the oscillation;
in a jump discontinuity, the size of the jump is the oscillation (assuming that the value at the point lies between these limits from the two sides);
in an essential discontinuity, oscillation measures the failure of a limit to exist.

This definition is useful in descriptive set theory to study the set of discontinuities and continuous points – the continuous points are the intersection of the sets where the oscillation is less than ε (hence a Gδ set) – and gives a very quick proof of one direction of the Lebesgue integrability condition.2
The oscillation is equivalence to the ε-δ definition by a simple re-arrangement, and by using a limit (lim sup, lim inf) to define oscillation: if (at a given point) for a given ε0 there is no δ that satisfies the ε-δ definition, then the oscillation is at least ε0, and conversely if for every ε there is a desired δ, the oscillation is 0. The oscillation definition can be naturally generalized to maps from a topological space to a metric space.
Generalizations
More generally, if f : X → Y is a function from a topological space X into a metric space Y, then the oscillation of f is defined at each x ∈ X by



See also

Wave equation
Wave envelope
Grandi's series
Bounded mean oscillation

References





"
Category:Real analysis Category:Limits (mathematics) Category:Sequences and series Category:Functions and mappings



Introduction to Real Analysis, updated April 2010, William F. Trench, Theorem 3.5.2, p. 172↩
Introduction to Real Analysis, updated April 2010, William F. Trench, 3.5 "A More Advanced Look at the Existence of the Proper Riemann Integral", pp. 171–177↩




