


Integral equation




Integral equation

In mathematics, an integral equation is an equation in which an unknown function appears under an integral sign. There is a close connection between differential and integral equations, and some problems may be formulated either way. See, for example, Maxwell's equations.
Overview
The most basic type of integral equation is called a Fredholm equation of the first type:



The notation follows Arfken. Here 
 
 
 
  is an unknown function, 
 
 
 
  is a known function, and K is another known function of two variables, often called the kernel function. Note that the limits of integration are constant; this is what characterizes a Fredholm equation.
If the unknown function occurs both inside and outside of the integral, it is known as a Fredholm equation of the second type:



The parameter 
 
 
 
  is an unknown factor, which plays the same role as the eigenvalue in linear algebra.
If one limit of integration is variable, it is called a Volterra equation. The following are called Volterra equations of the first and second types, respectively:






In all of the above, if the known function 
 
 
 
  is identically zero, it is called a homogeneous integral equation. If 
 
 
 
  is nonzero, it is called an inhomogeneous integral equation.
Numerical Solution
It is worth noting that Integral Equations often do not have an analytical solution, and must be solved numerically. An example of this is evaluating the Electric-Field Integral Equation (EFIE) or Magnetic-Field Integral Equation (MFIE) over an arbitrarily shaped object in an electromagnetic scattering problem.
One method to solve numerically requires discretizing variables and replacing integral by a quadrature rule



Then we have a system with 
 
 
 
  equations and 
 
 
 
  variables. By solving it we get the value of the 
 
 
 
  variables



Classification
Integral equations are classified according to three different dichotomies, creating eight different kinds:

Limits of integration
both fixed: Fredholm equation

one variable: Volterra equation

Placement of unknown function
only inside integral: first kind
 
both inside and outside integral: second kind
 
Nature of known function 
 
 

identically zero: homogeneous
 
not identically zero: inhomogeneous
 

Integral equations are important in many applications. Problems in which integral equations are encountered include radiative energy transfer and the oscillation of a string, membrane, or axle. Oscillation problems may also be solved as differential equations.
Both Fredholm and Volterra equations are linear integral equations, due to the linear behaviour of 
 
 
 
  under the integral. A nonlinear Volterra integral equation has the general form:



where 
 
 
 
  is a known function.
Wiener-Hopf integral equations



Originally, such equations were studied in connection with problems in radiative transfer, and more recently, they have been related to the solution of boundary integral equations for planar problems in which the boundary is only piecewise smooth.
Power series solution for integral equations
In many cases if the Kernel of the integral equation is of the form 
 
 
 
  and the Mellin transform of 
 
 
 
  exists we can find the solution of the integral equation



in a form of a power series



with



are the Z-transform of the function 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the Mellin transform of the Kernel.
Integral equations as a generalization of eigenvalue equations
Certain homogeneous linear integral equations can be viewed as the continuum limit of eigenvalue equations. Using index notation, an eigenvalue equation can be written as



where  [Mi,j]}} is a matrix, 
 
 
 
  is one of its eigenvectors, and 
 
 
 
  is the associated eigenvalue.
Taking the continuum limit, by replacing the discrete indices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with continuous variables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , gives



where the sum over 
 
 
 
  has been replaced by an integral over 
 
 
 
  and the matrix 
 
 
 
  and the vector 
 
 
 
  have been replaced by the kernel

 
  and the eigenfunction

 
 . (The limits on the integral are fixed, analogously to the limits on the sum over 
 
 
 
 .) This gives a linear homogeneous Fredholm equation of the second type.
In general, 
 
 
 
  can be a distribution, rather than a function in the strict sense. If the distribution 
 
 
 
  has support only at the point 
 
 
 
 , then the integral equation reduces to a differential eigenfunction equation.
See also

Differential equation

References

Kendall E. Atkinson The Numerical Solution of integral Equations of the Second Kind. Cambridge Monographs on Applied and Computational Mathematics, 1997.
George Arfken and Hans Weber. Mathematical Methods for Physicists. Harcourt/Academic Press, 2000.
Harry Bateman (1910) History and Present State of the Theory of Integral Equations, Report of the British Association.
Andrei D. Polyanin and Alexander V. Manzhirov Handbook of Integral Equations. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1998. ISBN 0-8493-2876-4.
E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson. A Course of Modern Analysis Cambridge Mathematical Library.
Jose Javier Garcia Moreta Borel Resummation & the Solution of Integral Equations, power series solution for integral equation with Kernel K(st)
M. Krasnov, A. Kiselev, G. Makarenko, Problems and Exercises in Integral Equations, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1971


External links

Integral Equations: Exact Solutions at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.
Integral Equations: Index at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.


"
 


