


Partition of an interval




Partition of an interval

(Figure)
A partition of an interval being used in a Riemann sum. The partition itself is shown in grey at the bottom, with one subinterval indicated in red.

In mathematics, a partition of an interval [a, b] on the real line is a finite sequence x = ( xi ) of real numbers such that

a = x0 1 2 n = b.
 

In other terms, a partition of a compact interval I is a strictly increasing sequence of numbers (belonging to the interval I itself) starting from the initial point of I and arriving at the final point of I.
Every interval of the form [xi, xi+1] is referred to as a sub-interval of the partition x.
Refinement of a partition
Another partition of the given interval, Q, is defined as a refinement of the partition, P, when it contains all the points of P and possibly some other points as well; the partition Q is said to be “finer” than P. Given two partitions, P and Q, one can always form their common refinement, denoted P ∨ Q, which consists of all the points of P and Q, re-numbered in order.1
Norm of a partition
The norm (or mesh) of the partition

x0 1 2 n


is the length of the longest of these subintervals,23 that is

max{ |xi − xi−1| : i = 1, ..., n }.
 

Applications
Partitions are used in the theory of the Riemann integral, the Riemann–Stieltjes integral and the regulated integral. Specifically, as finer partitions of a given interval are considered, their mesh approaches zero and the Riemann sum based on a given partition approaches the Riemann integral.4
Tagged partitions
A tagged partition5 is a partition of a given interval together with a finite sequence of numbers t0, ..., tn−1 subject to the conditions that for each i,

xi ≤ ti ≤ xi+1.
 

In other words, a tagged partition is a partition together with a distinguished point of every subinterval: its mesh is defined in the same way as for an ordinary partition. It is possible to define a partial order on the set of all tagged partitions by saying that one tagged partition is bigger than another if the bigger one is a refinement of the smaller one.
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  together with 
 
 
 
  is a tagged partition of 
 
 
 
 , and that 
 
 
 
 
  together with 
 
 
 
  is another tagged partition of 
 
 
 
 . We say that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  together is a refinement of a tagged partition

 
 
  together with 
 
 
 
  if for each integer 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , there is an integer 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  and such that 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . Said more simply, a refinement of a tagged partition takes the starting partition and adds more tags, but does not take any away.
See also

Regulated integral
Riemann integral
Riemann–Stieltjes integral
Partition of a set

References
Further reading



"
Category:Mathematical analysis












