


Geodesic curvature




Geodesic curvature
In [[Riemannian geometry]], the '''geodesic curvature'''  of a curve  measures how far the curve is from being a [[geodesic]]. In a given manifold , the '''geodesic curvature''' is just the usual '''curvature''' of  (see below), but when  is restricte
 d to lie on a submanifold 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  (e.g. for curves on surfaces), geodesic curvature refers to the curvature of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and it is different in general from the curvature of 
 
 
 
  in the ambient manifold 
 
 
 
 . The (ambient) curvature 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  depends on two factors: the curvature of the submanifold 
 
 
 
  in the direction of 
 
 
 
  (the normal curvature

 
 ), which depends only from the direction of the curve, and the curvature of 
 
 
 
  seen in 
 
 
 
  (the geodesic curvature 
 
 
 
 ), which is a second order quantity. The relation between these is 
 
 
 
 . In particular geodesics on 
 
 
 
  have zero geodesic curvature (they are "straight"), so that 
 
 
 
 , which explains why they appear to be curved in ambient space whenever the submanifold is.
Definition
Consider a curve 
 
 
 
  in a manifold 
 
 
 
 , parametrized by arclength, with unit tangent vector 
 
 
 
 . Its curvature is the norm of the covariant derivative of 
 
 

 
 . If 
 
 
 
  lies on 
 
 
 
 , the geodesic curvature is the norm of the projection of the covariant derivative 
 
 
 
  on the tangent space to the submanifold. Conversely the normal curvature is the norm of the projection of 
 
 
 
  on the normal bundle to the submanifold at the point considered.
If the ambient manifold is the euclidean space 
 
 
 
 , then the covariant derivative 
 
 
 
  is just the usual derivative 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  be the unit sphere 
 
 
 
  in three-dimensional Euclidean space. The normal curvature of 
 
 
 
  is identically 1, independently of the direction considered. Great circles have curvature 
 
 
 
 , so they have zero geodesic curvature, and are therefore geodesics. Smaller circles of radius 
 
 
 
  will have curvature 
 
 
 
  and geodesic curvature 
 
 
 
 .
Some results involving geodesic curvature

The geodesic curvature is none other than the usual curvature of the curve when computed intrinsically in the submanifold 
 
 
 
 . It does not depend on the way the submanifold 
 
 
 
  sits in 
 
 
 
 .


Geodesics of 
 
 
 
  have zero geodesic curvature, which is equivalent to saying that 
 
 
 
  is orthogonal to the tangent space to 
 
 
 
 .


On the other hand the normal curvature depends strongly on how the submanifold lies in the ambient space, but marginally on the curve
 
 
 
  only depends on the point on the submanifold and the direction 
 
 
 
 , but not on 
 
 
 
 .


In general Riemannian geometry, the derivative is computed using the Levi-Civita connection

 
  of the ambient manifold
 
 
 
 . It splits into a tangent part and a normal part to the submanifold
 
 
 
 . The tangent part is the usual derivative 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  (it is a particular case of Gauss equation in the Gauss-Codazzi equations), while the normal part is 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the second fundamental form.


The Gauss–Bonnet theorem.

See also

Curvature
Darboux frame
Gauss–Codazzi equations

References



.

.

External links



"
Category:Geodesic (mathematics) Category:Manifolds


