


Rate (mathematics)




Rate (mathematics)

In mathematics, a rate is the ratio between two related quantities.1 Often it is a rate of change. If the unit or quantity in respect of which something is changing is not specified, usually the rate is per unit time. However, a rate of change can be specified per unit time, or per unit of length or mass or another quantity. The most common type of rate is "per unit time", such as speed, heart rate and flux. Ratios that have a non-time denominator include exchange rates, literacy rates and electric flux.
In describing the units of a rate, the word "per" is used to separate the units of the two measurements used to calculate the rate (for example a heart rate is expressed "beats per minute"). A rate defined using two numbers of the same units (such as tax rates) or counts (such as literacy rate) will result in a dimensionless quantity, which can be expressed as a percentage (for example, the global literacy rate in 1998 was 80%) or fraction or as a multiple.
Often rate is a synonym of rhythm or frequency, a count per second (i.e., Hertz); e.g., radio frequencies or heart rate or sample rate.
Rate of change
A rate of change can be formally defined in two ways:2


 
 
  where f(x) is the function with respect to x over the interval from a to a+h. An instantaneous rate of change is equivalent to a derivative.
An example to contrast the differences between the average and instantaneous definitions: the speed of a car can be calculated:

An average rate can be calculated using the total distance travelled between a and b, divided by the travel time
An instantaneous rate can be determined by viewing a speedometer.

Temporal rates
In chemistry and physics:

Speed, being the distance covered per unit time; e.g., miles per hour and meters per second
Acceleration, the rate of change in speed, or the change in speed per unit time
Reaction rate, the speed at which chemical reactions occur
Volumetric flow rate, the volume of fluid which passes through a given surface per unit time; e.g., cubic meters per second

In finance:

Inflation rate, a measure of inflation change per year

Counts-per-time rates

Radioactive decay, the amount of radioactive material in which one nucleus decays per second, measured in Becquerels

In computing:

Bit rate, the number of bits that are conveyed or processed by a computer per unit of time
Symbol rate, the number of symbol changes (signalling events) made to the transmission medium per second
Sampling rate, the number of samples (signal measurements) per second

Miscellaneous definitions:

Rate of reinforcement, number of reinforcements per time, usually per minute
Heart rate, usually measured in beats per minute

Other rates

Interest rate, the price a borrower pays for the use of money they do not own
Exchange rate, how much one currency is worth in terms of the other
Rate of return, the ratio of money gained or lost on an investment relative to the amount of money invested
Tax rate, the tax amount divided by the taxable income
Unemployment rate, a ratio between those in the labor force to those who are unemployed
Birth rate and mortality rate, the number of births or deaths scaled to the size of that population, per unit time
Literacy rate, the proportion of the population over age fifteen that can read and write

See also

Derivative
Flux
Gradient
Hertz
Rate of change
Rate
Slope

References
de:Rate"
Category:Measurement  



↩
↩




