


Algebra homomorphism




Algebra homomorphism

A homomorphism between two algebras, A and B, over a field (or ring) K, is a map

 
  such that for all k in K and x,y in A,

F(kx) = kF(x)


F(x + y) = F(x) + F(y)


F(xy) = F(x)F(y)12

If F is bijective then F is said to be an isomorphism between A and B.
A common abbreviation for "homomorphism between algebras" is "algebra homomorphism" or "algebra map". Every algebra homomorphism is a homomorphism of K-modules
Unital algebra homomorphisms
If A and B are two unital algebras, then an algebra homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is said to be unital if it maps the unity of A to the unity of B. Often the words "algebra homomorphism" are actually used in the meaning of "unital algebra homomorphism", so non-unital algebra homomorphisms are excluded.
A unital algebra homomorphism is a ring homomorphism.
Examples
Let A = K[x] be the set of all polynomials over a field K and B be the set of all polynomial functions over K. Both A and B are algebras over K given by the standard multiplication and addition of polynomials and functions, respectively. We can map each 
 
 
 
  in A to 
 
 
 
  in B by the rule 
 
 
 
 . A routine check shows that the mapping 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphism of the algebras A and B. This homomorphism is an isomorphism if and only if K is an infinite field.
Proof. If K is a finite field then let



p is a nonzero polynomial in K[x], however 
 
 
 
  for all t in K, so 
 
 
 
  is the zero function and our homomorphism is not an isomorphism (and, actually, the algebras are not isomorphic, since the algebra of polynomials is infinite while that of polynomial functions is finite).
If K is infinite then choose a polynomial f such that 
 
 
 
 . We want to show this implies that 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be n + 1 distinct elements of K. Then 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and by Lagrange interpolation we have 
 
 
 
 . Hence the mapping 
 
 
 
  is injective. Since this mapping is clearly surjective, it is bijective and thus an algebra isomorphism of A and B.
If A is a subalgebra of B, then for every invertible b in B the function that takes every a in A to b−1 a b is an algebra homomorphism (in case 
 
 
 
 , this is called an inner automorphism of B). If A is also simple and B is a central simple algebra, then every homomorphism from A to B is given in this way by some b in B; this is the Skolem-Noether theorem.
See also

Augmentation (algebra)

References
"
Category:Algebras Category:Ring theory Category:Morphisms



↩
↩




