


Sound intensity




Sound intensity

Sound intensity or acoustic intensity is defined as the sound power per unit area. The SI unit of sound intensity is the watt per square metre (W/m2). The usual context is the noise measurement of sound intensity in the air at a listener's location as a sound energy quantity.1
Sound intensity is not the same physical quantity as sound pressure. Hearing is directly sensitive to sound pressure which is related to sound intensity. In consumer audio electronics, the level differences are called "intensity" differences, but sound intensity is a specifically defined quantity and cannot be sensed by a simple microphone.
Mathematical definition
Sound intensity, denoted I, is defined by


 
  where

p is the sound pressure;
v is the particle velocity.

Both I and v are vectors, which means that both have a direction as well as a magnitude. The direction of sound intensity is the average direction in which energy is flowing.
The average sound intensity during time T is given by



Relationships with other quantities
Sound intensity in the direction of the sound force is related to sound power:


 
  where

P is the sound power;
A is the area.

Sound intensity in the direction of the sound force is related sound energy density:


 
  where

c is the speed of sound;
w is the sound energy density.

Inverse-square law
For a spherical sound wave, the intensity in the radial direction as a function of distance r from the centre of the sphere is given by


 
  where

P is the sound power;
A(r) is the area of a sphere of radius r.

Thus sound intensity decreases as 1/r2 from the centre of the sphere:



This relationship is an inverse-square law.
Sound intensity level
Sound intensity level (SIL) or acoustic intensity level is a logarithmic measure of the sound intensity of a sound relative to a reference value.
 Sound intensity level, denoted LI and measured in dB, is defined by2


 
  where

I is the sound intensity;
I0 is the reference sound intensity;

is the neper;

is the bel;

is the decibel.

The commonly used reference sound intensity in air is3


 
  The proper notations for sound intensity level using this reference are  or , but the notations , , dBSIL, or dBSIL are very common, even if they are not accepted by the SI.4
The reference sound intensity I0 is defined such that a progressive plane wave has the same value of sound intensity level (SIL) and sound pressure level (SPL), since


 
  The equality of SIL and SPL requires that


 
  where  is the reference sound pressure.
For a progressive spherical wave,


 
  where z0 is the characteristic specific acoustic impedance. Thus,


 
  In air at ambient temperature, , hence the reference value .5
In an anechoic chamber, which approximates a free field (no reflection), the SIL can be taken as being equal to the SPL. This fact is exploited to measure sound power in anechoic conditions.
Measurement
One method of sound intensity measurement involves the use of two microphones located close to each other, normal to the direction of sound energy flow. A signal analyser is used to compute the crosspower between the measured pressures and the sound intensity is derived from (proportional to) the imaginary part of the crosspower.6
References
External links

How Many Decibels Is Twice as Loud? Sound Level Change and the Respective Factor of Sound Pressure or Sound Intensity
Acoustic Intensity
Conversion: Sound Intensity Level to Sound Intensity and Vice Versa
Ohm's Law as Acoustic Equivalent. Calculations
Relationships of Acoustic Quantities Associated with a Plane Progressive Acoustic Sound Wave
Table of Sound Levels. Corresponding Sound Intensity and Sound Pressure
What Is Sound Intensity Measurement and Analysis?

"
Category:Acoustics Category:Sound Category:Sound measurements Category:Physical quantities




"Letter symbols to be used in electrical technology – Part 3: Logarithmic and related quantities, and their units", IEC 60027-3 Ed. 3.0, International Electrotechnical Commission, 19 July 2002.
Ross Roeser, Michael Valente, Audiology: Diagnosis (Thieme 2007), p. 240.
Thompson, A. and Taylor, B. N. sec 8.7, "Logarithmic quantities and units: level, neper, bel", Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI) 2008 Edition, NIST Special Publication 811, 2nd printing (November 2008), SP811 PDF
Sound Power Measurements, Hewlett Packard Application Note 1230, 1992.
Sound Intensity (Theory)




