


Fibonacci polynomials




Fibonacci polynomials

In mathematics, the Fibonacci polynomials are a polynomial sequence which can be considered as a generalization of the Fibonacci numbers. The polynomials generated in a similar way from the Lucas numbers are called Lucas polynomials.
Definition
These Fibonacci polynomials are defined by a recurrence relation:1



The first few Fibonacci polynomials are:





















The Lucas polynomials use the same recurrence with different starting values:2


The first few Lucas polynomials are:





















The Fibonacci and Lucas numbers are recovered by evaluating the polynomials at x = 1; Pell numbers are recovered by evaluating Fn at x = 2. The degrees of Fn is n − 1 and the degree of Ln is n. The ordinary generating function for the sequences are:3






The polynomials can be expressed in terms of Lucas sequences as






Identities
As particular cases of Lucas sequences, Fibonacci polynomials satisfy a number of identities.
First, they can be defined for negative indices by4


 
  Other identities include:5











 
  Closed form expressions, similar to Binet's formula are:6


 
  where


 
  are the solutions (in t) of



Combinatorial interpretation
 If F(n,k) is the coefficient of xk in Fn(x), so


 
  then F(n,k) is the number of ways an n−1 by 1 rectangle can be tiled with 2 by 1 dominoes and 1 by 1 squares so that exactly k squares are used.7 Equivalently, F(n,k) is the number of ways of writing n−1 as an ordered sum involving only 1 and 2, so that 1 is used exactly k times. For example F(6,3)=4 and 5 can be written in 4 ways, 1+1+1+2, 1+1+2+1, 1+2+1+1, 2+1+1+1, as a sum involving only 1 and 2 with 1 used 3 times. By counting the number of times 1 and 2 are both used in such a sum, it is evident that F(n,k) is equal to the binomial coefficient


 
  when n and k have opposite parity. This gives a way of reading the coefficients from Pascal's triangle as shown on the right.
References








Further reading







External links




"
Category:Polynomials Category:Fibonacci numbers



Benjamin & Quinn p. 141↩
Benjamin & Quinn p. 142↩
↩
Springer↩







