   Primitive ring      Primitive ring   In the branch of abstract algebra known as ring theory , a left primitive ring is a ring which has a faithful simple left module . Well known examples include endomorphism rings of vector spaces and Weyl algebras over fields of characteristic zero.  Definition  A ring  R is said to be a left primitive ring if and only if it has a faithful  simple  left R -module . A right primitive ring is defined similarly with right R -modules. There are rings which are primitive on one side but not on the other. The first example was constructed by George M. Bergman in . Another example found by Jategaonkar showing the distinction can be found in  An internal characterization of left primitive rings is as follows: a ring is left primitive if and only if there is a maximal left ideal containing no nonzero two-sided ideals . The analogous definition for right primitive rings is also valid.  The structure of left primitive rings is completely determined by the Jacobson density theorem : A ring is left primitive if and only if it is isomorphic to a dense subring of the ring of endomorphisms of a left vector space over a division ring.  Another equivalent definition states that a ring is left primitive if and only if it is a prime ring with a faithful left module of finite length (, [ http://books.google.com/books?id=2T5DAAAAQBAJ&pg; ;=PA191 Ex. 11.19, p. 191]).  Properties  One sided primitive rings are both semiprimitive rings and prime rings . Since the ring product of two or more nonzero rings is not prime, it is clear that the product of primitive rings is never primitive.  For a left Artinian ring , it is known that the conditions "left primitive", "right primitive", "prime", and " simple " are all equivalent, and in this case it is a semisimple ring isomorphic to a square matrix ring over a division ring. More generally, in any ring with a minimal one sided ideal, "left primitive"="right primitive"="prime".  A commutative ring is left primitive if and only if it is a field .  Being left primitive is a Morita invariant property .  Examples  Every simple ring  R with unity is both left and right primitive. (However, a simple non-unital ring may not be primitive.) This follows from the fact that R has a maximal left ideal  M , and the fact that the quotient module  R / M is a simple left R -module, and that its annihilator is a proper two-sided ideal in R . Since R is a simple ring, this annihilator is {0} and therefore R / M is a faithful left R -module.  Weyl algebras over fields with characteristic zero are primitive, and since they are domains , they are examples without minimal one-sided ideals.  Full linear rings  A special case of primitive rings is that of full linear rings . A left full linear ring is the ring of all linear transformations of an infinite dimensional left vector space over a division ring. (A right full linear ring differs by using a right vector space instead.) In symbols,    R  =  End    (  D   V  )      fragments  R   End   fragments   subscript  normal-(  D   V  normal-)     R=\mathrm{End}(_{D}V)\,   where V is a vector space over a division ring D . It is known that R is a left full linear ring if and only if R is von Neumann regular , left self-injective with socle soc( R R )≠{0}.  Through linear algebra arguments, it can be shown that    End    (  D   V  )      fragments  End   fragments   subscript  normal-(  D   V  normal-)     \mathrm{End}(_{D}V)\,   is isomorphic to the ring of row finite matrices     ℝ  𝔽   𝕄  I    (  D  )       ℝ  𝔽   subscript  𝕄  I   D    \mathbb{RFM}_{I}(D)\,   , where I is an index set whose size is the dimension of V over D . Likewise right full linear rings can be realized as column finite matrices over D .  Using this we can see that there are non-simple left primitive rings. By the Jacobson Density characterization, a left full linear ring R is always left primitive. When dim D V is finite R is a square matrix ring over D , but when dim D V is infinite, the set of finite rank linear transformations is a proper two-sided ideal of R , and hence R is not simple.  References    p. 1000 errata      "  Category:Ring theory  Category:Algebraic structures   