


Curvature form




Curvature form

In differential geometry, the curvature form describes curvature of a connection on a principal bundle. It can be considered as an alternative to or generalization of the curvature tensor in Riemannian geometry.
Definition
Let G be a Lie group with Lie algebra

 
 , and P → B be a principal G-bundle. Let ω be an Ehresmann connection on P (which is a 

 
 -valued one-form on P).
Then the curvature form is the 
 
 
 
 -valued 2-form on P defined by



Here 
 
 
 
  stands for exterior derivative, 
 
 
 
  is defined in the article "Lie algebra-valued form" and D denotes the exterior covariant derivative. In other terms,


 
  where X, Y are tangent vectors to P.
There is also another expression for Ω:


 
  where hZ means the horizontal component of Z and on the right we identified a vertical vector field and a Lie algebra element generating it (fundamental vector field).1
A connection is said to be flat if its curvature vanishes: Ω = 0. Equivalently, a connection is flat if the structure group can be reduced to the same underlying group but with the discrete topology. See also: flat vector bundle.
Curvature form in a vector bundle
If E → B is a vector bundle, then one can also think of ω as a matrix of 1-forms and the above formula becomes the structure equation of E. Cartan:



where 
 
 
 
  is the wedge product. More precisely, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote components of ω and Ω correspondingly, (so each 
 
 
 
  is a usual 1-form and each 
 
 
 
 
  is a usual 2-form) then



For example, for the tangent bundle of a Riemannian manifold, the structure group is O(n) and Ω is a 2-form with values in the Lie algebra of O(n), i.e. the antisymmetric matrices. In this case the form Ω is an alternative description of the curvature tensor, i.e.



using the standard notation for the Riemannian curvature tensor.
Bianchi identities
If 
 
 
 
  is the canonical vector-valued 1-form on the frame bundle, the torsion

 
  of the connection form

 
 
  is the vector-valued 2-form defined by the structure equation



where as above D denotes the exterior covariant derivative.
The first Bianchi identity takes the form



The second Bianchi identity takes the form



and is valid more generally for any connection in a principal bundle.
Notes
References

Shoshichi Kobayashi and Katsumi Nomizu (1963) Foundations of Differential Geometry, Vol.I, Chapter 2.5 Curvature form and structure equation, p 75, Wiley Interscience.

See also

Connection (principal bundle)
Basic introduction to the mathematics of curved spacetime
Chern-Simons form
Curvature of Riemannian manifolds
Gauge theory

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Curvature (mathematics)



Proof: We can assume X, Y are either vertical or horizontal. Then we can assume X, Y are both horizontal (otherwise both sides vanish since Ω is horizontal). In that case, this is a consequence of the invariant formula for exterior derivative d and the fact ω(Z) is a unique Lie algebra element that generates the vector field Z.




