


Inclusion map




Inclusion map

 In mathematics, if 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 , then the inclusion map (also inclusion function, insertion, or canonical injection) 1 is the function

 
  that sends each element, 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , treated as an element of 
 
 
 
 :



A "hooked arrow" 
 
 
 
  is sometimes used in place of the function arrow above to denote an inclusion map.
This and other analogous injective functions 2 from substructures are sometimes called natural injections.
Given any morphism f between objects X and Y, if there is an inclusion map into the domain

 
 , then one can form the restriction fi of f. In many instances, one can also construct a canonical inclusion into the codomain R→Y known as the range of f.
Applications of inclusion maps
Inclusion maps tend to be homomorphisms of algebraic structures; thus, such inclusion maps are embeddings. More precisely, given a sub-structure closed under some operations, the inclusion map will be an embedding for tautological reasons. For example, for a binary operation 
 
 
 
 , to require that



is simply to say that 
 
 
 
  is consistently computed in the sub-structure and the large structure. The case of a unary operation is similar; but one should also look at nullary operations, which pick out a constant element. Here the point is that closure means such constants must already be given in the substructure.
Inclusion maps are seen in algebraic topology where if A is a strong deformation retract of X, the inclusion map yields an isomorphism between all homotopy groups (i.e. is a homotopy equivalence)
Inclusion maps in geometry come in different kinds: for example embeddings of submanifolds. Contravariant objects such as differential forms restrict to submanifolds, giving a mapping in the other direction. Another example, more sophisticated, is that of affine schemes, for which the inclusions

Spec(R/I) → Spec(R)


and

Spec(R/I2) → Spec(R)


may be different morphisms, where R is a commutative ring and I an ideal.
See also

Cofibration
Identity function

Notes
References


.

.

"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Basic concepts in set theory



, page 5
, page 1




