


Oblique projection




Oblique projection


This article discusses the imaging of 3D objects. For an abstract mathematical discussion, see Projection (linear algebra).


Oblique projection is a simple type of technical drawing of graphical projection used for producing pictorial, two-dimensional images of three-dimensional objects.
Overview
 Oblique projection is a type of parallel projection:

it projects an image by intersecting parallel rays (projectors)
from the three-dimensional source object with the drawing surface (projection plane).

In both oblique projection and orthographic projection, parallel lines of the source object produce parallel lines in the projected image. The projectors in oblique projection intersect the projection plane at an oblique angle to produce the projected image, as opposed to the perpendicular angle used in orthographic projection.
Mathematically, the parallel projection of the point 
 
 
 
  on the 
 
 
 
 -plane gives 
 
 
 
 . The constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  uniquely specify a parallel projection. When 
 
 
 
 , the projection is said to be "orthographic" or "orthogonal". Otherwise, it is "oblique". The constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not necessarily less than 1, and as a consequence lengths measured on an oblique projection may be either larger or shorter than they were in space. In a general oblique projection, spheres of the space are projected as ellipses on the drawing plane, and not as circles as you would expect them from an orthogonal projection.
Oblique drawing is also the crudest "3D" drawing method but the easiest to master. Oblique is not really a 3D system but a two-dimensional view of an object with 'forced depth'. One way to draw using an oblique view is to draw the side of the object you are looking at in two dimensions, i.e. flat, and then draw the other sides at an angle of 45 degrees, but instead of drawing the sides full size they are only drawn with half the depth creating 'forced depth' – adding an element of realism to the object. Even with this 'forced depth', oblique drawings look very unconvincing to the eye. For this reason oblique is rarely used by professional designers and engineers.
Oblique pictorial
In an oblique pictorial drawing, the angles displayed among the axis, as well as the foreshortening factors (scale) are arbitrary. More precisely, any given set of three coplanar segments originating from the same point may be construed as forming some oblique perspective of three sides of a cube. This result is known as Pohlke's theorem, from the German mathematician Pohlke, who published it in the early 19th century.1
The resulting distortions make the technique unsuitable for formal, working drawings. Nevertheless, the distortions are partially overcome by aligning one plane of the image parallel to the plane of projection. Doing so creates a true shape image of the chosen plane. This specific category of oblique projections, whereby lengths along the directions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are preserved, but lengths along direction 
 
 
 
  are drawn at angle using a reduction factor is very much in use for industrial drawings.

Cavalier projection is the name of such a projection, where the length along the 
 
 
 
  axis remains unscaled.2
Cabinet projection, popular in furniture illustrations, is an example of such a technique, wherein the receding axis is scaled to half-size3 (sometimes instead two thirds the original).4

Cavalier projections
In cavalier projection (sometimes cavalier perspective or high view point) a point of the object is represented by three coordinates, x, y and z. On the drawing, it is represented by only two coordinates, x" and y". On the flat drawing, two axes, x and z on the figure, are perpendicular and the length on these axes are drawn with a 1:1 scale; it is thus similar to the dimetric projections, although it is not an orthographic projection, as the third axis, here y, is drawn in diagonal, making an arbitrary angle with the x" axis, usually 30 or 45°. The length of the third axis is not scaled.56
It is very easy to draw, especially with pen and paper. It is thus often used when a figure must be drawn by hand, e.g. on a black board (lesson, oral examination).
The representation was initially used for military fortifications. In French, the « cavalier » (literally rider, horseman, see Cavalry) is an artificial hill behind the walls that allows to see the enemy above the walls.7 The cavalier perspective was the way the things were seen from this high point. Some also explain the name by the fact that it was the way a rider could see a small object on the ground from his horseback.8
Cabinet projection
The term cabinet projection (sometimes cabinet perspective) stems from its use in illustrations by the furniture industry.9 Like cavalier perspective, one face of the projected object is parallel to the viewing plane, and the third axis is projected as going off in an angle (typical 30° or 45°). Unlike cavalier projection, where the third axis keeps its length, with cabinet projection the length of the receding lines is cut in half.
Mathematical formula
As formula, if the plane facing the viewer is 
 
 
 
 , and the receding axis is 
 
 
 
 , then a point 
 
 
 
  is projected like this:


 
  Where 
 
 
 
  is the mentioned angle.
The transformation matrix is:



Alternatively you could remove one third from the leading arm projected off the starting face, thus giving the same
Military projection
In the military projection, the angles of the x- and z-axes are at 45°, meaning that the angle between the x-axis and the z-axis is 90°. That is, the x-z plane is not skewed. It is rotated over 45°, though.10
Examples
Besides technical drawing and illustrations, video games (especially those preceding the advent of 3D games) also often use a form of oblique projection. Examples include SimCity, Ultima VII, Ultima Online, EarthBound, Paperboy and, more recently, Tibia.
Image:Perspective cavaliere exemple piece revolution.svg|The figures to the left are orthographic projections. The figure to the right is an oblique projection with an angle of 30° and a ratio of 0.5. Image:Potting-bench-cabinet-view.png|Potting bench drawn in cabinet projection: an oblique projection with an angle of 30° and a ratio of 0.5. Image:Perspective cavaliere fortification.jpg|Pieces of fortification in cavalier perspective (Cyclopaedia vol. 1, 1728). Image:Perspective cavaliere report coordonnees 90deg.svg|How the coordinates are used to place a point on a cavalier perspective.
See also

Orthographic projection
Plans (drawings)
Graphical projection


Projection (linear algebra)
Parallel (geometry)
Space-oblique Mercator projection
Perspective (visual)

References
Further reading


Ingrid Carlbom, Joseph Paciorek, Planar Geometric Projections and Viewing Transformations, ACM Computing Surveys, v.10 n.4, p. 465–502, Dec. 1978

External links

Illustrator Draftsman 3 & 2 – Volume 2 Standard Practices and Theory, page 68 from http://www.tpub.com

"
Category:Graphical projections



Weisstein, Eric W. "Pohlke's Theorem". From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource.
Parallel Projections from PlaneView3D Online

.
Illustrator Draftsman 3 & 2 – Volume 2 Standard Practices and Theory, page 67 from http://www.tpub.com
Ingrid Carlbom, Joseph Paciorek, Planar Geometric Projections and Viewing Transformations, ACM Computing Surveys, v.10 n.4, pp. 465–502, Dec. 1978
Etymologie des maths, letter C (French)
DES QUESTIONS D’ORIGINES (French)
.





