


Lie algebra representation




Lie algebra representation

In the mathematical field of representation theory, a Lie algebra representation or representation of a Lie algebra is a way of writing a Lie algebra as a set of matrices (or endomorphisms of a vector space) in such a way that the Lie bracket is given by the commutator.
The notion is closely related to that of a representation of a Lie group. Roughly speaking, the representations of Lie algebras are the differentiated form of representations of Lie groups, while the representations of the universal cover of a Lie group are the integrated form of the representations of its Lie algebra.
In the study of representations of a Lie algebra, a particular ring, called the universal enveloping algebra, associated with the Lie algebra plays a decisive role. The universality of this construction of this ring says that the category of representations of a Lie algebra is the same as the category of modules over its enveloping algebra.
Formal definition
A representation of a Lie algebra

 
  is a Lie algebra homomorphism


 
  from 
 
 
 
  to the Lie algebra of endomorphisms on a vector space V (with the commutator as the Lie bracket), sending an element x of 
 
 
 
  to an element ρx of 
 
 
 
 .
Explicitly, this means that


 
  for all x,y in 
 
 
 
 . The vector space V, together with the representation ρ, is called a 

 
 -module. (Many authors abuse terminology and refer to V itself as the representation).
The representation 
 
 
 
  is said to be faithful if it is injective.
One can equivalently define a 
 
 
 
 -module as a vector space V together with a bilinear map

 
  such that


 
  for all x,y in 
 
 
 
  and v in V. This is related to the previous definition by setting x ⋅ v = ρx (v).
Examples
Adjoint representations
The most basic example of a Lie algebra representation is the adjoint representation of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  on itself:


 
  Indeed, by virtue of the Jacobi identity, 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra homomorphism.
Infinitesimal Lie group representations
A Lie algebra representation also arises in nature. If φ: G → H is a homomorphism of (real or complex) Lie groups, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Lie algebras of G and H respectively, then the differential

 
  on tangent spaces at the identities is a Lie algebra homomorphism. In particular, for a finite-dimensional vector space V, a representation of Lie groups


 
  determines a Lie algebra homomorphism


 
  from 
 
 
 
  to the Lie algebra of the general linear group GL(V), i.e. the endomorphism algebra of V.
For example, let 
 
 
 
 . Then the differential of 
 
 
 
  at the identity is an element of 
 
 
 
 . Denoting it by 
 
 
 
  one obtains a representation 
 
 
 
  of G on the vector space 
 
 
 
 . Applying the preceding, one gets the Lie algebra representation 
 
 
 
 . It can be shown that 
 
 

A partial converse to this statement says that every representation of a finite-dimensional (real or complex) Lie algebra lifts to a unique representation of the associated simply connected Lie group, so that representations of simply-connected Lie groups are in one-to-one correspondence with representations of their Lie algebras.
Basic concepts
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie algebra. Let V, W be 
 
 
 
 -modules. Then a linear map 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphism of 
 
 
 
 -modules if it is 
 
 
 
 -equivariant; i.e., 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 . If f is bijective, 
 
 
 
  are said to be equivalent. Similarly, many other constructions from module theory in abstract algebra carry over to this setting: submodule, quotient, subquotient, direct sum, Jordan-Hölder series, etc.
Let V be a 
 
 
 
 -module. Then V is said to be semisimple or completely reducible if it satisfies the following equivalent conditions: (cf. semisimple module)

V is a direct sum of simple modules.
V is the sum of its simple submodules.
Every submodule of V is a direct summand: for every submodule W of V, there is a complement P such that V = W ⊕ P.

If 
 
 
 
  is a finite-dimensional semisimple Lie algebra over a field of characteristic zero and V is finite-dimensional, then V is semisimple (Weyl's complete reducibility theorem).1 A Lie algebra is said to be reductive if the adjoint representation is semisimple. Thus, a semisimple Lie algebra is reductive. An element v of V is said to be 
 
 
 
 -invariant if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . The set of all invariant elements is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is a left-exact functor.
Basic constructions
If we have two representations, with V1 and V2 as their underlying vector spaces and ·[·]1 and ·[·]2 as the representations, then the product of both representations would have V1 ⊗ V2 as the underlying vector space and



If L is a real Lie algebra and ρ: L × V→ V is a complex representation of it, we can construct another representation of L called its dual representation as follows.
Let V∗ be the dual vector space of V. In other words, V∗ is the set of all linear maps from V to C with addition defined over it in the usual linear way, but scalar multiplication defined over it such that 
 
 
 
  for any z in C, ω in V∗ and X in V. This is usually rewritten as a contraction with a sesquilinear form 〈·,·〉. i.e. 〈ω,X〉 is defined to be ω[X].
We define 
 
 
 
  as follows:

〈
 
 
 
 (A)[ω],X〉 + 〈ω, ρA[X]〉 = 0,
 

for any A in L, ω in V∗ and X in V. This defines 
 
 
 
  uniquely.
Let 
 
 
 
  be 
 
 
 
 -modules, 
 
 
 
  a Lie algebra. Then 
 
 
 
  becomes a 
 
 
 
 -module by setting 
 
 
 
 . In particular, 
 
 
 
 . Since any field becomes a 
 
 
 
 -module with a trivial action, taking W to be the base field, the dual vector space 
 
 
 
  becomes a 
 
 
 
 -module.
Enveloping algebras
To each Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  over a field k, one can associate a certain ring called the universal enveloping algebra of 
 
 
 
 . The construction is universal and consequently (along with the PBW theorem) representations of 
 
 
 
  corresponds in one-to-one with algebra representations of universal enveloping algebra of 
 
 
 
 . The construction is as follows.2 Let T be the tensor algebra of the vector space 
 
 
 
 . Thus, by definition, 
 
 
 
  and the multiplication on it is given by 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the quotient ring of T by the ideal generated by elements 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is an associative algebra over the field k, it can be turned into a Lie algebra via the commutator 
 
 
 
  (omitting 
 
 
 
  from the notation). There is a canonical morphism of Lie algebras 
 
 
 
  obtained by restricting 
 
 
 
  to degree one piece. The PBW theorem implies that the canonical map is actually injective. Note if 
 
 
 
  is abelian, then 
 
 
 
  is the symmetric algebra of the vector space 
 
 
 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
  is a module over itself via adjoint representation, the enveloping algebra 
 
 
 
  becomes a 
 
 
 
 -module by extending the adjoint representation. But one can also use the left and right regular representation to make the enveloping algebra a 
 
 
 
 -module; namely, with the notation 
 
 
 
 , the mapping 
 
 
 
  defines a representation of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . The right regular representation is defined similarly.
Induced representation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite-dimensional Lie algebra over a field of characteristic zero and 
 
 
 
  a subalgebra. 
 
 
 
  acts on 
 
 
 
  from the right and thus, for any 
 
 
 
 -module W, one can form the left 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
 . It is a 
 
 
 
 -module denoted by 
 
 
 
  and called the 
 
 
 
 -module induced by W. It satisfies (and is in fact characterized by) the universal property: for any 
 
 
 
 -module E


 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  is an exact functor from the category of 
 
 
 
 -modules to the category of 
 
 
 
 -modules. These uses the fact that 
 
 
 
  is a free right module over 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if 
 
 
 
  is simple (resp. absolutely simple), then W is simple (resp. absolutely simple). Here, a 
 
 
 
 -module V is absolutely simple if 
 
 
 
  is simple for any field extension 
 
 
 
 .
The induction is transitive
 
 
 
  for any Lie subalgebra 
 
 
 
  and any Lie subalgebra 
 
 
 
 . The induction commutes with restriction: let 
 
 
 
  be subalgebra and 
 
 
 
  an ideal of 
 
 
 
  that is contained in 
 
 
 
 . Set 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 .
Representations of a semisimple Lie algebra
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite-dimensional semisimple Lie algebra over a field of characteristic zero. (in the solvable or nilpotent case, one studies primitive ideals of the enveloping algebra; cf. Dixmier for the definitive account.)
The category of modules over 
 
 
 
  turns out to be too large especially for homological algebra methods to be useful: it was realized that a smaller subcategory category O is a better place for the representation theory in the semisimple case in zero characteristic. For instance, the category O turned out to be of a right size to formulate the celebrated BGG reciprocity.3
(g,K)-module
One of the most important applications of Lie algebra representations is to the representation theory of real reductive Lie group. The application is based on the idea that if 
 
 
 
  is a Hilbert-space representation of, say, a connected real semisimple linear Lie group G, then it has two natural actions: the complexification 
 
 
 
  and the connected maximal compact subgroup K. The 
 
 
 
 -module structure of 
 
 
 
  allows algebraic especially homological methods to be applied and 
 
 
 
 -module structure allows harmonic analysis to be carried out in a way similar to that on connected compact semisimple Lie groups.
Classification
Finite-dimensional representations of semisimple Lie algebras
Similarly to how semisimple Lie algebras can be classified, the finite-dimensional representations of semisimple Lie algebras can be classified. This is a classical theory, widely regarded as beautiful, and a standard reference is .
Briefly, finite-dimensional representations of a semisimple Lie algebra are completely reducible, so it suffices to classify irreducible (simple) representations. Semisimple Lie algebras are classified in terms of the weights of the adjoint representation, the so-called root system; in a similar manner all finite-dimensional irreducible representations can be understood in terms of weights; see weight (representation theory) for details.
Representation on an algebra
If we have a Lie superalgebra L, then a representation of L on an algebra is a (not necessarily associative) Z2 graded algebra A which is a representation of L as a Z2 graded vector space and in addition, the elements of L acts as derivations/antiderivations on A.
More specifically, if H is a pure element of L and x and y are pure elements of A,

H[xy] = (H[x])y + (−1)xHx(H[y])
 

Also, if A is unital, then

H[1] = 0
 

Now, for the case of a representation of a Lie algebra, we simply drop all the gradings and the (−1) to the some power factors.
A Lie (super)algebra is an algebra and it has an adjoint representation of itself. This is a representation on an algebra: the (anti)derivation property is the superJacobi identity.
If a vector space is both an associative algebra and a Lie algebra and the adjoint representation of the Lie algebra on itself is a representation on an algebra (i.e., acts by derivations on the associative algebra structure), then it is a Poisson algebra. The analogous observation for Lie superalgebras gives the notion of a Poisson superalgebra.
See also

Quillen's lemma - analog of Schur's lemma
Verma module
Geometric quantization
Kazhdan–Lusztig conjectures
Representation of a Lie superalgebra
Whitehead's lemma (Lie algebras)

Notes
References

Bernstein I.N., Gelfand I.M., Gelfand S.I., "Structure of Representations that are generated by vectors of highest weight," Functional. Anal. Appl. 5 (1971)

.
A. Beilinson and J. Bernstein, "Localisation de g-modules," C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math., vol. 292, iss. 1, pp. 15–18, 1981.

D. Gaitsgory, Geometric Representation theory, Math 267y, Fall 2005
Ryoshi Hotta, Kiyoshi Takeuchi, Toshiyuki Tanisaki, D-modules, perverse sheaves, and representation theory; translated by Kiyoshi Takeuch
J.Humphreys, Introduction to Lie algebras and representation theory, Birkhäuser, 2000.
N. Jacobson, Lie algebras, Courier Dover Publications, 1979.


Further reading



"
 





http://mathoverflow.net/questions/64931/why-the-bgg-category-o




