


Sign function




Sign function

(Figure)
Signum function y = sgn(x)

In mathematics, the sign function or signum function (from signum, Latin for "sign") is an odd mathematical function that extracts the sign of a real number. In mathematical expressions the sign function is often represented as sgn.
Definition
The signum function of a real number x is defined as follows:



Properties
Any real number can be expressed as the product of its absolute value and its sign function:


 
  It follows that whenever x is not equal to 0 we have


 
  Similarly, for any real number x,



The signum function is the derivative of the absolute value function (up to the indeterminacy at zero): Note, the resultant power of x is 0, similar to the ordinary derivative of x. The numbers cancel and all we are left with is the sign of x.


 
  .
The signum function is differentiable with derivative 0 everywhere except at 0. It is not differentiable at 0 in the ordinary sense, but under the generalised notion of differentiation in distribution theory, the derivative of the signum function is two times the Dirac delta function, which can be demonstrated using the identity


1 (where H(x) is the Heaviside step function using the standard H(0) = 1/2 formalism). Using this identity, it is easy to derive the distributional derivative:


2
The signum can also be written using the Iverson bracket notation:



The signum can also be written using the floor and the absolute value functions:



For 
 
 
 
 , a smooth approximation of the sign function is


 
  Another approximation is


 
  which gets sharper as 
 
 
 
 , note that it's the derivative of 
 
 
 
 . This is inspired from the fact that the above is exactly equal for all nonzero x if 
 
 
 
 , and has the advantage of simple generalization to higher-dimensional analogues of the sign function (for example, the partial derivatives of 
 
 
 
 ).
See Heaviside step function – Analytic approximations.
Complex signum
The signum function can be generalized to complex numbers as


 
  for any z ∈ 
 
 
 
  except z = 0. The signum of a given complex number z is the point on the unit circle of the complex plane that is nearest to z. Then, for z ≠ 0,


 
  where arg is the complex argument function. For reasons of symmetry, and to keep this a proper generalization of the signum function on the reals, also in the complex domain one usually defines, for z = 0:



Another generalization of the sign function for real and complex expressions is csgn,3 which is defined as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the real part of z, 
 
 
 
  is the imaginary part of z.
We then have (except for z = 0):



Generalized signum function
At real values of 
 
 
 
 , it is possible to define a generalized function–version of the signum function, 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  everywhere, including at the point 
 
 
 
  (unlike 
 
 
 
 , for which 
 
 
 
 ). This generalized signum allows construction of the algebra of generalized functions, but the price of such generalization is the loss of commutativity. In particular, the generalized signum anticommutes with the Dirac delta function4


 
  in addition, 
 
 
 
  cannot be evaluated at 
 
 
 
 ; and the special name, 
 
 
 
  is necessary to distinguish it from the function 
 
 
 
 . (
 
 
 
  is not defined, but 
 
 
 
 .)
See also

Absolute value
Heaviside function
Negative number
Rectangular function
Sigmoid function
Three-way comparison
Zero crossing

Notes


"
Category:Special functions





Maple V documentation. May 21, 1998





