


Medial magma




Medial magma

In abstract algebra, a medial magma, or medial groupoid, is a set with a binary operation which satisfies the identity


 
 , or more simply, 
 
 

using the convention that juxtaposition denotes the same operation but has higher precedence. A magma or groupoid is an algebraic structure that generalizes a group. This identity has been variously called medial, abelian, alternation, transposition, interchange, bi-commutative, bisymmetric, surcommutative, entropic etc.1
Any commutative semigroup is a medial magma, and a medial magma has an identity element if and only if it is a commutative monoid. Another class of semigroups forming medial magmas are the normal bands.2 Medial magmas need not be associative: for any nontrivial abelian group and integers 
 
 
 
 , replacing the group operation 
 
 
 
  with the binary operation 
 
 
 
  yields a medial magma which in general is neither associative nor commutative.
Using the categorial definition of the product, one may define the Cartesian square magma 
 
 
 
  with the operation



 
 .
 

The binary operation
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , considered as a function on 
 
 
 
 , maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Hence, a magma 
 
 
 
  is medial if and only if its binary operation is a magma homomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . This can easily be expressed in terms of a commutative diagram, and thus leads to the notion of a medial magma object in a category with a Cartesian product. (See the discussion in auto magma object.)
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are endomorphisms of a medial magma, then the mapping 
 
 
 
  defined by pointwise multiplication


 
  is itself an endomorphism.
Bruck–Murdoch–Toyoda theorem
The Bruck–Murdoch-Toyoda theorem provides the following characterization of medial quasigroups. Given an abelian group

 
  and two commuting automorphisms φ and ψ of 
 
 
 
 , define an operation 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  by





where 
 
 
 
  some fixed element of 
 
 
 
 . It is not hard to prove that 
 
 
 
  forms a medial quasigroup under this operation. The Bruck–Toyoda theorem states that every medial quasigroup is of this form, i.e. is isomorphic to a quasigroup defined from an abelian group in this way.3 In particular, every medial quasigroup is isotopic to an abelian group.
The result was obtained independently in 1941 by D.C. Murdoch and K. Toyoda. It was then rediscovered by Bruck in 1944.
Generalizations
The term medial or (more commonly) entropic is also used for a generalization to multiple operations. An algebraic structure is an entropic algebra4 if every two operations satisfy a generalization of the medial identity. Let f and g be operations of arity m and n, respectively. Then f and g are required to satisfy



See also

Category of medial magmas

References



D.C. Murdoch, Structure of abelian quasigroups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc, 1941, 47, p. 134-138.
K. Toyoda, On axioms of linear functions. Proc. Imp. Acad. Tokyo, 1941, 17, p. 221-227
R. H. Bruck, Some results in the theory of quasigroups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc, 1944, 55.

"
Category:Non-associative algebra



Historical comments J.Jezek and T.Kepka: Medial groupoids Rozpravy CSAV, Rada mat. a prir. ved 93/2 (1983), 93 pp↩
.↩
↩
↩




