


Big Two




Big Two

Big Two (also known as Deuces and other names, see below; Mandarin: 大老二; pinyin: dà lǎo èr; Cantonese: 鋤大D; jyutping: co4 daai6 di2) is a card game similar to the game of Asshole, Crazy Eights, Bullshit, Winner, and other shedding games. It is sometimes called "Chinese poker" because of its Chinese origin and its use of poker hands, though there is actually a different game by that name of an entirely different nature. In Malta it is often referred to as Giappuniza or Ciniza due to its Asian origin.
Description
This card game has many names, including Big Deuce, Big Two, Top Dog, "The Hannah Game" (used in Canada), Da Lao Er (Mandarin Chinese), Sho Tai Ti, Chor Dai Di, Dai Di (Cantonese), Cap Sa (Hokkien, used in Indonesia), and Pusoy Dos (a Philippine variant of the game). A common mistake is to confuse this game with Tien Len or Thirteen or 13 because these two games are actually different in the sense that Big Two involves poker hands but Tien Len does not.
The game is very popular in East Asia and South East Asia, especially throughout China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Macau, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan. It is played both casually and as a gambling game. It is usually played with two to four players, the entire deck being dealt out in either case (or sometimes with only 13 cards per player). The objective of the game is to be the first to get rid of all of your cards.
A commercial version of the game was published as Gang of Four1 in 1990.
Rules

Note: Like many other popular card games, there are a wealth of variations to these rules. Rules with variations are noted.


Valid combinations
Cards may be played as singles or in groups of two, three or five (var. 1 and 8), in combinations which resemble poker hands. The leading card to a trick sets down the number of cards to be played; all the cards of a trick must contain the same number of cards. The highest ranking card is 2 instead of A. The combinations and their rankings are as follows.

Single cards: Any card from the deck, ordered by rank with suit being the tie-breaker. (For instance, A beats A, which beats K.)


Pairs: Any two cards of matching rank, ordered as with singular cards by the card of the higher suit. (A pair consisting of the K and K beats a pair consisting of K and K.)


Triples: Three equal ranked cards, three twos are highest, then aces, kings, etc. down to three threes, which is the lowest triple. In some variations, a triple can only be played as part of a 5-card hand.


5-card hand: There are five (var. 2) different valid 5-card poker hands, ranking, from low to high, as follows (the same ranking as in poker):

:* Straight (also known as a snake in Cantonese or mokke in Malaysia): Any 5 cards in a sequence (but not all of the same suit). Rank is determined by the value of the biggest card, with the suit used only as a tie-breaker. Therefore 3-4-5-6-7 \frac{ \tbinom{4}{1}^{13} }{ \tbinom{52}{13} } = 0.010568\% = 1:9462 games.
The chance of getting a Suited Dragon (Grand Dragon) is 
 
 
 
  games.
In some areas there are other ways to obtain immediate wins, usually among casual playing groups. One such way is known as the "Golden Whoopin'" This is when a player is dealt all four 2s in a single hand. The player may lay them down together (not as a valid hand such as a 4-of-a-kind) before anyone plays anything, regardless of the situation. The player then wins the hand automatically. The score (card count) of the losing players is tripled.
Reshuffling
If a player receives a hand with only 3 points or less, he may declare his cards, and the cards shall be reshuffled and dealt again. Point counting rules: J=1, Q=2, K=3, A=4, 2=5, others=0. This pointing counting rules may vary from place to place, or may be voided. A variation states that a player holding a hand with no cards with faces on them (namely Jacks "J", Queens "Q", and Kings "K") may request a reshuffle and the cards shall be dealt again.
Scoring
Scoring varies from place to place. The most common version is that after a game each player with cards remaining scores -1 point for each, unless they have 10 or more remaining, in which they score -2 for each. If they didn't get to play any cards at all, they score -3 for each. Then the winner of the hand scores +1 for every -1 his opponents got. (So, for example, if North won, and East, West, and South respectively still had 3, 11, and 8 cards left, East would score -3, West would score -22, South would score -8, and North would score +33.)
Likewise for a 3-player game, a player with 17 cards remaining is deducted triple points. A player with more than 11 cards and less than 17 cards remaining is deducted double points. An alternative scoring method to deduct one point per remaining card, is to double the count for each unused 2.
Penalty for assistance
If Player B won a game by playing his last card (the case of more than one card played is excluded) after Player A has played his or hers and Player A could have prevented this from happening by playing a higher card, he is deemed to have assisted Player B.
There are several ways to penalize Player A. The most common way is for Player A to be deducted the total points that the other 2 losers have lost on top of his own so that the other two may win some points.
This rule can vary between styles of play. If the scoring system is by ranks (e.g. who finishes first, second, third or last), then this rule doesn't apply.
Variations

Smack Down: The Smack Down, also known as a Chop, can be played to defeat the "Big Two" only when the Two of Spades is played as a single. A Smack Down is either 4 of a kind or a run of pairs (Example: 4-4-5-5-6-6). The run of pairs may be any length of at least 3. After a Smack Down has been played, any player is allowed to "Smack Back", or Chop-Chop, with a higher 4 of a kind or run of pairs of equal length as the Smack Down. "The Smack Down" and "The Smack Back" originated on the first floor of the Chemistry Building at UMBC and is often culminated with a violent smack of the playing surface.
If a player leads off with three 3's, you are required to play three 2's if no other play is possible
Some allow four-of-a-kind without extra card; twos rank high, as usual.
Some variations allowing four-of-a-kind without extra card do not allow for two pairs.
Some allow four-card combinations (two pairs or four cards alone, without an odd card). Four of a kind beats two pairs (this rule is extremely rare)
Some allow a sixth five-card combination called "two pair-junk" or "Butterfly", consisting of two pairs (of different ranks) and one odd card ("junk"); Rank is determined by the highest pair. This combination ranks below the straight.
Some allow the three-of-a-kind poker hand, consisting of a triple and two junk cards. This combination ranks below the straight.
 
Or it can be more specific, known as sisters, where two consecutive pairs are played, with any random card. This combo is lower than a straight, making it the weakest 5 card combo in the game, if it is played. An example of sisters is double Jack, double Queen and a single Nine. This would be beaten by a double King, double Ace and a three (only the 'sisters' count, not the random card.)
 
3-K-K-A-A > 9-J-J-Q-Q (tie-breaker rules vary)
 

Some variations allow for straights longer than five cards, or even as short as three cards.
There are many variations on ranking straights, suit of last card is tie-breaker unless otherwise stated.
 
A-2-3-4-5 < 3-4-5-6-7 < ... < 10-J-Q-K-A < 2-3-4-5-6 (Singaporean variant)
3-4-5-6-7 < ... < 10-J-Q-K-A < A-2-3-4-5 < 2-3-4-5-6 (Suit of 2 is tiebreaker) (Malaysian variant)
3-4-5-6-7 < ... < 10-J-Q-K-A < J-Q-K-A-2 (Vietnamese & Indonesian variant)
3-4-5-6-7 < ... < 10-J-Q-K-A < 2-3-4-5-6 (Suit of 2 is tiebreaker) < A-2-3-4-5 (Suit of 2 is tiebreaker) (Hong Kong variant)
2-3-4-5-6 < 3-4-5-6-7 < ... < 9-10-J-Q-K < 10-J-Q-K-A < A-2-3-4-5 (Suit of A is tiebreaker)
2-3-4-5-6 < 3-4-5-6-7 < ... < 9-10-J-Q-K < A-2-3-4-5 (Suit of A is tiebreaker) < 10-J-Q-K-A
3-4-5-6-7 < ... < 10-J-Q-K-A
Q-K-A-2-3 < K-A-2-3-4 < … < 10-J-Q-K-A < J-Q-K-A-2 (Depending on variant, suit of last or highest card is tiebreaker)

Some rank flushes by highest suit, K-Q-J-10-8 in spades defeating A-K-Q-J-9 of diamonds.
Some discard the extra cards. Some play that the lowest cards are consciously removed to avoid having the spade two, the highest card, in the kitty. Yet others give the kitty to the holder of the lowest diamond (not necessarily the lowest card).
 
Whereas sometimes in a 3-player game, the extra card is not revealed (or is revealed), and the holder of 3 is given a chance to make a decision to or not to trade his/her 3 for the extra card. If he/she does, the starting player will be 3 holder, or the previous winner depending on the rules.
 

Some switch  and , to conform to contract bridge tradition, and play begins with the 3. Another variation rearranges the suit ranks from (lowest to highest) , , , . Another variation of suit ranks is (lowest to highest) , , , .
In some variations, suit rankings are not used, for example, a 3-single cannot be used to beat any other 3-single, and an 8-high straight cannot be used to beat any other 8-high straight.
A variant to discourage passing disallows a player from playing any further cards to a trick after he passes.
A rare variation involves a 3-player game, where each is dealt 17 cards. A "Dragon" consists of 13 cards in straight (A-K-Q-J-10-9-8-7-6-5-4-3-2), is considered a valid combination and may be played once the player has gained control of the game. Suit of 2 is tie-breaker.
In Malta, a "Dragun" or "Dragon" is not a 13 card straight, but it is the initial 13 cards that he is dealt, consisting of 6 pairs and any other single card. When a person is dealt a "Dragon" he immediately wins the game. However, if the "Dragon" contains a pair of 3s it is called a "Dragun bla-bajd" and the player immediately loses.
In tournaments, this is only true for the first round. In subsequent rounds, the winner of the previous round plays first.
If only two players are available, deal 13 cards each and play as normal. When one player passes he is forced to pick up one card from the remaining deck and add it to his hand. This variation is taken from the card game Go Fish.
If three people are playing, deal four 13-card hands as if a fourth players were present. The hand to receive the last card that would normally become the dealer's now becomes the "ghost hand". No one plays the ghost hand and its cards are not shown, play continues as normal.
If three people are playing, deal three 17-card hands, leaving one left over. The one card is placed in the middle, and whichever player possesses the two of spades or three of diamonds receives that card.
In some places, owning 4 Twos is also a condition for Immediate Win. Some play Immediate Win rule in 3-player game too. There are more cards involved, the chance of occurring and points transfer is therefore very high. On the contrary, some variations said that it's an automatic draw when 1 player has all 4 twos, as having all 4 twos gives the player amazing amount of power.
  The chance of getting 4 Twos is 
 
 
 
  games.
In some rules, four of a kind + one card and straight flush can also be played on a pair or a single card, regardless of value.
Some players rank all poker hand with traditional poker rules, except for the full house 2, which is higher than full house Ace, and you must win a hand exactly, not just by a tiebreaker of suit.
In some rules, a single spade of 2 is not allowed to be played as the last card. Others do not allow any combination that includes the 2 of spades to be played as the last hand.
A four of a kind can be used to beat all card combinations without a four of a kind.
Some require the person to call "Last Card" when he/she only have one card left right after the last play. If the person holding the last card won, but forgot to call "Last Card" beforehand, he/she will take the penalty of all the other player's remaining cards, while other players will score 0.
In some variations, a straight is considered higher than a flush. This can be determined beforehand.
In Hawai'i, the game Penning is played similarly to Big Two. The main difference is that the ranking of cards is Diamonds high, followed by Hearts, then Spades, and Clubs as lowest. When playing with three or four people, the 2nd and 3rd place titles are done by person with the lowest card going first.
Joker Rules: Jokers are added to the deck, and they can be played as any card with any suit. Also, the jokers are deemed higher than the Two of Spades, but the black joker is considered higher than the red joker. Another variation sets the Joker as valueless: it can be played to beat any card, but any card can be played to beat the Joker(s). These variations allow for more in depth and strategic game play.
No Poker Rules (AKA No Soccer Ball Rules): The players are not allowed to play a different type of 5 card hand over the current. For example, a Full House can not be played over a Straight.
In some variations, any five-card combination can be played on top of any other five-card combination with a lower card value, e.g. 4-5-6-7-8 can be played on top of 7-7-7-6-6 even though full house is higher than straight in standard Big Two.
Some variants do not score; rather, play continues till all but one person have rid all cards, and at the end, players are ranked according to the order they got rid of their cards, e.g. 1st, 2nd, 3rd etc.
The direction of play (clockwise or anti-clockwise) can be determined by a race between the two players on either side of the leader (previous round winner, or holder of diamond 3).
In some regions, daily games are scored not by the number of wins but by the number of losses. A common referral or losing achievement is known as entering Club Bottom. The "Club" aptly named after a nameless player of Asian descent, known only as the Emperor.
Losing two games in a row is known as "dropping a deuce", whilst losing three is known as the "runs"; 4 losses is sometimes referred to as rimming or a rim job - basically, akin to rimming the bottom.
Special achievements for losses after 5 games in one sitting are known as follows: 6 losses - a six pack; 7 losses - S-Club Seven; 8 losses - a Snowman; 9 losses - Cloud Nine; 10 losses - X-Factor status. X-Factors status while rare, has been achieved periodically, most notably on back-to-back days by Tom Magliocco who claimed he was still under the influence of heavy cold medication at the time (this claim was swiftly refuted by those in attendance).
On rare occasions, losses amounting to more than 10 in a single sitting may be referred to as a "stoning". A stoning has only been recorded on three occasions, once each by Aly Merani, Justin Capri and Geoff Mejia. The stoning received by Mejia was particularly dubious as he achieved the current record 15 losses. When interviewed about what transpired, Mr. Mejia's response was incoherent. Observers stated he appeared disoriented and confused.
Often players in a losing streak may attempt to opt out of future hands in order to stay out Club Bottom or avoid a high ranking loss achievement. These individuals are often referred to "wusses" and shunned by the general population. Brandon Choy currently holds the wuss record at 17 consecutive games. Many experts feel this record to be unbreakable.
During game play, one strategy when holding a majority of high ranking cards is to slow play or lead in with low cards in order to draw out the high cards from other players - i.e., to "milk" them of their high cards whilst not giving up power. Milking was initially popularized by Brandon (Dai Lo) Choy, who was quickly dubbed the "milkman". One drawback of milking too fast and too early is to run out of high cards if an opponent's cards outrank your own. This situation is sometimes known as a dry teat or chaffing.
Often when playing poker hands, an opponent will come "over the top" to trump a hand. If an especially high poker hand is trumped, or a late in the game poker hand is trumped - this will be referred to as a "reach around." For example, an aces high full house is trumped by four of a kind.
Playing with 2 decks: this enables up to 8 players per game. In this case, five-of-a-kind defeats four-of-a-kind, but may or may not defeat a straight flush. Players may or may not be allowed to play a hand equivalent to the previous hand, such as diamond 3 followed by the other diamond 3.
Some variations do not allow any of the twos to be played as the last single card of a player's hand. However, the twos can be played as the last pair, triple or five cards of a deck.

The game of President using Deuces rules

This is a major variant of President using Deuces rules.


The usual rules of Deuces apply, with the following President game features:

The first player to clear all his cards becomes the President for the next round. The players next to the new President can follow the President's last play if possible (singleton, pair, three of a kind, 5 cards). If no one can follow the President's last play or choose not to do so even when able (the player immediately next to the President has a strong incentive not to follow), the player next to the President gains control and may start a new sequence of his own. Eventually, this will produce the Vice-President, followed by the Vice-Bitch. The last player remaining becomes the Bitch for the next round.
The first game proceeds without anyone being President, Vice-President, Vice-Bitch and Bitch.
Subsequent games involve the following:
 
President passes his lowest 2 cards to the Bitch. The Bitch passes his highest 2 cards to President.
Vice-President passes his lowest 1 card to Vice-Bitch. Vice-Bitch passes his highest 1 card to Vice-President.
 
A variant to the rule is where President passes any 2 cards to the Bitch, after receiving cards. This can make a difference as his 2 lowest cards may form a 5-card hand.



Team Play
It is possible to play in teams of two with four total players. Each player's teammate is the one opposite of him (i.e. the two players who you are adjacent to are your opponents). Teammates are not allowed to have any communication with each other regarding their cards, preferred combinations or the quality of their hands.
The winning team is determined by the total number of cards held by that team when the one player runs out of card. If one player plays his last card but his teammate has more cards left than the other team's total, his team loses. (Ex: Mike and Dave are on one team against Lionel and Brendan. Mike has 4 cards, Dave has 5, Lionel has 10 and Brendan has 1. Brendan plays his last card but Lionel has 10 cards and Mike and Dave have 9 cards total. By playing his last card Brendan has lost the game for his team.) Any player can ask what the card count is for each team at any point.
If the card count is tied at the end of a game the players proceed to a five card shootout. This is where each player receives 5 cards and the game is played as normal. The lowest card holder starts and the same team grouping is still used. Further ties lead to further five card hands; this determines the final winner of the original game.
Kiddening
Players in collusion with one another have massive advantages over a non-colluding player(s). The basic strategy of colluding players is to preserve the high "control" cards against the non-colluder, and not to waste these cards amongst themselves (a.k.a. "Holding"). Other collusive techniques include signaling techniques (through the played cards, e.g. odd/even as in bridge, or non-verbal cues) where the strength of the hand, number of controls, hand type, exact high cards and other features of the hands are transmitted to the partner.
Other cheating methods includes false shuffles, peeking and cold decking. Cheating, especially collusive techniques, is rampant in online and higher stakes games.
See also

Dou Di Zhu (similar rules, played with three players)
Gnau
Zi pai
Four Color Cards
 Daguai Luzi also known as Wild Escape or The Joker's Way

References


"
Category:Chinese card games Category:Four-player card games Category:Trick-taking card games Category:Shedding-type card games



Gang of Four on Boardgamegeek.com




