


Henderson–Hasselbalch equation




Henderson–Hasselbalch equation

In chemistry, the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation describes the derivation of pH as a measure of acidity (using , the negative log of the acid dissociation constant) in biological and chemical systems. The equation is also useful for estimating the pH of a buffer solution and finding the equilibrium pH in acid-base reactions (it is widely used to calculate the isoelectric point of proteins).
The equation is given by:



Here, 
 
 
 
  is the molar concentration of the undissociated weak acid, 
 
 
 
  is the molar concentration (molarity, M) of this acid's conjugate base and  is  where  is the acid dissociation constant, that is:


 
  for the non-specific Brønsted acid-base reaction


In these equations, 
 
 
 
  denotes the ionic form of the relevant acid. Bracketed quantities such as [base] and [acid] denote the molar concentration of the quantity enclosed.
For bases
For the standard base equation:1



A second form of the equation, known as the Heylman Equation, expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the base dissociation constant:



In analogy to the above equations, the following equation is valid:



Where BH+ denotes the conjugate acid of the corresponding base B. Using the properties of these terms at 25 degrees Celsius one can synthesise an equation for pH of basic solutions in terms of pKa and pH:



Derivation
The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation is derived from the acid dissociation constant equation by the following steps:2



Taking the log, to base ten, of both sides gives:



Then, using the properties of logarithms:



Identifying the left-hand side of this equation as -pKa and the 
 
 
 
  as -pH:



Adding pH and pKa to both sides:



The ratio 
 
 
 
  is unitless, and as such, other ratios with other units may be used. For example, the mole ratio of the components, 
 
 
 
  or the fractional concentrations 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  will yield the same answer. Sometimes these other units are more convenient to use.
History
Lawrence Joseph Henderson wrote an equation, in 1908, describing the use of carbonic acid as a buffer solution. Karl Albert Hasselbalch later re-expressed that formula in logarithmic terms, resulting in the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation 1. Hasselbalch was using the formula to study metabolic acidosis.
Limitations
There are some significant approximations implicit in the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation. The most significant is the assumption that the concentration of the acid and its conjugate base at equilibrium will remain the same as the formal concentration. This neglects the dissociation of the acid and the binding of H+ to the base. The dissociation of water and relative water concentration itself is neglected as well. These approximations will fail when dealing with relatively strong acids or bases (pKa more than a couple units away from 7), dilute or very concentrated solutions (less than 1 mM or greater than 1M), or heavily skewed acid/base ratios (more than 100 to 1). In high buffer dilutions, where the concentration of protons arising from water become equally or more prevalent than the buffer species themselves (at pH 7, this means buffer component concentrations of −5 M formally, but practically much higher), the pKa of the 'buffer' system will tend towards neutrality.
Estimating blood pH
The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation can be applied to relate the pH of blood to constituents of the bicarbonate buffering system:3



where:

 is the cologarithm of the acid dissociation constant of carbonic acid. It is equal to 6.1.
 is the concentration of bicarbonate in the blood
 is the concentration of carbonic acid in the blood

This is useful in arterial blood gas, but these usually state , that is, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide, rather than . However, these are related by the equation:4


 
  where:

 is the concentration of carbonic acid in the blood
 is the Henry's law constant for the solubility of carbon dioxide in blood. kH CO2 is approximately 0.0307 mmol/(L-torr)
 is the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood

Taken together, the following equation can be used to relate the pH of blood to the concentration of bicarbonate and the partial pressure of carbon dioxide:5


 
  where:



 
  is the acidity in the blood
 is the concentration of bicarbonate in the blood
 is the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the arterial blood

See also

Acid
Base
Titration
Buffer solution
Acidosis
Alkalosis

References
Further reading







External links

Variable buffer system Henderson–Hasselbalch Calculator
Applications and Example Problems Using Henderson-Hasselbalch Equation
Henderson–Hasselbalch Calculator
Online Henderson–Hasselbalch Calculator
[http://www.chembuddy.com/?left=pH-calculation&right;;=pH-buffers-henderson-hasselbalch Derivation and detailed discussion of Henderson–Hasselbalch equation]
True example of using Henderson–Hasselbalch equation for calculation net charge of proteins

"
Category:Acid–base chemistry Category:Equilibrium chemistry Category:Equations Category:Mathematics in medicine Category:Enzyme kinetics




Henderson Hasselbalch Equation: Derivation of pKa and pKb
[http://books.google.com.my/books?id=qyHu0Iu-XOUC&pg;;=PA556 page 556], section "Estimating plasma pH" in: 






