


Zariski tangent space




Zariski tangent space

In algebraic geometry, the Zariski tangent space is a construction that defines a tangent space at a point P on an algebraic variety V (and more generally). It does not use differential calculus, being based directly on abstract algebra, and in the most concrete cases just the theory of a system of linear equations.
Motivation
For example, suppose given a plane curve C defined by a polynomial equation

F(X,Y) = 0


and take P to be the origin (0,0). Erasing terms of higher order than 1 would produce a 'linearised' equation reading

L(X,Y) = 0


in which all terms ''XaYb'' have been discarded if a + b > 1.
We have two cases: L may be 0, or it may be the equation of a line. In the first case the (Zariski) tangent space to C at (0,0) is the whole plane, considered as a two-dimensional affine space. In the second case, the tangent space is that line, considered as affine space. (The question of the origin comes up, when we take P as a general point on C; it is better to say 'affine space' and then note that P is a natural origin, rather than insist directly that it is a vector space.)
It is easy to see that over the real field we can obtain L in terms of the first partial derivatives of F. When those both are 0 at P, we have a singular point (double point, cusp or something more complicated). The general definition is that singular points of C are the cases when the tangent space has dimension 2.
Definition
The cotangent space of a local ring R, with maximal ideal

 
  is defined to be


 
  where 
 
 
2 is given by the product of ideals. It is a vector space over the residue field k := R/
 
 
. Its dual (as a k-vector space) is called tangent space of R.1
This definition is a generalization of the above example to higher dimensions: suppose given an affine algebraic variety V and a point v of V. Morally, modding out 

2 corresponds to dropping the non-linear terms from the equations defining V inside some affine space, therefore giving a system of linear equations that define the tangent space.
The tangent space 
 
 
 
  and cotangent space 
 
 
 
  to a scheme X at a point P is the (co)tangent space of 
 
 
 
 . Due to the functoriality of Spec, the natural quotient map 
 
 
 
  induces a homomorphism 
 
 
 
  for X=Spec(R), P a point in Y=Spec(R/I). This is used to embed 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .2 Since morphisms of fields are injective, the surjection of the residue fields induced by g is an isomorphism. Then a morphism k of the cotangent spaces is induced by g, given by












Since this is a surjection, the transpose

 
  is an injection.
(One often defines the tangent and cotangent spaces for a manifold in the analogous manner.)
Analytic functions
If V is a subvariety of an n-dimensional vector space, defined by an ideal I, then R = Fn/I, where Fn is the ring of smooth/analytic/holomorphic functions on this vector space. The Zariski tangent space at x is

''mn / ( I+mn2 ),
 

where mn is the maximal ideal consisting of those functions in Fn vanishing at x.
In the planar example above, I = , and ''I+m2 = +m2.
Properties
If R is a Noetherian local ring, the dimension of the tangent space is at least the dimension of R:

dim m/m2 ≧ dim R


R is called regular if equality holds. In a more geometric parlance, when R is the local ring of a variety V in v, one also says that v is a regular point. Otherwise it is called a singular point.
The tangent space has an interpretation in terms of homomorphisms to the dual numbers for K,

K[t]/t2:
 

in the parlance of schemes, morphisms Spec K[t]/t2 to a scheme X over K correspond to a choice of a rational point x ∈ X(k) and an element of the tangent space at x.3 Therefore, one also talks about tangent vectors. See also: tangent space to a functor.
See also

Tangent cone
Jet (mathematics)

References
Books




External links

Zariski tangent space. V.I. Danilov (originator), Encyclopedia of Mathematics.

"
Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Differential algebra




Smoothness and the Zariski Tangent Space, James McKernan, 18.726 Spring 2011 Lecture 5





