


Hausdorff measure




Hausdorff measure
In [[mathematics]
 ] a Hausdorff measure is a type of outer measure, named for Felix Hausdorff, that assigns a number in [0,∞] to each set in Rn or, more generally, in any metric space. The zero-dimensional Hausdorff measure is the number of points in the set (if the set is finite) or ∞ if the set is infinite. The one-dimensional Hausdorff measure of a simple curve in Rn is equal to the length of the curve. Likewise, the two dimensional Hausdorff measure of a measurable subset of R2 is proportional to the area of the set. Thus, the concept of the Hausdorff measure generalizes counting, length, and area. It also generalizes volume. In fact, there are d-dimensional Hausdorff measures for any d ≥ 0, which is not necessarily an integer. These measures are fundamental in geometric measure theory. They appear naturally in harmonic analysis or potential theory.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a metric space. For any subset 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  denote its diameter, that is



Let 

 be any subset of 

, and 
 
 
 
  a real number. Define



(The infimum is over all countable covers of 

 by sets 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 .)
Note that 
 
 
 
  is monotone decreasing in 
 
 
 
  since the larger 
 
 
 
  is, the more collections of sets are permitted, making the infimum smaller. Thus, the limit 
 
 
 
  exists but may be infinite. Let



It can be seen that 
 
 
 
  is an outer measure (more precisely, it is a metric outer measure). By general theory, its restriction to the σ-field of Carathéodory-measurable sets is a measure. It is called the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Hausdorff measure of 
 
 
 
 . Due to the metric outer measure property, all Borel subsets of 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
  measurable.
In the above definition the sets in the covering are arbitrary. However, they may be taken to be open or closed, and will yield the same measure, although the approximations 
 
 
 
  may be different . If 

 is a normed space the sets may be taken to be convex. However, the restriction of the covering families to balls gives a different measure.1
Properties of Hausdorff measures
Note that if d is a positive integer, the d dimensional Hausdorff measure of Rd is a rescaling of usual d-dimensional Lebesgue measure

 
  which is normalized so that the Lebesgue measure of the unit cube [0,1]d is 1. In fact, for any Borel set E,


 
  where αd is the volume of the unit d-ball; it can be expressed using Euler's gamma function



Remark. Some authors adopt a definition of Hausdorff measure slightly different from the one chosen here, the difference being that it is normalized in such a way that Hausdorff d-dimensional measure in the case of Euclidean space coincides exactly with Lebesgue measure.
Relation with Hausdorff dimension
One of several possible equivalent definitions of the Hausdorff dimension is



where we take



Generalizations
In geometric measure theory and related fields, the Minkowski content is often used to measure the size of a subset of a metric measure space. For suitable domains in Euclidean space, the two notions of size coincide, up to overall normalizations depending on conventions. More precisely, a subset of 
 
 
 
  is said to be 

-rectifiable if it is the image of a bounded set in 
 
 
 
  under a Lipschitz function. If 
 
 
 
 ''-dimensional Minkowski content of a closed 

-rectifiable subset of 
 
 
 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
  times the 

-dimensional Hausdorff measure .
In fractal geometry, some fractals with Hausdorff dimension 
 
 
 
  have zero or infinite 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Hausdorff measure. For example, almost surely the image of planar Brownian motion has Hausdorff dimension 2 and its two-dimensional Hausdoff measure is zero. In order to “measure” the “size” of such sets, mathematicians have considered the following variation on the notion of the Hausdorff measure:

In the definition of the measure 
 
 
 
  is replaced with 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is any monotone increasing set function satisfying 
 
 
 
 .
 

This is the Hausdorff measure of 
 
 
 
  with  gauge function

 
 , or 
 
 
 
 -Hausdorff measure. A 
 
 
 
 -dimensional set 
 
 
 
  may satisfy 
 
 
 
 , but 
 
 
 
  with an appropriate 
 
 
 
  Examples of gauge functions include 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . The former gives almost surely positive and 
 
 
 
 -finite measure to the Brownian path in 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 , and the latter when $n=2$.
See also

Hausdorff dimension
Geometric measure theory
Measure theory
Outer measure

External links

Hausdorff dimension at Encyclopedia of Mathematics
Hausdorff measure at Encyclopedia of Mathematics

References




.

.
Yan Kun (2007), [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007PrGeo..22..451Y Fractal Measure].

.

.

.

"
Category:Fractals Category:Measures (measure theory) Category:Metric geometry Category:Dimension theory








