


Heegner number




Heegner number

In number theory, a Heegner number is a square-free positive integer d such that the imaginary quadratic field Q(
 
 
 
 ) has class number 1. Equivalently, its ring of integers has unique factorization.1
The determination of such numbers is a special case of the class number problem, and they underlie several striking results in number theory.
According to the Stark–Heegner theorem there are precisely nine Heegner numbers:


, , , , , , , , . 


This result was conjectured by Gauss and proven by Kurt Heegner in 1952.
Euler's prime-generating polynomial
Euler's prime-generating polynomial



which gives (distinct) primes for n = 1, ..., 40, is related to the Heegner number 163 = 4 · 41 − 1.
Euler's formula, with 
 
 
 
  taking the values 1,... 40 is equivalent to



with 
 
 
 
  taking the values 0,... 39, and Rabinowitz2 proved that


 
  gives primes for 
 
 
 
  if and only if its discriminant 
 
 
 
  equals minus a Heegner number.
(Note that 
 
 
 
 
  yields 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  is maximal.) 1, 2, and 3 are not of the required form, so the Heegner numbers that work are 
 
 
 
 , yielding prime generating functions of Euler's form for 
 
 
 
 ; these latter numbers are called lucky numbers of Euler by F. Le Lionnais.3
Almost integers and Ramanujan's constant
Ramanujan's constant is the transcendental number4

 
 
 , which is an almost integer, in that it is very close to an integer:


5


This number was discovered in 1859 by the mathematician Charles Hermite.6 In a 1975 April Fool article in Scientific American magazine,7 "Mathematical Games" columnist Martin Gardner made the (hoax) claim that the number was in fact an integer, and that the Indian mathematical genius Srinivasa Ramanujan had predicted it—hence its name.
This coincidence is explained by complex multiplication and the q-expansion of the j-invariant.
Detail
Briefly, 
 
 
 
  is an integer for d a Heegner number, and 
 
 
 
  via the q-expansion.
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a quadratic irrational, then the j-invariant is an algebraic integer of degree 
 
 
 
 , the class number of 
 
 
 
  and the minimal (monic integral) polynomial it satisfies is called the Hilbert class polynomial. Thus if the imaginary quadratic extension 
 
 
 
  has class number 1 (so d is a Heegner number), the j-invariant is an integer.
The q-expansion of j, with its Fourier series expansion written as a Laurent series in terms of 
 
 
 
 , begins as:



The coefficients 
 
 
 
  asymptotically grow as 
 
 
 
 , and the low order coefficients grow more slowly than 
 
 
 
 , so for 
 
 
 
 , j is very well approximated by its first two terms. Setting 
 
 
 
 
  yields 
 
 
 
  or equivalently, 
 
 
 
 . Now 
 
 
 
 , so,


 
  Or,


 
  where the linear term of the error is,


 
  explaining why 
 
 
 
  is within approximately the above of being an integer.
Pi formulas
The Chudnovsky brothers found in 1987,



and uses the fact that 
 
 
 
 . For similar formulas, see the Ramanujan–Sato series.
Other Heegner numbers
For the four largest Heegner numbers, the approximations one obtains8 are as follows.



Alternatively,9


 
 
  where the reason for the squares is due to certain Eisenstein series. For Heegner numbers 
 
 
 
 , one does not obtain an almost integer; even 
 
 
 
  is not noteworthy.10 The integer j-invariants are highly factorisable, which follows from the 
 
 
 
  form, and factor as,



These transcendental numbers, in addition to being closely approximated by integers, (which are simply algebraic numbers of degree 1), can also be closely approximated by algebraic numbers of degree 3,11



The roots of the cubics can be exactly given by quotients of the Dedekind eta function η(τ), a modular function involving a 24th root, and which explains the 24 in the approximation. In addition, they can also be closely approximated by algebraic numbers of degree 4,12



Note the reappearance of the integers 
 
 
 
  as well as the fact that,



which, with the appropriate fractional power, are precisely the j-invariants. As well as for algebraic numbers of degree 6,



where the xs are given respectively by the appropriate root of the sextic equations,



with the j-invariants appearing again. These sextics are not only algebraic, they are also solvable in radicals as they factor into two cubics over the extension 
 
 
 
  (with the first factoring further into two quadratics). These algebraic approximations can be exactly expressed in terms of Dedekind eta quotients. As an example, let 
 
 
 
 , then,



where the eta quotients are the algebraic numbers given above.
Consecutive primes
Given an odd prime p, if one computes 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
  (this is sufficient because 
 
 
 
 ), one gets consecutive composites, followed by consecutive primes, if and only if p is a Heegner number.13
For details, see "Quadratic Polynomials Producing Consecutive Distinct Primes and Class Groups of Complex Quadratic Fields" by Richard Mollin.
Notes and references


External links



Gauss' Class Number Problem for Imaginary Quadratic Fields, by Dorian Goldfeld: Detailed history of problem.


"
Category:Algebraic number theory



↩
Rabinowitz, G. "Eindeutigkeit der Zerlegung in Primzahlfaktoren in quadratischen Zahlkörpern." Proc. Fifth Internat. Congress Math. (Cambridge) 1, 418–421, 1913.↩
Le Lionnais, F. Les nombres remarquables. Paris: Hermann, pp. 88 and 144, 1983.↩
 gives 
 
 
 
 , based on Nesterenko, Yu. V. "On Algebraic Independence of the Components of Solutions of a System of Linear Differential Equations." Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Ser. Mat. 38, 495–512, 1974. English translation in Math. USSR 8, 501–518, 1974.↩
Ramanujan Constant – from Wolfram MathWorld↩
↩
↩
These can be checked by computing 
 
 
 
  on a calculator, and 
 
 
 
  for the linear term of the error.↩
http://groups.google.com.ph/group/sci.math.research/browse_thread/thread/3d24137c9a860893?hl=en#↩
The absolute deviation of a random real number (picked uniformly from [[unit interval|
 
 
 
 
 ]], say) is a uniformly distributed variable on $[ 0, 0.5 size=120% ]$, so it has absolute average deviation and median absolute deviation of 0.25, and a deviation of 0.22 is not exceptional.↩
↩
↩
http://www.mathpages.com/home/kmath263.htm↩




