


Companion matrix




Companion matrix

In linear algebra, the Frobenius companion matrix of the monic polynomial


 
  is the square matrix defined as



With this convention, and on the basis , one has


 
  (for 
 
 

Some authors use the transpose of this matrix, which (dually) cycles coordinates, and is more convenient for some purposes, like linear recurrence relations.
Characterization
The characteristic polynomial as well as the minimal polynomial of 
 
 
 
  are equal to 
 
 
 
 .1
In this sense, the matrix 
 
 
 
  is the "companion" of the polynomial 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is an n-by-n matrix with entries from some field

 
 , then the following statements are equivalent:



 
  is similar to the companion matrix over 
 
 
 
  of its characteristic polynomial
the characteristic polynomial of 
 
 
 
  coincides with the minimal polynomial of 
 
 
 
 , equivalently the minimal polynomial has degree 
 
 

there exists a cyclic vector

 
  in 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , meaning that {v, Av, A2v, ..., An−1v} is a basis of V. Equivalently, such that V is cyclic as a 
 
 
 
 -module (and 
 
 
 
 ); one says that 
 
 
 
  is regular.

Not every square matrix is similar to a companion matrix. But every matrix is similar to a matrix made up of blocks of companion matrices. Furthermore, these companion matrices can be chosen so that their polynomials divide each other; then they are uniquely determined by 
 
 
 
 . This is the rational canonical form of 
 
 
 
 .
Diagonalizability
If 
 
 
 
  has distinct roots  (the eigenvalues of C(p)), then C(p) is diagonalizable as follows:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Vandermonde matrix corresponding to the 
 
 
 
 's.
In that case,2 traces of powers m of 
 
 
 
  readily yield sums of the same powers m of all roots of p(t),



In general, the companion matrix may be non-diagonalizable.
Linear recursive sequences
Given a linear recursive sequence with characteristic polynomial


 
  the (transpose) companion matrix


 
  generates the sequence, in the sense that


 
  increments the series by 1.
The vector  is an eigenvector of this matrix for eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 , when 
 
 
 
  is a root of the characteristic polynomial $p ( t )$.
For  −1}}, and all other 0}}, i.e.,  tn−1}}, this matrix reduces to Sylvester's cyclic shift matrix, or circulant matrix.
See also

Frobenius endomorphism
Cayley-Hamilton theorem
Krylov subspace

Notes
"
Category:Matrices Category:Matrix theory




Bellman, Richard (1987), Introduction to Matrix Analysis, SIAM, ISBN 0898713994 .




