


Homotopy lifting property




Homotopy lifting property

In mathematics, in particular in homotopy theory within algebraic topology, the homotopy lifting property (also known as the right lifting property or the covering homotopy axiom) is a technical condition on a continuous function from a topological space E to another one, B. It is designed to support the picture of E "above" B by allowing a homotopy taking place in B to be moved "upstairs" to E.
For example, a covering map has a property of unique local lifting of paths to a given sheet; the uniqueness is due to the fact that the fibers of a covering map are discrete spaces. The homotopy lifting property will hold in many situations, such as the projection in a vector bundle, fiber bundle or fibration, where there need be no unique way of lifting.
Formal definition
Assume from now on all mappings are continuous functions from a topological space to another. Given a map 
 
 
 
 , and a space 
 
 
 
 , one says that 
 
 
 
  has the homotopy lifting property,12 or that 
 
 
 
  has the homotopy lifting property with respect to 
 
 
 
 , if:

for any homotopy

 
 , and
for any map 
 
 
 
  lifting 
 
 
 
  (i.e., so that 
 
 
 
 ),

there exists a homotopy 
 
 
 
  lifting 
 
 
 
  (i.e., so that 
 
 
 
 ) which also satisfies 
 
 
 
 .
The following diagram depicts this situation.




The outer square (without the dotted arrow) commutes if and only if the hypotheses of the lifting property are true. A lifting 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a dotted arrow making the diagram commute. Also compare this to the visualization of the homotopy extension property.
If the map 
 
 
 
  satisfies the homotopy lifting property with respect to all spaces X, then 
 
 
 
  is called a fibration, or one sometimes simply says that 

 
  has the homotopy lifting property.
Note that this is the definition of fibration in the sense of Hurewicz, which is more restrictive than fibration in the sense of Serre, for which homotopy lifting only for 
 
 
 
  a CW complex is required.
Generalization: The Homotopy Lifting Extension Property
There is a common generalization of the homotopy lifting property and the homotopy extension property. Given a pair of spaces 
 
 
 
 , for simplicity we denote 
 
 
 
 . Given additionally a map 
 
 
 
 , one says that ''
 
 
 
  has the homotopy lifting extension property '' if:

For any homotopy

 
 , and
For any lifting 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 ,

there exists a homotopy 
 
 
 
  which covers 
 
 
 
  (i.e., such that 
 
 
 
 ) and extends 
 
 
 
  (i.e., such that 
 
 
 
 ).
The homotopy lifting property of 
 
 
 
  is obtained by taking 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  above is simply 
 
 
 
 .
The homotopy extension property of 
 
 
 
  is obtained by taking 
 
 
 
  to be a constant map, so that 
 
 
 
  is irrelevant in that every map to E is trivially the lift of a constant map to the image point of 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Covering space
Fiber bundle
Fibration

Notes
References





.

External links




"
Category:Homotopy theory Category:Algebraic topology



 page 24↩
 page 7↩




