


Specific activity




Specific activity

Specific activity is the activity per quantity of a radionuclide and is a physical property of that radionuclide.12
Activity is a quantity related to radioactivity. The SI unit of activity is the becquerel (Bq), equal to one reciprocal second.3
Since the probability of radioactive decay for a given radionuclide is a fixed physical quantity (with some slight exceptions, see Changing decay rates), the number of decays that occur in a given time of a specific number of atoms of that radionuclide is also a fixed physical quantity (if there are large enough numbers of atoms to ignore statistical fluctuations).
Thus, specific activity is defined as the activity per quantity of atoms of a particular radionuclide. It is usually given in units of Bq/g, but another commonly used unit of activity is the curie (Ci) allowing the definition of specific activity in Ci/g.
Half-life
Experimentally-measured specific activity can be used to calculate the half-life of a radionuclide.
Half-life (T1/2) is defined as the length of time for half of a given quantity of radioactive atoms to undergo radioactive decay: Or more generally: Starting with N0, atoms of an element, the number of atoms, N, remaining after time, t, is given by:



The natural log of both sides



The derivative with respect to time, t



Multiplying both sides by N



Yields



dN/dt represents the decay rate of atoms. The negative sign shows that the rate is negative, so the number of atoms is decreasing with time. Rearranging terms:



Example: half-life of Rb-87
One gram of rubidium-87 and a radioactivity count rate that, after taking solid angle effects into account, is consistent with a decay rate of 3200 decays per second corresponds to a specific activity of . Rubidium's atomic weight is 87, so one gram is one 87th of a mole, or N= atoms. Plugging in the numbers:



Formulation
Radioactivity is expressed as the decay rate of a particular radionuclide with decay constant λ and the number of atoms N:



Mass of the radionuclide is given by



where m is mass number of the radionuclide and NA is Avogadro's constant.
Specific radioactivity a is defined as radioactivity per unit mass of the radionuclide:



In addition, decay constant λ is related to the half-life T1/2 by the following equation:



Thus, specific radioactivity can also be described by



This equation is simplified by



When the unit of half-life converts a year



For example, specific radioactivity of radium 226 with a half-life of 1600 years is obtained by



This value derived from radium 226 was defined as unit of radioactivity known as Curie (Ci).
Another two examples are specific radioactivity of thorium 232 and specific radioactivity of potassium 40:






Applications
The specific activity of radionuclides is particularly relevant when it comes to select them for production for therapeutic pharmaceuticals, as well as for immunoassays or other diagnostic procedures, or assessing radioactivity in certain environments, among several other biomedical applications.456789
References
Further Reading





"
Category:Units of radioactivity



↩
↩
↩
Duursma, E. K. "Specific activity of radionuclides sorbed by marine sediments in relation to the stable element composition." Radioactive contamination of the marine environment (1973): 57-71.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




