


Girsanov theorem




Girsanov theorem

(Figure)
Visualisation of the Girsanov theorem — The left side shows a Wiener process with negative drift under a canonical measure P; on the right side each path of the process is colored according to its likelihood under the martingale measure Q. The density transformation from P to Q is given by the Girsanov theorem.

In probability theory, the Girsanov theorem (named after Igor Vladimirovich Girsanov) describes how the dynamics of stochastic processes change when the original measure is changed to an equivalent probability measure.1 The theorem is especially important in the theory of financial mathematics as it tells how to convert from the physical measure which describes the probability that an underlying instrument (such as a share price or interest rate) will take a particular value or values to the risk-neutral measure which is a very useful tool for pricing derivatives on the underlying.
History
Results of this type were first proved by Cameron–Martin in the 1940s and by Girsanov in 1960.2 They have been subsequently extended to more general classes of process culminating in the general form of Lenglart (1977).3
Significance
Girsanov's theorem is important in the general theory of stochastic processes since it enables the key result that if Q is a measure absolutely continuous with respect to P then every P-semimartingale is a Q-semimartingale.
Statement of theorem
We state the theorem first for the special case when the underlying stochastic process is a Wiener process. This special case is sufficient for risk-neutral pricing in the Black-Scholes model and in many other models (e.g. all continuous models).
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Wiener process on the Wiener probability space

 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a measurable process adapted to the natural filtration of the Wiener process 
 
 
 
 .
Given an adapted process 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  define



where 
 
 
 
  is the stochastic exponential (or Doléans exponential) of X with respect to W, i.e.


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a quadratic variation for 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a strictly positive martingale, a probability measure Q can be defined on 
 
 
 
  such that we have Radon–Nikodym derivative



Then for each t the measure Q restricted to the unaugmented sigma fields 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to P restricted to 
 
 

Furthermore if Y is a local martingale under P then the process



is a Q local martingale on the filtered probability space

 
 .
Corollary
If X is a continuous process and W is Brownian motion under measure P then


 
  is Brownian motion under Q.
The fact that 
 
 
 
  is continuous is trivial; by Girsanov's theorem it is a Q local martingale, and by computing the quadratic variation



it follows by Lévy's characterization of Brownian motion that this is a Q Brownian motion.
Comments
In many common applications, the process X is defined by



For X of this form then a sufficient condition for 
 
 
 
 
  to be a martingale is Novikov's condition which requires that



The stochastic exponential 
 
 
 
  is the process Z which solves the stochastic differential equation



The measure Q constructed above is not equivalent to P on 
 
 
 
  as this would only be the case if the Radon–Nikodym derivative were a uniformly integrable martingale, which the exponential martingale described above is not (for 
 
 
 
 
 ).
Application to finance
In finance, Girsanov theorem is used each time one needs to derive an asset's or rate's dynamics under a new probability measure. The most well known case is moving from historic measure P to risk neutral measure Q which is done—in Black–Scholes model—via Radon–Nikodym derivative:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the instantaneous risk free rate, 
 
 
 
  the asset's drift and 
 
 
 
  its volatility.
Other classical applications of Girsanov theorem are quanto adjustments and the calculation of forwards' drifts under LIBOR market model.
See also

Cameron–Martin theorem

References




External links

Notes on Stochastic Calculus which contains a simple outline proof of Girsanov's theorem.
Applied Multidimensional Girsanov Theorem which contains financial applications of Girsanov's theorem.

"
Category:Stochastic processes Category:Probability theorems










