


Spectral space




Spectral space

In mathematics, a spectral space is a topological space that is homeomorphic to the spectrum of a commutative ring.
Definition
Let X be a topological space and let K

(X) be the set of all quasi-compact open subsets of X. Then X is said to be spectral if it satisfies all of the following conditions:

X is quasi-compact and T0.
K

(X) is a basis of open subsets of X.
K

(X) is closed under finite intersections.
X is sober, i.e. every nonempty irreducible closed subset of X has a (necessarily unique) generic point.

Equivalent descriptions
Let X be a topological space. Each of the following properties are equivalent to the property of X being spectral:

X is homeomorphic to a projective limit of finite T0-spaces.
X is homeomorphic to the spectrum of a bounded distributive lattice L. In this case, L is isomorphic (as a bounded lattice) to the lattice K

(X) (this is called Stone representation of distributive lattices).
X is homeomorphic to the spectrum of a commutative ring.
X is the topological space determined by a Priestley space.
X is a coherent space in the sense of topology (this indeed is only another name).

Properties
Let X be a spectral space and let K

(X) be as before. Then:

K

(X) is a bounded sublattice of subsets of X.
Every closed subspace of X is spectral.
An arbitrary intersection of quasi-compact and open subsets of X (hence of elements from K

(X)) is again spectral.
X is T0 by definition, but in general not T1. In fact a spectral space is T1 if and only if it is Hausdorff (or T2) if and only if it is a boolean space.
X can be seen as a Pairwise Stone space.1

Spectral maps
A spectral map f: X → Y between spectral spaces X and Y is a continuous map such that the preimage of every open and quasi-compact subset of Y under f is again quasi-compact.
The category of spectral spaces which has spectral maps as morphisms is dually equivalent to the category of bounded distributive lattices (together with morphisms of such lattices).2 In this anti-equivalence, a spectral space X corresponds to the lattice K

(X).
References

M. Hochster (1969). Prime ideal structure in commutative rings. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 142 43—60



.

Footnotes
"
Category:General topology Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Lattice theory



G. Bezhanishvili, N. Bezhanishvili, D. Gabelaia, A. Kurz, (2010). Bitopological duality for distributive lattices and Heyting algebras. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 20.





