


Binomial




Binomial

In algebra, a binomial is a polynomial which is the sum of two terms, which are monomials.1 It is the simplest kind of polynomial after the monomials.
Definition
A binomial is a polynomial, which is the sum of two monomials. A binomial in a single indeterminate (also known as a univariate binomial) can be written in the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are numbers, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are distinct nonnegative integers and 
 
 
 
  is a symbol which is called an indeterminate or, for historical reasons, a variable. In some contexts, the exponents 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  may be negative, in which case the monomial is a Laurent binomial.
More generally, a binomial may be written2 as:



Some examples of binomials are:









Operations on simple binomials

The binomial 
 
 
 
  can be factored as the product of two other binomials.








This is a special case of the more general formula
 
 
 
 .
 
This can also be extended to 
 
 
 
  when working over the complex numbers
 


The product of a pair of linear binomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a trinomial:










A binomial raised to the nth power, represented as








can be expanded by means of the binomial theorem or, equivalently, using Pascal's triangle. For example, the square 
 
 
 
  of the binomial 
 
 
 
  is equal to the sum of the squares of the two terms and twice the product of the terms, that is 
 
 
 
 . The numbers (1,2,1) appearing as multipliers for the terms in this expansion are binomial coefficients two rows down from the top of Pascal's triangle. The expansion of the nth power uses the numbers n rows down from the top of the triangle.
 


An application of above formula for the square of a binomial is the "(m,n)-formula" for generating Pythagorean triples: for ''m a=n^2-m^2, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .


Binomials that are sums or differences of cubes can be factored into lower-order polynomials as follows:












See also

Completing the square
Binomial distribution
Binomial-QMF (Daubechies Wavelet Filters)
The list of factorial and binomial topics contains a large number of related links.

Notes
References

L. Bostock and S. Chandler (1978). Pure Mathematics 1. ISBN 0-85950-092-6. pp. 36


"
Category:Algebra Category:Factorial and binomial topics



↩
↩




