


Symbolic method




Symbolic method

In mathematics, the symbolic method in invariant theory is an algorithm developed by , , , and  in the 19th century for computing invariants of algebraic forms. It is based on treating the form as if it were a power of a degree one form, which corresponds to embedding a symmetric power of a vector space into the symmetric elements of a tensor product of copies of it.
Symbolic notation
The symbolic method uses a compact but rather confusing and mysterious notation for invariants, depending on the introduction of new symbols a, b, c, ... (from which the symbolic method gets its name) with apparently contradictory properties.
Example: the discriminant of a binary quadratic form
These symbols can be explained by the following example from . Suppose that


 
  is a binary quadratic form with an invariant given by the discriminant


 
  The symbolic representation of the discriminant is


 
  where a and b are the symbols. The meaning of the expression (ab)2 is as follows. First of all, (ab) is a shorthand form for the determinant of a matrix whose rows are a1, a2 and b1, b2, so


 
  Squaring this we get


 
  Next we pretend that


 
  so that


 
  and we ignore the fact that this does not seem to make sense if f is not a power of a linear form. Substituting these values gives



Higher degrees
More generally if


 
  is a binary form of higher degree, then one introduces new variables a1, a2, b1, b2, c1, c2, with the properties



What this means is that the following two vector spaces are naturally isomorphic:

The vector space of homogeneous polynomials in A0,...An of degree m
The vector space of polynomials in 2m variables a1, a2, b1, b2, c1, c2, ... that have degree n in each of the m pairs of variables (a1, a2), (b1, b2), (c1, c2), ... and are symmetric under permutations of the m symbols a, b, ....,

The isomorphism is given by mapping aa, bb, .... to Aj. This mapping does not preserve products of polynomials.
More variables
The extension to a form f in more than two variables x1, x2,x3,... is similar: one introduces symbols a1, a2,a3 and so on with the properties



Symmetric products
The rather mysterious formalism of the symbolic method corresponds to embedding a symmetric product Sn(V) of a vector space V into a tensor product of n copies of V, as the elements preserved by the action of the symmetric group. In fact this is done twice, because the invariants of degree n of a quantic of degree m are the invariant elements of SnSm(V), which gets embedded into a tensor product of mn copies of V, as the elements invariant under a wreath product of the two symmetric groups. The brackets of the symbolic method are really invariant linear forms on this tensor product, which give invariants of SnSm(V) by restriction.
See also

Umbral calculus

References





, pages 32–37, "Invariants of n-ary forms: the symbolic method. Reprinted as 







"
Category:Algebra Category:Invariant theory


