


Virtual ground




Virtual ground

In electronics, a virtual ground (or virtual earth) is a node of a circuit that is maintained at a steady reference potential, without being connected directly to the reference potential. In some cases the reference potential is considered to be that of the surface of the earth, and the reference node is called "ground" or "earth" as a consequence.
The virtual ground concept aids circuit analysis in operational amplifier and other circuits and provides useful practical circuit effects that would be difficult to achieve in other ways.
In circuit theory, a node may have any value of current or voltage but physical implementations of a virtual ground will have limitations of current handling ability and a non-zero impedance which may have practical side effects.
Construction
A voltage divider, using two resistors, can be used to create a virtual ground node. If two voltage sources are connected in series with two resistors, it can be shown that the midpoint becomes a virtual ground if




An active virtual ground circuit is sometimes called a rail splitter. Such a circuit uses an op-amp or some other circuit element that has gain. Since an operational amplifier has very high open-loop gain, the potential difference between its inputs tend to zero when a feedback network is implemented. To achieve a reasonable voltage at the output (and thus equilibrium in the system), the output supplies the inverting input (via the feedback network) with enough voltage to reduce the potential difference between the inputs to microvolts. The non-inverting (+) input of the operational amplifier is grounded; therefore, its inverting (-) input, although not connected to ground, will assume a similar potential, becoming a virtual ground if the opamp is working in its linear region (i.e., outputs have not saturated).
Applications
Voltage is a differential quantity, which appears between two points. In order to deal only with a voltage (an electrical potential) of a single point, the second point has to be connected to a reference point (ground). Usually, the power supply terminals serve as steady grounds; when the internal points of compound power sources are accessible, they can also serve as real grounds.
If there are not accessible source internal points, external circuit points having steady voltage with respect to the source terminals can serve as artificial virtual grounds. Such a point has to have steady potential, which does not vary when a load is attached.123
See also

Voltage-to-current converter and Current-to-voltage converter show some typical virtual ground applications
Miller theorem applications

References


External links

Create a Virtual Ground with the LT1118-2.5 Sink/Source Voltage Regulator
Rail Splitter, from Abraham Lincoln to Virtual Ground Application note on creating an artificial virtual ground as a reference voltage.
Creating a Virtual Power Supply Ground
Inverting configuration shows the application of the virtual ground concept in an inverting amplifier

"
Category:Electronics



Virtual Ground Circuits↩
Single Supply Op Amps↩
Designing Single Supply, Low-Power Systems↩




