


Radon–Nikodym theorem




Radon–Nikodym theorem

In mathematics, the Radon–Nikodym theorem is a result in measure theory which states that, given a measurable space

 
 , if a σ-finite measure

 
  on 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous with respect to a σ-finite measure 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , then there is a measurable function

 
 , such that for any measurable subset 
 
 
 
 :



The function 
 
 
 
  is called the Radon–Nikodym derivative and denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
The theorem is named after Johann Radon, who proved the theorem for the special case where the underlying space is  in 1913, and for Otto Nikodym who proved the general case in 1930.1 In 1936 Hans Freudenthal further generalized the Radon–Nikodym theorem by proving the Freudenthal spectral theorem, a result in Riesz space theory, which contains the Radon–Nikodym theorem as a special case.2
If 
 
 
 
  is a Banach space and the generalization of the Radon–Nikodym theorem also holds for functions with values in 
 
 
 
  (mutatis mutandis), then 
 
 
 
  is said to have the Radon–Nikodym property. All Hilbert spaces have the Radon–Nikodym property.
Radon–Nikodym derivative
The function 
 
 
 
  satisfying the above equality is uniquely defined up to a 
 
 
 
 -null set, that is, if 
 
 
 
  is another function which satisfies the same property, then 
 
 

 
 -almost everywhere. 
 
 
 
  is commonly written 
 
 
 
  and is called the Radon–Nikodym derivative. The choice of notation and the name of the function reflects the fact that the function is analogous to a derivative in calculus in the sense that it describes the rate of change of density of one measure with respect to another (the way the Jacobian determinant is used in multivariable integration). A similar theorem can be proven for signed and complex measures: namely, that if 
 
 
 
  is a nonnegative σ-finite measure, and ν is a finite-valued signed or complex measure such that ν ≪ μ, i.e. ν is absolutely continuous with respect to 
 
 
 
 , then there is a 
 
 
 
 -integrable real- or complex-valued function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  such that for every measurable set 
 
 
 
 ,



Applications
The theorem is very important in extending the ideas of probability theory from probability masses and probability densities defined over real numbers to probability measures defined over arbitrary sets. It tells if and how it is possible to change from one probability measure to another. Specifically, the probability density function of a random variable is the Radon–Nikodym derivative of the induced measure with respect to some base measure (usually the Lebesgue measure for continuous random variables).
For example, it can be used to prove the existence of conditional expectation for probability measures. The latter itself is a key concept in probability theory, as conditional probability is just a special case of it.
Amongst other fields, financial mathematics uses the theorem extensively. Such changes of probability measure are the cornerstone of the rational pricing of derivatives and are used for converting actual probabilities into those of the risk neutral probabilities.
Properties

Let ν, μ, and λ be σ-finite measures on the same measure space. If ν ≪ λ and μ ≪ λ (ν and μ are absolutely continuous with respect to λ, then










If ν ≪ μ ≪ λ, then










In particular, if μ ≪ ν and ν ≪ μ, then










If μ ≪ λ and 
 
 
 
  is a μ-integrable function, then










If ν is a finite signed or complex measure, then









Further applications
Information divergences
If μ and ν are measures over 
 
 
 
 , and μ ≪ ν

The Kullback–Leibler divergence from μ to ν is defined to be










For α > 0, α ≠ 1 the Rényi divergence of order α from μ to ν is defined to be









The assumption of σ-finiteness
The Radon–Nikodym theorem makes the assumption that the measure μ with respect to which one computes the rate of change of ν is σ-finite. Here is an example when μ is not σ-finite and the Radon–Nikodym theorem fails to hold.
Consider the Borel σ-algebra on the real line. Let the counting measure, 
 
 
 
 , of a Borel set 
 
 
 
  be defined as the number of elements of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is finite, and 
 
 
 
  otherwise. One can check that 
 
 
 
  is indeed a measure. It is not 
 
 
 
 -finite, as not every Borel set is at most a countable union of finite sets. Let 
 
 
 
  be the usual Lebesgue measure on this Borel algebra. Then, 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous with respect to 
 
 
 
 , since for a set 
 
 
 
  one has 
 
 
 
  only if 
 
 
 
  is the empty set, and then 
 
 
 
  is also zero.
Assume that the Radon–Nikodym theorem holds, that is, for some measurable function 
 
 
 
  one has



for all Borel sets. Taking 
 
 
 
  to be a singleton set,  and using the above equality, one finds



for all real numbers 
 
 
 
 . This implies that the function 
 
 
 
 , and therefore the Lebesgue measure 
 
 
 
 , is zero, which is a contradiction.
Proof
This section gives a measure-theoretic proof of the theorem. There is also a functional-analytic proof, using Hilbert space methods, that was first given by von Neumann.
For finite measures 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the idea is to consider functions 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . The supremum of all such functions, along with the monotone convergence theorem, then furnishes the Radon–Nikodym derivative. The fact that the remaining part of 
 
 
 
  is singular with respect to 
 
 
 
  follows from a technical fact about finite measures. Once the result is established for finite measures, extending to 
 
 
 
 -finite, signed, and complex measures can be done naturally. The details are given below.
For finite measures
First, suppose 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both finite-valued nonnegative measures. Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of those measurable functions 
 
 
 
  such that:



 
 , since it contains at least the zero function. Now let , and suppose 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary measurable set, and define:



Then one has



and therefore, .
Now, let be a sequence of functions in 
 
 
 
  such that



By replacing  with the maximum of the first 
 
 
 
  functions, one can assume that the sequence  is increasing. Let 
 
 
 
  be a function defined as



By Lebesgue's monotone convergence theorem, one has



for each 
 
 
 
 , and hence, 
 
 
 
 . Also, by the construction of 
 
 
 
 ,



Now, since 
 
 
 
 ,



defines a nonnegative measure on 
 
 
 
 . Suppose ; then, since 
 
 
 
  is finite, there is an 
 
 
 
  such that . Let (P, N) be a Hahn decomposition for the signed measure . Note that for every 
 
 
 
  one has , and hence,



Also, note that 
 
 
 
 ; for if 
 
 
 
 , then (since 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous in relation to 
 
 
 
 )  0}}, so  0}} and



contradicting the fact that .
Then, since


 and satisfies



This is impossible, therefore, the initial assumption that  must be false. So  0}}, as desired.
Now, since 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -integrable, the set is 
 
 
 
 -null. Therefore, if a 
 
 
 
  is defined as



then 
 
 
 
  has the desired properties.
As for the uniqueness, let 
 
 
 
  be measurable functions satisfying



for every measurable set 
 
 
 
 . Then, 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -integrable, and



In particular, for  or  It follows that



and so, that  0}}

 
 -almost everywhere; the same is true for , and thus, 
 
 

 
 -almost everywhere, as desired.
For 
 
 
 
 -finite positive measures
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 -finite, then 
 
 
 
  can be written as the union of a sequence  of disjoint sets in 
 
 
 
 , each of which has finite measure under both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For each 
 
 
 
 , there is a 
 
 
 
 -measurable function  such that



for each 
 
 
 
 -measurable subset 
 
 
 
  of . The union

 
  of those functions is then the required function.
As for the uniqueness, since each of the  is 
 
 
 
 -almost everywhere unique, then so is 
 
 
 
 .
For signed and complex measures
If 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -finite signed measure, then it can be Hahn–Jordan decomposed as  ν+ − ν−}} where one of the measures is finite. Applying the previous result to those two measures, one obtains two functions, 
 
 
 
 , satisfying the Radon–Nikodym theorem for  and  respectively, at least one of which is 
 
 
 
 -integrable (i.e., its integral with respect to 
 
 
 
  is finite). It is clear then that 
 
 
 
  satisfies the required properties, including uniqueness, since both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are unique up to 
 
 
 
 -almost everywhere equality.
If 
 
 
 
  is a complex measure, it can be decomposed as  ν1 + iν2}}, where both  and  are finite-valued signed measures. Applying the above argument, one obtains two functions, 
 
 
 
 , satisfying the required properties for  and , respectively. Clearly, 
 
 
 
  is the required function.
See also

Girsanov theorem

Notes
References


Contains a proof for vector measures assuming values in a Banach space.

Contains a lucid proof in case the measure ν is not σ-finite.



"
Category:Theorems in measure theory Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Generalizations of the derivative Category:Integral representations



↩
↩




