


Hyperelliptic curve cryptography




Hyperelliptic curve cryptography

Hyperelliptic curve cryptography is similar to elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) insofar as the Jacobian of a hyperelliptic curve is an Abelian group on which to do arithmetic, just as we use the group of points on an elliptic curve in ECC.
Definition
An (imaginary) hyperelliptic curve of genus

 
  over a field 
 
 
 
  is given by the equation 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial of degree not larger than 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a monic polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
 . From this definition it follows that elliptic curves are hyperelliptic curves of genus 1. In hyperelliptic curve cryptography 
 
 
 
  is often a finite field. The Jacobian of 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 , is a quotient group, thus the elements of the Jacobian are not points, they are equivalence classes of divisors of degree 0 under the relation of linear equivalence. This agrees with the elliptic curve case, because it can be shown that the Jacobian of an elliptic curve is isomorphic with the group of points on the elliptic curve.1 The use of hyperelliptic curves in cryptography came about in 1989 from Neal Koblitz. Although introduced only 3 years after ECC, not many cryptosystems implement hyperelliptic curves because the implementation of the arithmetic isn't as efficient as with cryptosystems based on elliptic curves or factoring (RSA). The efficiency of implementing the arithmetic depends on the underlying finite field 
 
 
 
 , in practice it turns out that finite fields of characteristic 2 are a good choice for hardware implementations while software is usually faster in odd characteristic.2
The Jacobian on a hyperelliptic curve is an Abelian group and as such it can serve as group for the  discrete logarithm problem (DLP). In short, suppose we have an Abelian group 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  an element of 
 
 
 
 , the DLP on 
 
 
 
  entails finding the integer 
 
 
 
  given two elements of 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The first type of group used was the multiplicative group of a finite field, later also Jacobians of (hyper)elliptic curves were used. If the hyperelliptic curve is chosen with care, then Pollard's rho method is the most efficient way to solve DLP. This means that, if the Jacobian has 
 
 
 
  elements, that the running time is exponential in 
 
 
 
 . This makes is possible to use Jacobians of a fairly small order, thus making the system more efficient. But if the hyperelliptic curve is chosen poorly, the DLP will become quite easy to solve. In this case there are known attacks which are more efficient than generic discrete logarithm solvers3 or even subexponential.4 Hence these hyperelliptic curves must be avoided. Considering various attacks on DLP, it is possible to list the features of hyperelliptic curves that should be avoided.
Attacks against the DLP
All generic attacks on the discrete logarithm problem in finite abelian groups such as the Pohlig–Hellman algorithm and Pollard's rho method can be used to attack the DLP in the Jacobian of hyperelliptic curves. The Pohlig-Hellman attack reduces the difficulty of the DLP by looking at the order of the group we are working with. Suppose the group 
 
 
 
  that is used has 
 
 
 
  elements, where 
 
 
 
  is the prime factorization of 
 
 
 
 . Pohlig-Hellman reduces the DLP in 
 
 
 
  to DLPs in subgroups of order 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . So for 
 
 
 
  the largest prime divisor of 
 
 
 
 , the DLP in 
 
 
 
  is just as hard to solve as the DLP in the subgroup of order 
 
 
 
 . Therefore we would like to choose 
 
 
 
  such that the largest prime divisor 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is almost equal to 
 
 
 
  itself. Requiring 
 
 
 
  usually suffices.
The index calculus algorithm is another algorithm that can be used to solve DLP under some circumstances. For Jacobians of (hyper)elliptic curves there exists an index calculus attack on DLP. If the genus of the curve becomes too high, the attack will be more efficient than Pollard's rho. Today it is known that even a genus of 
 
 
 
  cannot assure security.5 Hence we are left with elliptic curves and hyperelliptic curves of genus 2.
Another restriction on the hyperelliptic curves we can use comes from the Menezes-Okamoto-Vanstone-attack / Frey-Rück-attack. The first, often called MOV for short, was developed in 1993, the second came about in 1994. Consider a (hyper)elliptic curve 
 
 
 
  over a finite field 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the power of a prime number. Suppose the Jacobian of the curve has 
 
 
 
  elements and 
 
 
 
  is the largest prime divisor of 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
  the smallest positive integer such that 
 
 
 
  there exists a computable injective group homomorphism from the subgroup of 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is small, we can solve DLP in 
 
 
 
  by using the index calculus attack in 
 
 
 
 . For arbitrary curves 
 
 
 
  is very large (around the size of 
 
 
 
 ); so even though the index calculus attack is quite fast for multiplicative groups of finite fields this attack is not a threat for most curves. The injective function used in this attack is a pairing and there are some applications in cryptography that make use of them. In such applications it is important to balance the hardness of the DLP in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ; depending on the security level values of 
 
 
 
  between 6 and 12 are useful. The subgroup of 
 
 
 
  is a torus. There exists some independent usage in torus based cryptography.
We also have a problem, if 
 
 
 
 , the largest prime divisor of the order of the Jacobian, is equal to the characteristic of 
 
 
 
  By a different injective map we could then consider the DLP in the additive group 
 
 
 
  instead of DLP on the Jacobian. However, DLP in this additive group is trivial to solve, as can easily be seen. So also these curves, called anomalous curves, are not to be used in DLP.
Order of the Jacobian
Hence, in order to choose a good curve and a good underlying finite field, it is important to know the order of the Jacobian. Consider a hyperelliptic curve 
 
 
 
  of genus 
 
 
 
  over the field 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the power of a prime number and define 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  but now over the field 
 
 
 
 . It can be shown 6 that the order of the Jacobian of 
 
 
 
  lies in the interval 
 
 
 
 , called the Hasse-Weil interval. But there is more, we can compute the order using the zeta-function on hyperelliptic curves. Let 
 
 
 
  be the number of points on 
 
 
 
 . Then we define the zeta-function of 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . For this zeta-function it can be shown 7 that 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore 
 
 
 
  factors as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the complex conjugate of 
 
 
 
 . Finally we have that the order of 
 
 
 
  equals 
 
 
 
 . Hence orders of Jacobians can be found by computing the roots of 
 
 
 
 .
References
External links

Colm Ó hÉigeartaigh Implementation of some hyperelliptic curves algorithms using MIRACL

"
Category:Public-key cryptography Category:Elliptic curve cryptography



↩
↩
↩
↩
Jasper Scholten and Frederik Vercauteren, An Introduction to Elliptic and Hyperelliptic Curve Cryptography and the NTRU Cryptosystem, section 4↩
Alfred J. Menezes, Yi-Hong Wu, Robert J. Zuccherato, An elementary introduction to hyperelliptic curves, page 30↩
Alfred J. Menezes, Yi-Hong Wu, Robert J. Zuccherato, An elementary introduction to hyperelliptic curves, page 29↩




