


Irradiance




Irradiance
In [[radiometry]], '''irradiance''' is the [[radiant flux]] ''recei
 ved'' by a surface per unit area, and spectral irradiance is the irradiance of a surface per unit frequency or wavelength, depending on whether the spectrum is taken as a function of frequency or of wavelength. The SI unit of irradiance is the watt per square metre (), while that of spectral irradiance is the watt per square metre per hertz (W·m−2·Hz−1) or the watt per square metre per metre (W·m−3)—commonly the watt per square metre per nanometre (). The CGS unit erg per square centimeter per second () is often used in astronomy. Irradiance is often called "intensity" in branches of physics other than radiometry, but in radiometry this usage leads to confusion with radiant intensity.
Mathematical definitions
Irradiance
Irradiance of a surface, denoted Ee ("e" for "energetic", to avoid confusion with photometric quantities), is defined as1


 
  where

∂ is the partial derivative symbol;
Φe is the radiant flux received;
A is the area.

If we want to talk about the radiant flux emitted by a surface, we speak of radiant exitance.
Spectral irradiance
Spectral irradiance in frequency of a surface, denoted Ee,ν, is defined as2


 
  where ν is the frequency.
Spectral irradiance in wavelength of a surface, denoted Ee,λ, is defined as3


 
  where λ is the wavelength.
Property
Irradiance of a surface is also, according to the definition of radiant flux, equal to the time-average of the component of the Poynting vector perpendicular to the surface:


 
  where

 is the time-average;
S is the Poynting vector;
n is a unit vector normal to that surface;
α is the angle between n and S.

For a propagating sinusoidal linearly polarized electromagnetic plane wave, the Poynting vector always points to the direction of propagation while oscillating in magnitude. The irradiance of a surface is then given by4


 
  where

Em is the amplitude of the wave's electric field;
n is the refractive index of the medium of propagation;
c is the speed of light in vacuum;
μ0 is the vacuum permeability;
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity.

This formula assumes that the magnetic susceptibility is negligible, i.e. that μr ≈ 1 where μr is the magnetic permeability of the propagation medium. This assumption is typically valid in transparent media in the optical frequency range.
Solar energy
The global irradiance on a horizontal surface on Earth consists of the direct irradiance Ee,dir and diffuse irradiance Ee,diff. On a tilted plane, there is another irradiance component, Ee,refl, which is the component that is reflected from the ground. The average ground reflection is about 20% of the global irradiance. Hence, the irradiance Ee on a tilted plane consists of three components:5



The integral of solar irradiance over a time period is called "solar exposure" or "insolation".67
SI radiometry units
See also

Illuminance
Spectral flux density
Albedo
Fluence
Insolation
Light diffusion
PI curve (photosynthesis-irradiance curve)
Solar azimuth angle
Solar irradiation
Solar noon
Stefan–Boltzmann law

References
"
Category:Physical quantities Category:Radiometry



↩


↩
↩

↩




