   Borel subgroup      Borel subgroup   In the theory of algebraic groups , a Borel subgroup of an algebraic group  G is a maximal Zariski closed and connected  solvable  algebraic subgroup . For example, in the group GL n ( n x n invertible matrices), the subgroup of invertible upper triangular matrices is a Borel subgroup.  For groups realized over algebraically closed fields , there is a single conjugacy class of Borel subgroups.  Borel subgroups are one of the two key ingredients in understanding the structure of simple (more generally, reductive ) algebraic groups, in Jacques Tits ' theory of groups with a (B,N) pair . Here the group B is a Borel subgroup and N is the normalizer of a maximal torus contained in B .  The notion was introduced by Armand Borel , who played a leading role in the development of the theory of algebraic groups.  Parabolic subgroups  Subgroups between a Borel subgroup B and the ambient group G are called parabolic subgroups . Parabolic subgroups P are also characterized, among algebraic subgroups, by the condition that G / P is a complete variety . Working over algebraically closed fields, the Borel subgroups turn out to be the minimal parabolic subgroups in this sense. Thus B is a Borel subgroup when the homogeneous space G/B is a complete variety which is "as large as possible".  For a simple algebraic group G , the set of conjugacy classes of parabolic subgroups is in bijection with the set of all subsets of nodes of the corresponding Dynkin diagram ; the Borel subgroup corresponds to the empty set and G itself corresponding to the set of all nodes. (In general each node of the Dynkin diagram determines a simple negative root and thus a one-dimensional 'root group' of G ---a subset of the nodes thus yields a parabolic subgroup, generated by B and the corresponding negative root groups. Moreover any parabolic subgroup is conjugate to such a parabolic subgroup.)  Lie algebra  For the special case of a Lie algebra    ğ”¤   ğ”¤   \mathfrak{g}   with a Cartan subalgebra    ğ”¥   ğ”¥   \mathfrak{h}   , given an ordering of   ğ”¥   ğ”¥   \mathfrak{h}   , the Borel subalgebra is the direct sum of   ğ”¥   ğ”¥   \mathfrak{h}   and the weight spaces of   ğ”¤   ğ”¤   \mathfrak{g}   with positive weight. A Lie subalgebra of   ğ”¤   ğ”¤   \mathfrak{g}   containing a Borel subalgebra is called a parabolic Lie algebra .  See also   Hyperbolic group   References       External links      de:Borel-Untergruppe "  Category:Algebraic groups   