


Kronecker's theorem




Kronecker's theorem

In mathematics, Kronecker's theorem is a theorem about diophantine approximation, introduced by .
Kronecker's approximation theorem had been firstly proved by L. Kronecker in the end of the 19th century. It has been now revealed to relate to the idea of n-torus and Mahler measure since the later half of the 20th century. In terms of physical systems, it has the consequence that planets in circular orbits moving uniformly around a star will, over time, assume all alignments, unless there is an exact dependency between their orbital periods.
Statement
Kronecker's theorem is a result in diophantine approximations applying to several real numbers ''xi'', for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, that generalises Dirichlet's approximation theorem to multiple variables.
The classical Kronecker's approximation theorem is formulated as follows; Given real numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  , for any small 
 
 
 
  there exist integers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  ,
if and only if for any 
 
 
 
  with


 
  the number 
 
 
 
  is also an integer.
Relation to tori
In the case of N numbers, taken as a single N-tuple and point P of the torus

T = RN/ZN,
 

the closure of the subgroup  generated by P will be finite, or some torus T′ contained in T. The original Kronecker's theorem (Leopold Kronecker, 1884) stated that the necessary condition for

T′ = T,
 

which is that the numbers ''xi'' together with 1 should be linearly independent over the rational numbers, is also sufficient. Here it is easy to see that if some linear combination of the ''xi'' and 1 with non-zero rational number coefficients is zero, then the coefficients may be taken as integers, and a character χ of the group T other than the trivial character takes the value 1 on P. By Pontryagin duality we have T′ contained in the kernel of χ, and therefore not equal to T.
In fact a thorough use of Pontryagin duality here shows that the whole Kronecker theorem describes the closure of  as the intersection of the kernels of the χ with

χ(P) = 1.
 

This gives an (antitone) Galois connection between monogenic closed subgroups of T (those with a single generator, in the topological sense), and sets of characters with kernel containing a given point. Not all closed subgroups occur as monogenic; for example a subgroup that has a torus of dimension ≥ 1 as connected component of the identity element, and that is not connected, cannot be such a subgroup.
The theorem leaves open the question of how well (uniformly) the multiples mP of P fill up the closure. In the one-dimensional case, the distribution is uniform by the equidistribution theorem.
See also

Weyl's criterion

References






"
Category:Diophantine approximation Category:Topological groups


