


Arzelà–Ascoli theorem




Arzelà–Ascoli theorem

The Arzelà–Ascoli theorem is a fundamental result of mathematical analysis giving necessary and sufficient conditions to decide whether every sequence of a given family of real-valued continuous functions defined on a closed and bounded interval has a uniformly convergent subsequence. The main condition is the equicontinuity of the family of functions. The theorem is the basis of many proofs in mathematics, including that of the Peano existence theorem in the theory of ordinary differential equations, Montel's theorem in complex analysis, and the Peter–Weyl theorem in harmonic analysis.
The notion of equicontinuity was introduced at around the same time by  and . A weak form of the theorem was proven by , who established the sufficient condition for compactness, and by , who established the necessary condition and gave the first clear presentation of the result. A further generalization of the theorem was proven by , to sets of real-valued continuous functions with domain a compact metric space . Modern formulations of the theorem allow for the domain to be compact Hausdorff and for the range to be an arbitrary metric space. More general formulations of the theorem exist that give necessary and sufficient conditions for a family of functions from a compactly generated Hausdorff space into a uniform space to be compact in the compact-open topology. .
Statement and first consequences
A sequence  of continuous functions on an interval 
 
 
 
  is uniformly bounded if there is a number M such that



for every function  belonging to the sequence, and every 
 
 
 
 . The sequence is equicontinuous if, for every 
 
 
 
 
 , there exists 
 
 
 
  such that



whenever 
 
 


Consider a sequence of real-valued continuous functions  defined on a closed and bounded interval

 
  of the real line. If this sequence is uniformly bounded and equicontinuous, then there exists a subsequence (fnk) that converges uniformly.
 

The converse is also true, in the sense that if every subsequence of itself has a uniformly convergent subsequence, then is uniformly bounded and equicontinuous. (See below for a proof.)
Examples
Differentiable functions
The hypotheses of the theorem are satisfied by a uniformly bounded sequence of differentiable functions with uniformly bounded derivatives. Indeed, uniform boundedness of the derivatives implies by the mean value theorem that for all 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,



where K is the supremum of the derivatives of functions in the sequence and is independent of 
 
 
 
 . So, given 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
 
  to verify the definition of equicontinuity of the sequence. This proves the following corollary:

Let {fn} be a uniformly bounded sequence of real-valued differentiable functions on 
 
 
 
  such that the derivatives {fn′} are uniformly bounded. Then there exists a subsequence {fnk} that converges uniformly on 
 
 
 
 .

If, in addition, the sequence of second derivatives is also uniformly bounded, then the derivatives also converge uniformly (up to a subsequence), and so on. Another generalization holds for continuously differentiable functions. Suppose that the functions  are continuously differentiable with derivatives . Suppose that fn′ are uniformly equicontinuous and uniformly bounded, and that the sequence  is pointwise bounded (or just bounded at a single point). Then there is a subsequence of the converging uniformly to a continuously differentiable function.
Lipschitz and Hölder continuous functions
The argument given above proves slightly more, specifically

If is a uniformly bounded sequence of real valued functions on 
 
 
 
  such that each f is Lipschitz continuous with the same Lipschitz constant 
 
 
 
 :










for all 
 
 
 
  and all , then there is a subsequence that converges uniformly on 
 
 
 
 .
 

The limit function is also Lipschitz continuous with the same value 
 
 
 
  for the Lipschitz constant. A slight refinement is

A set 
 
 
 
  of functions 
 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  that is uniformly bounded and satisfies a Hölder condition of order 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 











is relatively compact in 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the unit ball of the Hölder space  is compact in 
 
 
 
 .
 

This holds more generally for scalar functions on a compact metric space 
 
 
 
  satisfying a Hölder condition with respect to the metric on 
 
 
 
 .
Euclidean spaces
The Arzelà–Ascoli theorem holds, more generally, if the functions  take values in 
 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space , and the proof is very simple: just apply the 
 
 
 
 -valued version of the Arzelà–Ascoli theorem 
 
 
 
  times to extract a subsequence that converges uniformly in the first coordinate, then a sub-subsequence that converges uniformly in the first two coordinates, and so on. The above examples generalize easily to the case of functions with values in Euclidean space.
Proof
The proof is essentially based on a diagonalization argument. The simplest case is of real-valued functions on a closed and bounded interval:

Let 
 
 
 
  be a closed and bounded interval. If F is an infinite set of functions 
 
 
 
  which is uniformly bounded and equicontinuous, then there is a sequence fn of elements of F such that fn converges uniformly on I.

Fix an enumeration {xi}i ∈N of rational numbers in I. Since F is uniformly bounded, the set of points {f(x1)}f∈F is bounded, and hence by the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, there is a sequence {fn1} of distinct functions in F such that {fn1(x1)} converges. Repeating the same argument for the sequence of points {fn1(x2)}, there is a subsequence {fn2} of {fn1} such that {fn2(x2)} converges.
By induction this process can be continued forever, and so there is a chain of subsequences



such that, for each k = 1, 2, 3, ..., the subsequence {fnk} converges at x1, ..., xk. Now form the diagonal subsequence {''f''} whose mth term fm is the mth term in the mth subsequence {fnm}. By construction, fm converges at every rational point of I.
Therefore, given any 
 
 
 
  and rational xk in I, there is an integer  N(ε, xk)}} such that



Since the family F is equicontinuous, for this fixed ε and for every x in I, there is an open interval Ux containing x such that



for all f ∈ F and all s, t in I such that .
The collection of intervals Ux, x ∈ I, forms an open cover of I. Since I  is compact, this covering admits a finite subcover . There exists an integer K such that each open interval Uj, 
 
 
 
 
 , contains a rational xk with 
 
 
 
 . Finally, for any t ∈ I, there are j and k so that t and xk belong to the same interval Uj. For this choice of k,



for all  Consequently, the sequence {fn} is uniformly Cauchy, and therefore converges to a continuous function, as claimed. This completes the proof.
Generalizations
Compact metric spaces and compact Hausdorff spaces
The definitions of boundedness and equicontinuity can be generalized to the setting of arbitrary compact metric spaces and, more generally still, compact Hausdorff spaces. Let X be a compact Hausdorff space, and let C(X) be the space of real-valued continuous functions on X. A subset 
 
 
 
  is said to be equicontinuous if for every x ∈ X and every 
 
 
 
 , x has a neighborhood Ux such that



A set 
 
 
 
  is said to be pointwise bounded if for every x ∈ X,



A version of the Theorem holds also in the space C(X) of real-valued continuous functions on a compact Hausdorff space X :

Let X be a compact Hausdorff space. Then a subset F of C(X) is relatively compact in the topology induced by the uniform norm if and only if it is equicontinuous and pointwise bounded.
 

The Arzelà–Ascoli theorem is thus a fundamental result in the study of the algebra of continuous functions on a compact Hausdorff space.
Various generalizations of the above quoted result are possible. For instance, the functions can assume values in a metric space or (Hausdorff) topological vector space with only minimal changes to the statement (see, for instance, , ):

Let X be a compact Hausdorff space and Y a metric space. Then 
 
 
 
  is compact in the compact-open topology if and only if it is equicontinuous, pointwise relatively compact and closed.
 

Here pointwise relatively compact means that for each x ∈ X, the set is relatively compact in Y.
The proof given can be generalized in a way that does not rely on the separability of the domain. On a compact Hausdorff space X, for instance, the equicontinuity is used to extract, for each ε = 1/n, a finite open covering of X such that the oscillation of any function in the family is less than ε on each open set in the cover. The role of the rationals can then be played by a set of points drawn from each open set in each of the countably many covers obtained in this way, and the main part of the proof proceeds exactly as above.
Necessity
Whereas most formulations of the Arzelà–Ascoli theorem assert sufficient conditions for a family of functions to be (relatively) compact in some topology, these conditions are typically also necessary. For instance, if a set F is compact in C(X), the Banach space of real-valued continuous functions on a compact Hausdorff space with respect to its uniform norm, then it is bounded in the uniform norm on C(X) and in particular is pointwise bounded. Let N(ε, U) be the set of all functions in F whose oscillation over an open subset U ⊂ X is less than ε:



For a fixed x∈X and ε, the sets N(ε, U) form an open covering of F as U varies over all open neighborhoods of x. Choosing a finite subcover then gives equicontinuity.
Examples

To every function 
 
 
 
  that is 

 
 -integrable on 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 











Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of functions 
 
 
 
  corresponding to functions 
 
 
 
  in the unit ball of the space . If 
 
 
 
  is the Hölder conjugate of 
 
 
 
 , defined by 
 
 
 
 , then Hölder's inequality implies that all functions in 
 
 
 
  satisfy a Hölder condition with 
 
 
 
  and constant 
 
 
 
 .
 


It follows that 
 
 
 
  is compact in 
 
 
 
 . This means that the correspondence 
 
 
 
  defines a compact linear operator

 
  between the Banach spaces  and 
 
 
 
 . Composing with the injection of 
 
 
 
  into , one sees that 
 
 
 
  acts compactly from  to itself. The case 
 
 
 
  can be seen as a simple instance of the fact that the injection from the Sobolev space

 
  into , for 
 
 
 
  a bounded open set in , is compact.
 


When 
 
 
 
  is a compact linear operator from a Banach space 
 
 
 
  to a Banach space 
 
 
 
 , its transpose  is compact from the (continuous) dual  to . This can be checked by the Arzelà–Ascoli theorem.


Indeed, the image 
 
 
 
  of the closed unit ball 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is contained in a compact subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . The unit ball  of  defines, by restricting from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , a set 
 
 
 
  of (linear) continuous functions on 
 
 
 
  that is bounded and equicontinuous. By Arzelà–Ascoli, for every sequence  in , there is a subsequence that converges uniformly on 
 
 
 
 , and this implies that the image 
 
 
 
  of that subsequence is Cauchy in .
 


When 
 
 
 
  is holomorphic in an open disk  B(z0, r)}}, with modulus bounded by 
 
 
 
 , then (for example by Cauchy's formula) its derivative 
 
 
 
  has modulus bounded by $4\frac{M}{r}$ in the smaller disk  B(z0, ).}} If a family of holomorphic functions on  is bounded by $M$ on , it follows that the family $\mathbf{ F } $ of restrictions to  is equicontinuous on . Therefore, a sequence converging uniformly on  can be extracted. This is a first step in the direction of Montel's theorem.

See also

Helly's selection theorem
Fréchet-Kolmogorov theorem

References


.

.

.

.


.

.
Arzelà-Ascoli theorem at Encyclopaedia of Mathematics




"
Category:Continuous mappings Category:Topology of function spaces Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Compactness theorems Category:Theorems in functional analysis


