


Gelfond–Schneider theorem




Gelfond–Schneider theorem

In mathematics, the Gelfond–Schneider theorem establishes the transcendence of a large class of numbers. It was originally proved independently in 1934 by Aleksandr Gelfond1 and Theodor Schneider. The Gelfond–Schneider theorem answers affirmatively Hilbert's seventh problem.
Statement

If a and b are algebraic numbers with a ≠ 0,1 and b irrational, then any value of ab is a transcendental number.
 

Comments

The values of a and b are not restricted to real numbers; complex numbers are allowed (they are never rational when they have an imaginary part not equal to 0, even if both the real and imaginary parts are rational).
In general,  is multivalued, where "log" stands for the complex logarithm. This accounts for the phrase "any value of" in the theorem's statement.
An equivalent formulation of the theorem is the following: if α and γ are nonzero algebraic numbers, and we take any non-zero logarithm of α, then  is either rational or transcendental. This may be expressed as saying that if ,  are linearly independent over the rationals, then they are linearly independent over the algebraic numbers. The generalisation of this statement to more general linear forms in logarithms of several algebraic numbers is in the domain of transcendence theory.
If the restriction that a and b be algebraic is removed, the statement does not remain true in general. For example,










Here, a is √2√2, which (as proven by the theorem itself) is transcendental rather than algebraic. Similarly, if  and , which is transcendental, then  is algebraic. A characterization of the values for a and b, which yield a transcendental ab, is not known.
 


Kurt Mahler proved the p-adic analogue of the theorem: if a and b are in Cp, the completion of the algebraic closure of Qp, and they are algebraic over Q, and if  and , then  is either rational or transcendental, where logp is the p-adic logarithm function.

Corollaries
The transcendence of the following numbers follows immediately from the theorem:

Gelfond–Schneider constant

 
  and its square root 
 
 

Gelfond's constant

 
 , as well as 
 
 


See also

Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem
Baker's theorem; an extension of the result
Schanuel's conjecture; if proven it would imply both the Gelfond–Schneider theorem and the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem

References









External links

A proof of the Gelfond–Schneider theorem

"
Category:Transcendental numbers Category:Theorems in number theory



↩




