


Principle of explosion




Principle of explosion

The principle of explosion (Latin: ex falso quodlibet, "from a falsehood, anything follows", or ex contradictione sequitur quodlibet, "from a contradiction, anything follows"), or the principle of Pseudo-Scotus, is the law of classical logic, intuitionistic logic and similar logical systems, according to which any statement can be proven from a contradiction.1 That is, once a contradiction has been asserted, any proposition (or its negation) can be inferred from it.
As a demonstration of the principle, consider two contradictory statements – “All lemons are yellow” and "Not all lemons are yellow", and suppose (for the sake of argument) that both are simultaneously true. If that is the case, anything can be proven, e.g. "Santa Claus exists", by using the following argument:

We know that "All lemons are yellow" as it is defined to be true.
Therefore the statement that (“All lemons are yellow" OR "Santa Claus exists”) must also be true, since the first part is true.
However, if "Not all lemons are yellow" (and this is also defined to be true), Santa Claus must exist – otherwise statement 2 would be false. It has thus been "proven" that Santa Claus exists. The same could be applied to any assertion, including the statement "Santa Claus does not exist".

The principle is not a universal rule; rather it exists as a consequence of a choice of which logic to use. It does not appear in some paraconsistent logics which allow localised 'gluts' of contradictory statements to be proved without affecting other proofs. In artificial intelligence and models of human reasoning it is common for such logics to be used. This can also occur in formal science, for example quantum mechanics and relativity lead to contradictions in extreme environments, but these contradictions do not imply that Santa exists – only that there are some scenarios where one or both theories are in need of alteration. Truth maintenance systems are AI models which try to capture this process.
Symbolic representation
The principle of explosion can be expressed in the following way (where "
 
 
 
 " symbolizes the relation of logical consequence and "
 
 
 
 
 " symbolizes a contradiction) :




or



 
 .
 

This can be read as, "If one claims something (
 
 
 
 ) and its negation (
 
 
 
 ), one can logically derive any conclusion (
 
 
 
 
 )."
Arguments for explosion
An informal, descriptive, argument is given above. In more formal terms, there are two kinds of argument for the principle of explosion, semantic and proof-theoretic.
The semantic argument
The first argument is semantic or model-theoretic in nature. A sentence 
 
 
 
  is a semantic consequence of a set of sentences 
 
 
 
  only if every model of 
 
 
 
  is a model of 
 
 
 
 . But there is no model of the contradictory set 
 
 
 
 
 . A fortiori, there is no model of 
 
 
 
  that is not a model of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, vacuously, every model of 
 
 
 
  is a model of 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
 
  is a semantic consequence of 
 
 
 
 .
The proof-theoretic argument
The second type of argument is proof-theoretic in nature. Consider the following derivations:




assumption
 




from (1) by conjunction elimination





from (1) by conjunction elimination
 




from (2) by disjunction introduction





from (3) and (4) by disjunctive syllogism





from (5) by conditional proof (discharging assumption 1)
 


This is just the symbolic version of the informal argument given above, with 
 
 
 
  standing for "all lemons are yellow" and 
 
 
 
  standing for "Santa Claus exists". From "all lemons are yellow and not all lemons are yellow" (1), we infer "all lemons are yellow" (2) and "not all lemons are yellow" (3); from "all lemons are yellow" (2), we infer "all lemons are yellow or Santa Claus exists" (4); and from "not all lemons are yellow" (3) and "all lemons are yellow or Santa Claus exists" (4), we infer "Santa Claus exists" (5). Hence, if all lemons are yellow and not all lemons are yellow, then Santa Claus exists.
Or:




hypothesis
 




from (1) by conjunction elimination
 




from (1) by conjunction elimination
 




hypothesis
 




reiteration of (2)
 




from (4) to (5) by deduction theorem





from (6) by contraposition





from (3) and (7) by modus ponens





from (8) by double negation elimination





from (1) to (9) by deduction theorem
 


Or:




assumption
 




assumption
 




from (1) by conjunction elimination
 




from (1) by conjunction elimination
 




from (3) and (4) by reductio ad absurdum (discharging assumption 2)
 




from (5) by double negation elimination
 




from (6) by conditional proof (discharging assumption 1)
 


Addressing the principle
Paraconsistent logics have been developed that allow for sub-contrary forming operators. Model-theoretic paraconsistent logicians often deny the assumption that there can be no model of 
 
 
 
  and devise semantical systems in which there are such models. Alternatively, they reject the idea that propositions can be classified as true or false. Proof-theoretic paraconsistent logics usually deny the validity of one of the steps necessary for deriving an explosion, typically including disjunctive syllogism, disjunction introduction, and reductio ad absurdum.
Use
The metamathematical value of the principle of explosion is that for any logical system where this principle holds, any derived theory which proves 

 (or an equivalent form, 
 
 
 
 ) is worthless because all its statements would become theorems, making it impossible to distinguish truth from falsehood. That is to say, the principle of explosion is an argument for the law of non-contradiction in classical logic, because without it all truth statements become meaningless.
See also

Consequentia mirabilis – Clavius's Law
Dialetheism – belief in the existence of true contradictions
Law of excluded middle – every proposition is either true or not true
Law of noncontradiction – no proposition can be both true and not true
Paraconsistent logic – a family of logics used to address contradictions
Paradox of entailment – a seeming paradox derived from the principle of explosion
Reductio ad absurdum – concluding that a proposition is false because it produces a contradiction
Trivialism – the belief that all statements of the form "P and not-P" are true

References
"
Category:Theorems in propositional logic Category:Classical logic Category:Principles



Carnielli, W. and Marcos, J. (2001) "Ex contradictione non sequitur quodlibet" Proc. 2nd Conf. on Reasoning and Logic (Bucharest, July 2000)↩




