


Score (statistics)




Score (statistics)

In statistics, the score, score function, efficient score1 or informant2 indicates how sensitively a likelihood function

 
  depends on its parameter

 
 . Explicitly, the score for 
 
 
 
  is the gradient of the log-likelihood with respect to 
 
 
 
 .
The score plays an important role in several aspects of inference. For example:
:*in formulating a test statistic for a locally most powerful test;3
:*in approximating the error in a maximum likelihood estimate;4
:*in demonstrating the asymptotic sufficiency of a maximum likelihood estimate;5
:*in the formulation of confidence intervals;6
:*in demonstrations of the Cramér–Rao inequality.7
The score function also plays an important role in computational statistics, as it can play a part in the computation of maximum likelihood estimates.
Definition
The score or efficient score 8 is the gradient (the vector of partial derivatives), with respect to some parameter 
 
 
 
 , of the logarithm (commonly the natural logarithm) of the likelihood function (the log-likelihood). If the observation is 
 
 
 
  and its likelihood is 
 
 
 
 , then the score 
 
 
 
  can be found through the chain rule:



Thus the score 
 
 
 
  indicates the sensitivity of 
 
 
 
  (its derivative normalized by its value). Note that 
 
 
 
  is a function of 
 
 
 
  and the observation 
 
 
 
 , so that, in general, it is not a statistic. However in certain applications, such as the score test, the score is evaluated at a specific value of 
 
 
 
  (such as a null-hypothesis value, or at the maximum likelihood estimate of 
 
 
 
 ), in which case the result is a statistic.
In older literature, the term "linear score" may be used to refer to the score with respect to infinitesimal translation of a given density. This convention arises from a time when the primary parameter of interest was the mean or median of a distribution. In this case, the likelihood of an observation is given by a density of the form 
 
 
 
 . The "linear score" is then defined as



Properties
Mean
Under some regularity conditions, the expected value of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the observation 
 
 
 
 
 , given 
 
 
 
 , written 
 
 
 
 , is zero. To see this rewrite the likelihood function L as a probability density function

 
 . Then:






If certain differentiability conditions are met (see Leibniz integral rule), the integral may be rewritten as



It is worth restating the above result in words: the expected value of the score is zero. Thus, if one were to repeatedly sample from some distribution, and repeatedly calculate the score, then the mean value of the scores would tend to zero as the number of repeat samples approached infinity.
Variance
The variance of the score is known as the Fisher information and is written 
 
 
 
 . Because the expectation of the score is zero, this may be written as



Note that the Fisher information, as defined above, is not a function of any particular observation, as the random variable 
 
 
 
  has been averaged out. This concept of information is useful when comparing two methods of observation of some random process.
Examples
Bernoulli process
Consider a Bernoulli process, with A successes and B failures; the probability of success is θ.
Then the likelihood L is



so the score V is



We can now verify that the expectation of the score is zero. Noting that the expectation of A is nθ and the expectation of B is n(1 − θ) [recall that A and B are random variables], we can see that the expectation of V is



We can also check the variance of 
 
 
 
 . We know that A + B = n (so B = n − A) and the variance of A is nθ(1 − θ) so the variance of V is



Binary outcome model
For models with binary outcomes (Y = 1 or 0), the model can be scored with the logarithm of predictions



where p is the probability in the model to be estimated and S is the score.9
Applications
Scoring algorithm
The scoring algorithm is an iterative method for numerically determining the maximum likelihood estimator.
Score test
See also

Fisher information
Information theory
Score test
Scoring algorithm
Support curve

Notes
References




"
Category:Estimation theory



Cox & Hinkley (1974), p 107↩
↩
Cox & Hinkley (1974), p 113↩
Cox & Hinkley (1974), p 295↩

Cox & Hinkley (1974), p 222–3↩
Cox & Hinkley (1974), p 254↩

↩




