


Feynman–Kac formula




Feynman–Kac formula

The Feynman–Kac formula named after Richard Feynman and Mark Kac, establishes a link between parabolic partial differential equations (PDEs) and stochastic processes. It offers a method of solving certain PDEs by simulating random paths of a stochastic process. Conversely, an important class of expectations of random processes can be computed by deterministic methods. Consider the PDE



defined for all x in R and t in [0, T], subject to the terminal condition



where μ, σ, ψ, V, f are known functions, T is a parameter and 
 
 
 
  is the unknown. Then the Feynman–Kac formula tells us that the solution can be written as a conditional expectation



under the probability measure Q such that X is an Itō process driven by the equation



with WQ(t) is a Wiener process (also called Brownian motion) under Q, and the initial condition for X(t) is X(t) = x.
Proof
Let u(x, t) be the solution to above PDE. Applying Itō's lemma to the process



one gets



Since


 
  the third term is 
 
 
 
  and can be dropped. We also have that



Applying Itō's lemma once again to 
 
 
 
 , it follows that



The first term contains, in parentheses, the above PDE and is therefore zero. What remains is



Integrating this equation from t to T, one concludes that



Upon taking expectations, conditioned on Xt = x, and observing that the right side is an Itō integral, which has expectation zero, it follows that



The desired result is obtained by observing that



and finally



Remarks

The proof above is essentially that of 1 with modifications to account for 
 
 
 
 .


The expectation formula above is also valid for N-dimensional Itô diffusions. The corresponding PDE for 
 
 
 
  becomes (see H. Pham book below):










where,
 










i.e. γ = σσ′, where σ′ denotes the transpose matrix of σ).
 


This expectation can then be approximated using Monte Carlo or quasi-Monte Carlo methods.


When originally published by Kac in 1949,2 the Feynman–Kac formula was presented as a formula for determining the distribution of certain Wiener functionals. Suppose we wish to find the expected value of the function










in the case where x(τ) is some realization of a diffusion process starting at x(0) = 0. The Feynman–Kac formula says that this expectation is equivalent to the integral of a solution to a diffusion equation. Specifically, under the conditions that 
 
 
 
 ,
 










where w(x, 0) = δ(x) and
 










The Feynman–Kac formula can also be interpreted as a method for evaluating functional integrals of a certain form. If
 










where the integral is taken over all random walks, then
 










where w(x, t) is a solution to the parabolic partial differential equation











with initial condition w(x, 0) = f(x).
 

See also

Itō's lemma
Kunita–Watanabe theorem
Girsanov theorem
Kolmogorov forward equation (also known as Fokker–Planck equation)

References





"
Category:Stochastic processes Category:Parabolic partial differential equations Category:Articles containing proofs



http://www.math.nyu.edu/faculty/kohn/pde_finance.html↩
This paper is reprinted in Mark Kac: Probability, Number Theory, and Statistical Physics, Selected Papers, edited by K. Baclawski and M.D. Donsker, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1979, pp.268-280↩




