


Homogeneous function




Homogeneous function

In mathematics, a homogeneous function is a function with multiplicative scaling behaviour: if the argument is multiplied by a factor, then the result is multiplied by some power of this factor. More precisely, if  is a function between two vector spaces over a field F, and k is an integer, then ƒ is said to be homogeneous of degree k if  for all nonzero  and . This implies it has scale invariance. When the vector spaces involved are over the real numbers, a slightly more general form of homogeneity is often used, requiring only that () hold for all α > 0.
Homogeneous functions can also be defined for vector spaces with the origin deleted, a fact that is used in the definition of sheaves on projective space in algebraic geometry. More generally, if S ⊂ V is any subset that is invariant under scalar multiplication by elements of the field (a "cone"), then a homogeneous function from S to W can still be defined by ().
Examples
(Figure)
A homogeneous function is not necessarily continuous, as shown by this example. This is the function f defined by 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . This function is homogeneous of order 1, i.e. 
 
 
 
  for any real numbers 
 
 
 
 . It is discontinuous at 
 
 
 
 .

Linear functions
Any linear function  is homogeneous of degree 1 since by the definition of linearity


 
  for all  and . Similarly, any multilinear function  is homogeneous of degree n since by the definition of multilinearity


 
  for all  and , , ..., . It follows that the n-th differential of a function  between two Banach spaces X and Y is homogeneous of degree n.
Homogeneous polynomials
Monomials in n variables define homogeneous functions . For example,


 
  is homogeneous of degree 10 since


 
  The degree is the sum of the exponents on the variables; in this example, 10=5+2+3.
A homogeneous polynomial is a polynomial made up of a sum of monomials of the same degree. For example,


 
  is a homogeneous polynomial of degree 5. Homogeneous polynomials also define homogeneous functions.
Polarization
A multilinear function  from the n-th Cartesian product of V with itself to the underlying field F gives rise to an homogeneous function  by evaluating on the diagonal:


 
  The resulting function ƒ is a polynomial on the vector space V.
Conversely, if F has characteristic zero, then given a homogeneous polynomial ƒ of degree n on V, the polarization of ƒ is a multilinear function  on the n-th Cartesian product of V. The polarization is defined by


 
  These two constructions, one of an homogeneous polynomial from a multilinear form and the other of a multilinear form from an homogeneous polynomial, are mutually inverse to one another. In finite dimensions, they establish an isomorphism of graded vector spaces from the symmetric algebra of V∗ to the algebra of homogeneous polynomials on V.
Rational functions
Rational functions formed as the ratio of two homogeneous polynomials are homogeneous functions off of the affine cone cut out by the zero locus of the denominator. Thus, if f is homogeneous of degree m and g is homogeneous of degree n, then f/g is homogeneous of degree m − n away from the zeros of g.
Non-examples
Logarithms
The natural logarithm 
 
 
 
  scales additively and so is not homogeneous.
This can be proved by noting that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . Therefore there is no 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
Affine functions
Affine functions (the function 
 
 
 
  is an example) do not scale multiplicatively.
Positive homogeneity
In the special case of vector spaces over the real numbers, the notation of positive homogeneity often plays a more important role than homogeneity in the above sense. A function  is positive homogeneous of degree k if



for all . Here k can be any complex number. A (nonzero) continuous function homogeneous of degree k on Rn \ {0} extends continuously to Rn if and only if .
Positive homogeneous functions are characterized by Euler's homogeneous function theorem. Suppose that the function  is continuously differentiable. Then ƒ is positive homogeneous of degree k if and only if



This result follows at once by differentiating both sides of the equation  with respect to α, applying the chain rule, and choosing  to be 1. The converse holds by integrating. Specifically, let 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  Thus, 
 
 
 
 . This implies 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, 
 
 
 
 : ƒ is positive homogeneous of degree k.
As a consequence, suppose that  is differentiable and homogeneous of degree k. Then its first-order partial derivatives 
 
 
 
  are homogeneous of degree k − 1. The result follows from Euler's theorem by commuting the operator 
 
 
 
  with the partial derivative.
Homogeneous distributions
A continuous function ƒ on Rn is homogeneous of degree k if and only if


 
  for all compactly supported test functions

 
 ; and nonzero real t. Equivalently, making a change of variable , ƒ is homogeneous of degree k if and only if


 
  for all t and all test functions 
 
 
 
 ;. The last display makes it possible to define homogeneity of distributions. A distribution S is homogeneous of degree k if


 
  for all nonzero real t and all test functions 
 
 
 
 ;. Here the angle brackets denote the pairing between distributions and test functions, and  is the mapping of scalar multiplication by the real number t.
Application to differential equations




The substitution v = y/x converts the ordinary differential equation



where I and J are homogeneous functions of the same degree, into the separable differential equation



See also

Weierstrass elliptic function
Triangle center function
Production function

References



External links




"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Differential operators Category:Types of functions


