


Wheel theory




Wheel theory

Wheels are a type of algebra where division is always defined. In particular, division by zero is meaningful. The real numbers can be extended to a wheel, as can any commutative ring.
Also the Riemann sphere can be extended to a wheel by adjoining an element 
 
 
 
 . The Riemann sphere is an extension of the complex plane by an element 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  for any complex 
 
 
 
 
 . However, 
 
 
 
  is still undefined on the Riemann sphere, but defined in wheels.
The algebra of wheels
Wheels discard the usual notion of division being a binary operator, replacing it with multiplication by a unary operator

 
  similar (but not identical) to the multiplicative inverse

 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  becomes shorthand for 
 
 
 
 
 , and modifies the rules of algebra such that



 
  in the general case.


 
  in the general case.


 
  in the general case, as 
 
 
 
  is not the same as the multiplicative inverse of 
 
 
 
 
 .

Precisely, a wheel is an algebraic structure with operations binary addition 
 
 
 
 , multiplication 
 
 
 
 , constants 0, 1 and unary 
 
 
 
 , satisfying:

Addition and multiplication are commutative and associative, with 0 and 1 as their respective identities.


 
  and 
 
 




















If there is an element 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , then we may define negation by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 .
Other identities that may be derived are











However, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  we get the usual








The subset 
 
 
 
  is always a commutative ring if negation can be defined as above, and every commutative ring is such a subset of a wheel. If 
 
 
 
  is an invertible element of the commutative ring, then 
 
 
 
 
 . Thus, whenever 
 
 
 
  makes sense, it is equal to 
 
 
 
 , but the latter is always defined, even when 
 
 
 
 .
References

Carlström, Jesper: . Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 14(2004): no. 1, 143–184 (also available online here).
Setzer, Anton (Drafts): Wheels (1997)

"
Category:Abstract algebra


