


Schnirelmann density




Schnirelmann density

In additive number theory, the Schnirelmann density of a sequence of numbers is a way to measure how "dense" the sequence is. It is named after Russian mathematician L.G. Schnirelmann, who was the first to study it.12
Definition
The Schnirelmann density of a set of natural numbers A is defined as


 
  where A(n) denotes the number of elements of A not exceeding n and inf is infimum.3
The Schnirelmann density is well-defined even if the limit of A(n)/n as  fails to exist (see asymptotic density).
Properties
By definition,  and  for all n, and therefore , and  if and only if . Furthermore,



Sensitivity
The Schnirelmann density is sensitive to the first values of a set:


 
 . In particular,


 
  and


 
  Consequently, the Schnirelmann densities of the even numbers and the odd numbers, which one might expect to agree, are 0 and 1/2 respectively. Schnirelmann and Yuri Linnik exploited this sensitivity as we shall see.
Schnirelmann's theorems
If we set 
 
 
 
 , then Lagrange's four-square theorem can be restated as 
 
 
 
 . (Here the symbol 
 
 
 
  denotes the sumset of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .) It is clear that 
 
 
 
 . In fact, we still have 
 
 
 
 , and one might ask at what point the sumset attains Schnirelmann density 1 and how does it increase. It actually is the case that 
 
 
 
  and one sees that sumsetting 
 
 
 
  once again yields a more populous set, namely all of 
 
 
 
 . Schnirelmann further succeeded in developing these ideas into the following theorems, aiming towards Additive Number Theory, and proving them to be a novel resource (if not greatly powerful) to attack important problems, such as Waring's problem and Goldbach's conjecture.

Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be subsets of 
 
 
 
 . Then






Note that 
 
 
 
 . Inductively, we have the following generalization.

Corollary. Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite family of subsets of 
 
 
 
 . Then






The theorem provides the first insights on how sumsets accumulate. It seems unfortunate that its conclusion stops short of showing 
 
 
 
  being superadditive. Yet, Schnirelmann provided us with the following results, which sufficed for most of his purpose.

Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be subsets of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , then







Theorem. (Schnirelmann) Let 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  then there exists 
 
 
 
  such that






Additive bases
A subset 
 
 
 
  with the property that 
 
 
 
  for a finite sum, is called an additive basis, and the least number of summands required is called the degree (sometimes order) of the basis. Thus, the last theorem states that any set with positive Schnirelmann density is an additive basis. In this terminology, the set of squares 
 
 
 
  is an additive basis of degree 4. (About an open problem for additive bases, see Erdős–Turán conjecture on additive bases.)
Mann's theorem
Historically the theorems above were pointers to the following result, at one time known as the 
 
 
 
  hypothesis. It was used by Edmund Landau and was finally proved by Henry Mann in 1942.

Theorem.  Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be subsets of 
 
 
 
 . In case that 
 
 
 
 , we still have






An analogue of this theorem for lower asymptotic density was obtained by Kneser.4 At a later date, E. Artin and P. Scherk simplified the proof of Mann's theorem.5
Waring's problem
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be natural numbers. Let 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
  to be the number of non-negative integral solutions to the equation



and 
 
 
 
  to be the number of non-negative integral solutions to the inequality



in the variables 
 
 
 
 , respectively. Thus 
 
 
 
 . We have








The volume of the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional body defined by 
 
 
 
 , is bounded by the volume of the hypercube of size 
 
 
 
 , hence 
 
 
 
 . The hard part is to show that this bound still works on the average, i.e.,

Lemma. (Linnik) For all 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  and a constant 
 
 
 
 , depending only on 
 
 
 
 , such that for all 
 
 
 
 ,





for all 
 
 


With this at hand, the following theorem can be elegantly proved.

Theorem. For all 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
 .

We have thus established the general solution to Waring's Problem:

Corollary.  For all 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
 , depending only on 
 
 
 
 , such that every positive integer 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as the sum of at most 
 
 
 
  many 
 
 
 
 -th powers.

Schnirelmann's constant
In 1930 Schnirelmann used these ideas in conjunction with the Brun sieve to prove Schnirelmann's theorem,67 that any natural number greater than one can be written as the sum of not more than C prime numbers, where C is an effectively computable constant:8 Schnirelmann obtained C Gelfond & Linnik (1966) p.136 Schnirelmann's constant is the lowest number C with this property.9
Olivier Ramaré showed in  that Schnirelmann's constant is at most 7,10 improving the earlier upper bound of 19 obtained by Hans Riesel and R. C. Vaughan.
Schnirelmann's constant is at least 3; Goldbach's conjecture implies that this is the constant's actual value.11
Essential components
Khintchin proved that the sequence of squares, though of zero Schnirelmann density, when added to a sequence of Schnirelmann density between 0 and 1, increases the density:



This was soon simplified and extended by Erdős, who showed, that if A is any sequence with Schnirelmann density α and B is an additive basis of order k then


12
and this was improved by Plünnecke to


13
Sequences with this property, of increasing density less than one by addition, were named essential components by Khintchin. Linnik showed that an essential component need not be an additive basis14 as he constructed an essential component that has xo(1) elements less than x. More precisely, the sequence has



elements less than x for some c e^{\sqrt{\log x}\log\log x}.\,
For a while, it remained an open problem how many elements an essential component must have. Finally, Ruzsa determined that an essential component has at least (log x)c elements up to x, for some c > 1, and for every c > 1 there is an essential component which has at most (log x)c elements up to x.15
References












Has a proof of Mann's theorem and the Schnirelmann-density proof of Waring's conjecture.




"
Category:Additive number theory Category:Mathematical constants



Schnirelmann, L.G. (1930). "On the additive properties of numbers", first published in "Proceedings of the Don Polytechnic Institute in Novocherkassk" (in Russian), vol XIV (1930), pp. 3-27, and reprinted in "Uspekhi Matematicheskikh Nauk" (in Russian), 1939, no. 6, 9–25.
Schnirelmann, L.G. (1933). First published as "Über additive Eigenschaften von Zahlen" in "Mathematische Annalen" (in German), vol 107 (1933), 649-690, and reprinted as "On the additive properties of numbers" in "Uspekhin. Matematicheskikh Nauk" (in Russian), 1940, no. 7, 7–46.
Nathanson (1996) pp.191–192
Nathanson (1990) p.397
E. Artin and P. Scherk (1943) On the sums of two sets of integers, Ann. of Math 44, page=138-142.


Nathanson (1996) p.208



Ruzsa (2009) p.177
Ruzsa (2009) p.179

Ruzsa (2009) p.184




