


Korteweg–de Vries equation




Korteweg–de Vries equation

thumb|right|upright=1.35|Cnoidal wave solution to the Korteweg–de Vries equation, in terms of the square of the Jacobi elliptic function cn (and with value of the parameter ). 
In mathematics, the Korteweg–de Vries equation (KdV equation for short) is a mathematical model of waves on shallow water surfaces. It is particularly notable as the prototypical example of an exactly solvable model, that is, a non-linear partial differential equation whose solutions can be exactly and precisely specified. KdV can be solved by means of the inverse scattering transform. The mathematical theory behind the KdV equation is a topic of active research. The KdV equation was first introduced by  and rediscovered by .1
Definition
The KdV equation is a nonlinear, dispersive partial differential equation for a function

 
  of two real variables, space x and time t :2



with ∂x and ∂t denoting partial derivatives with respect to x and t.
The constant 6 in front of the last term is conventional but of no great significance: multiplying t, x, and 
 
 
 
  by constants can be used to make the coefficients of any of the three terms equal to any given non-zero constants.
KdV equation and the Gross-Pitaevskii equation
Considering the simplified solutions of the form



we obtain the KdV equation as



or



or integrating for special case i.e. putting the integration constant to zero:



one obtains the generalized 
 
 
 
  stationary Gross-Pitaevskii equation (GPE)



Therefore, for the certain class of solutions of generalized GPE (
 
 
 
  for the true one-dimensional condensate and 
 
 
 
  while using the three dimensional equation in one dimension) two equations are one. While with 
 
 
 
  with the minus sign and the 
 
 
 
  real the self-interaction is attractive one should expect the excess in value (bright) soliton solutions.
Soliton solutions
Consider solutions in which a fixed wave form (given by f(X)) maintains its shape as it travels to the right at phase speed c. Such a solution is given by 
 
 
 
 (x,t) = f(x − ct − a) = f(X). Substituting it into the KdV equation gives the ordinary differential equation



or, integrating with respect to X,



where A is a constant of integration. Interpreting the independent variable X above as a virtual time variable, this means f satisfies Newton's equation of motion in a cubic potential. If parameters are adjusted so that the potential function V(f) has local maximum at f = 0, there is a solution in which f(X) starts at this point at 'virtual time' −∞, eventually slides down to the local minimum, then back up the other side, reaching an equal height, then reverses direction, ending up at the local maximum again at time ∞. In other words, f(X) approaches 0 as X → ±∞. This is the characteristic shape of the solitary wave solution.
More precisely, the solution is



where sech stands for the hyperbolic secant and a is an arbitrary constant.3 This describes a right-moving soliton.
Integrals of motion
The KdV equation has infinitely many integrals of motion , which do not change with time. They can be given explicitly as



where the polynomials Pn are defined recursively by



The first few integrals of motion are:

the mass 
 
 

the momentum 
 
 

the energy 
 
 


Only the odd-numbered terms P(2n+1) result in non-trivial (meaning non-zero) integrals of motion .
Lax pairs
The KdV equation



can be reformulated as the Lax equation



with L a Sturm–Liouville operator:


 
 
  and this accounts for the infinite number of first integrals of the KdV equation .
Least action principle
The Korteweg–de Vries equation



is the Euler–Lagrange equation of motion derived from the Lagrangian density, 
 
 




with 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
   Since the Lagrangian (eq (1)) contains second derivatives, the Euler–Lagrange equation of motion for this field is



where 
 
 
 
  is a derivative with respect to the 
 
 
 
  component.
A sum over 
 
 
 
  is implied so eq (2) really reads,



Evaluate the five terms of eq (3) by plugging in eq (1),















Remember the definition 
 
 
 
 , so use that to simplify the above terms,









Finally, plug these three non-zero terms back into eq (3) to see



which is exactly the KdV equation



Long-time asymptotics
It can be shown that any sufficiently fast decaying smooth solution will eventually split into a finite superposition of solitons travelling to the right plus a decaying dispersive part travelling to the left. This was first observed by  and can be rigorously proven using the nonlinear steepest descent analysis for oscillatory Riemann–Hilbert problems.4
History
The history of the KdV equation started with experiments by John Scott Russell in 1834, followed by theoretical investigations by Lord Rayleigh and Joseph Boussinesq around 1870 and, finally, Korteweg and De Vries in 1895.
The KdV equation was not studied much after this until , discovered numerically that its solutions seemed to decompose at large times into a collection of "solitons": well separated solitary waves. Moreover, the solitons seems to be almost unaffected in shape by passing through each other (though this could cause a change in their position). They also made the connection to earlier numerical experiments by Fermi, Pasta, Ulam, and Tsingou by showing that the KdV equation was the continuum limit of the FPU system. Development of the analytic solution by means of the inverse scattering transform was done in 1967 by Gardner, Greene, Kruskal and Miura.56
Applications and connections
The KdV equation has several connections to physical problems. In addition to being the governing equation of the string in the Fermi–Pasta–Ulam problem in the continuum limit, it approximately describes the evolution of long, one-dimensional waves in many physical settings, including:

shallow-water waves with weakly non-linear restoring forces,
long internal waves in a density-stratified ocean,
ion acoustic waves in a plasma,
acoustic waves on a crystal lattice.

The KdV equation can also be solved using the inverse scattering transform such as those applied to the non-linear Schrödinger equation.
Variations
Many different variations of the KdV equations have been studied. Some are listed in the following table.




Name

Equation





Korteweg–de Vries (KdV)







KdV (cylindrical)







KdV (deformed)







KdV (generalized)







KdV (generalized)







KdV (Lax 7th) 







KdV (modified)







KdV (modified modified)







KdV (spherical)







KdV (super)



 
 , 
 
 




KdV (transitional)







KdV (variable coefficients)







Korteweg–de Vries–Burgers equation7







See also

Benjamin–Bona–Mahony equation
Boussinesq approximation (water waves)
Cnoidal wave
Dispersion (water waves)
Dispersionless equation
Fifth-order Korteweg–de Vries equation
Kadomtsev–Petviashvili equation
Novikov–Veselov equation
Seventh-order Korteweg–de Vries equation
Ursell number
Vector soliton

Notes
References




, 2 Parts, 967 pages










External links

Korteweg–de Vries equation at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.
Korteweg–de Vries equation at NEQwiki, the nonlinear equations encyclopedia.
Cylindrical Korteweg–de Vries equation at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.
Modified Korteweg–de Vries equation at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.
Modified Korteweg–de Vries equation at NEQwiki, the nonlinear equations encyclopedia.

Derivation of the Korteweg–de Vries equation for a narrow canal.
Three Solitons Solution of KdV Equation – 1
Three Solitons (unstable) Solution of KdV Equation – 2
Mathematical aspects of equations of Korteweg–de Vries type are discussed on the Dispersive PDE Wiki.
Solitons from the Korteweg–de Vries Equation by S. M. Blinder, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
Solitons & Nonlinear Wave Equations

"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Exactly solvable models Category:Solitons Category:Equations of fluid dynamics



↩
See e.g. , p. 6. Or Lax (1968), without the factor 6.↩
↩
See e.g. ↩
↩
↩
↩




