


Local quantum field theory




Local quantum field theory

The Haag–Kastler axiomatic framework for quantum field theory, introduced by , is an application to local quantum physics of C*-algebra theory. Because of this it is also known as Algebraic Quantum Field Theory (AQFT). The axioms are stated in terms of an algebra given for every open set in Minkowski space, and mappings between those.
Let Mink be the category of open subsets of Minkowski space M with inclusion maps as morphisms. We are given a covariant functor

 
  from Mink to uC*alg, the category of unital C* algebras, such that every morphism in Mink maps to a monomorphism in uC*alg (isotony).
The Poincaré group acts continuously on Mink. There exists a pullback of this action, which is continuous in the norm topology of 
 
 
 
  (Poincaré covariance).
Minkowski space has a causal structure. If an open set V lies in the causal complement of an open set U, then the image of the maps



and



commute (spacelike commutativity). If 
 
 
 
  is the causal completion of an open set U, then 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism (primitive causality).
A state with respect to a C*-algebra is a positive linear functional over it with unit norm. If we have a state over 
 
 
 
 , we can take the "partial trace" to get states associated with 
 
 
 
  for each open set via the net monomorphism. The states over the open sets form a presheaf structure.
According to the GNS construction, for each state, we can associate a Hilbert space representation of 
 
 
Pure states correspond to irreducible representations and mixed states correspond to reducible representations. Each irreducible (up to equivalence) is called a superselection sector. We assume there is a pure state called the vacuum such that the Hilbert space associated with it is a unitary representation of the Poincaré group compatible with the Poincaré covariance of the net such that if we look at the Poincaré algebra, the spectrum with respect to energy-momentum (corresponding to spacetime translations) lies on and in the positive light cone. This is the vacuum sector.
More recently, the approach has been further implemented to include an algebraic version of quantum field theory in curved spacetime. Indeed, the viewpoint of local quantum physics is in particular suitable to generalize the renormalization procedure to the theory of quantum fields developed on curved backgrounds. Several rigorous results concerning QFT in presence of a black hole have been obtained.
List of researchers in local quantum field theory

Detlev Buchholz
Rudolf Haag
Daniel Kastler
Karl-Henning Rehren
Bert Schroer

References




External links

Local Quantum Physics Crossroads 2.0 – A network of scientists working on Local Quantum Physics
Papers – A database of preprints on algebraic QFT
Algebraic Quantum Field Theory – AQFT resources at the University of Hamburg

"
Category:Quantum field theory


