


Vandermonde matrix




Vandermonde matrix

In linear algebra, a Vandermonde matrix, named after Alexandre-Théophile Vandermonde, is a matrix with the terms of a geometric progression in each row, i.e., an m × n matrix


 
  or


 
  for all indices i and j.1 (Some authors use the transpose of the above matrix.)
The determinant of a square Vandermonde matrix (where m = n) can be expressed as:


 
  are distinct, then it is non-zero.
The Vandermonde determinant is sometimes called the discriminant, although many sources, including this article, refer to the discriminant as the square of this determinant. Note that the Vandermonde determinant is alternating in the entries, meaning that permuting the 
 
 
 
  by an odd permutation changes the sign, while permuting them by an even permutation does not change the value of the determinant. It thus depends on the order, while its square (the discriminant) does not depend on the order.
When two or more αi are equal, the corresponding polynomial interpolation problem (see below) is underdetermined. In that case one may use a generalization called confluent Vandermonde matrices, which makes the matrix non-singular while retaining most properties. If αi = αi + 1 = ... = αi+k and αi ≠ αi − 1, then the (i + k)th row is given by



The above formula for confluent Vandermonde matrices can be readily derived by letting two parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  go arbitrarily close to each other. The difference vector between the rows corresponding to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  scaled to a constant yields the above equation (for k = 1). Similarly, the cases k > 1 are obtained by higher order differences. Consequently, the confluent rows are derivatives of the original Vandermonde row.
Properties
In the case of a square Vandermonde matrix, the Leibniz formula for the determinant gives



where Sn denotes the set of permutations of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  denotes the signature of the permutation σ. This determinant factors as


 
  to the values the polynomial takes at the points 
 
 
 
  The non-vanishing of the Vandermonde determinant for distinct points 
 
 
 
  shows that, for distinct points, the map from coefficients to values at those points is a one-to-one correspondence, and thus that the polynomial interpolation problem is solvable with unique solution; this result is called the unisolvence theorem.
They are thus useful in polynomial interpolation, since solving the system of linear equations Vu = y for u with V an m × n Vandermonde matrix is equivalent to finding the coefficients uj of the polynomial(s)



of degree ≤ n − 1 which has (have) the property
$$P(\alpha_i) = y_i \quad\text{for } i=1,\ldots, m. \,$$
The Vandermonde matrix can easily be inverted in terms of Lagrange basis Polynomials:2 each column is the coefficients of the Lagrange basis polynomial, with terms in increasing order going down. The resulting solution to the interpolation problem is called the Lagrange polynomial.
The Vandermonde determinant plays a central role in the Frobenius formula, which gives the character of conjugacy classes of representations of the symmetric group.3
When the values $\alpha_k$ range over powers of a finite field, then the determinant
has a number of interesting properties: for example, in proving the properties of a BCH code.
Confluent Vandermonde matrices are used in Hermite interpolation.
A commonly known special Vandermonde matrix is the discrete Fourier transform matrix (DFT matrix), where the numbers αi are chosen to be the m different mth roots of unity.
The Vandermonde matrix diagonalizes the companion matrix.
The Vandermonde matrix is used in some forms of Reed–Solomon error correction codes.
See also

Alternant matrix
Lagrange polynomial
Wronskian
List of matrices
Moore determinant over a finite field

References
Further reading


. To be published.

External links
"
Category:Matrices Category:Determinants Category:Numerical linear algebra



Roger A. Horn and Charles R. Johnson (1991), Topics in matrix analysis, Cambridge University Press. See Section 6.1

 Lecture 4 reviews the representation theory of symmetric groups, including the role of the Vandermonde determinant.




