


Projective representation




Projective representation

In the field of representation theory in mathematics, a projective representation of a group G on a vector space V over a field F is a group homomorphism from G to the projective linear group

PGL(V, F) = GL(V, F) / F∗,
 

where GL(V, F) is the general linear group of invertible linear transformations of V over F and F∗ is the normal subgroup consisting of multiplications of vectors in V by nonzero elements of F (that is, scalar multiples of the identity; scalar transformations).1
Linear representations and projective representations
One way in which a projective representation can arise is by taking a linear group representation of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and applying the quotient map



which is the quotient by the subgroup  of scalar transformations (diagonal matrices with all diagonal entries equal). The interest for algebra is in the process in the other direction: given a projective representation, try to 'lift' it to a conventional linear representation.
 In general, given a projective representation 
 
 
 
  it cannot be lifted to a linear representation 
 
 
 
 , and the obstruction to this lifting can be understood via group homology, as described below. However, one can lift a projective representation of 
 
 
 
  to a linear representation of a different group 
 
 
 
 , which will be a central extension of 
 
 
 
 . To understand this, note that 
 
 
 
  is a central extension of 
 
 
 
 , meaning that the kernel is central (in fact, is exactly the center of 
 
 
 
 ). One can pull back the projective representation 
 
 
 
  along the quotient map, obtaining a linear representation 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  will be a central extension of 
 
 
 
  because it is a pullback of a central extension. Thus projective representations of 
 
 
 
  can be understood in terms of linear representations of (certain) central extensions of 
 
 
 
 . Notably, for 
 
 
 
  a perfect group there is a single universal perfect central extension of 
 
 
 
  that can be used.
Group cohomology
The analysis of the lifting question involves group cohomology. Indeed, if one introduces for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  a lifted element 
 
 
 
  in lifting from 
 
 
 
  back to 
 
 
 
 , the lifts must satisfy



for some scalar 
 
 
 
  in . The 2-cocycle or Schur multiplier

 
  must satisfy the cocycle equation



for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
  depends on the choice of the lift 
 
 
 
 , but a different choice of lift 
 
 
 
  will result in a new cocycle



cohomologous to 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  defines a unique class in , which need not be trivial. For example, in the case of the symmetric group and alternating group, Schur proved that there is exactly one non-trivial class of Schur multiplier and completely determined all the corresponding irreducible representations.2
It is shown, however, that this leads to an extension problem for 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is correctly extended we can speak of a linear representation of the extended group, which gives back the initial projective representation on factoring by  and the extending subgroup. The solution is always a central extension. From Schur's lemma, it follows that the irreducible representations of central extensions of 
 
 
 
 , and the irreducible projective representations of 
 
 
 
 , describe essentially the same questions of representation theory.
Projective representations of Lie groups
Studying projective representations of Lie groups leads one to consider true representations of their central extensions (see Group extension#Lie groups). In many cases of interest it suffices to consider representations of covering groups; for a connected Lie group G, this amounts to studying the representations of the Lie algebra of G. Notable cases of covering groups giving interesting projective representations:

The special orthogonal group SO(n,F) is doubly covered by the Spin group Spin(n,F). In particular, the group SO(3,R) (the rotation group in 3 dimensions) is doubly covered by SU(2). This has important applications in quantum mechanics, as the study of representations of SU(2) leads to a low-velocity theory of spin.
The group SO+(3;1), isomorphic to the Möbius group, is likewise doubly covered by SL2(C). Both are supergroups of aforementioned SO(3) and SU(2) respectively and form a relativistic spin theory.
The orthogonal group O(n) is double covered by the Pin group Pin±(n).
The symplectic group Sp(2n) is double covered by the metaplectic group Mp(2n).

Notes
References




See also

Affine representation
Group action

"
Category:Homological algebra Category:Group theory Category:Representation theory Category:Representation theory of groups



.





