


Group ring




Group ring

In algebra, a group ring is a free module and at the same time a ring, constructed in a natural way from any given ring and any given group. As a free module, its ring of scalars is the given ring, and its basis is one-to-one with the given group. As a ring, its addition law is that of the free module and its multiplication extends "by linearity" the given group law on the basis. Less formally, a group ring is a generalization of a given group, by attaching to each element of the group a "weighting factor" from a given ring.
If the given ring is commutative, a group ring is also referred to as a group algebra, for it is indeed an algebra over the given ring.
The apparatus of group rings is especially useful in the theory of group representations.
Definition
Let G be a group, written multiplicatively, and let R be a ring. The group ring of G over R, which we will denote by R[G] (or simply RG), is the set of mappings f : G → R of finite support,1 where the product αf of a scalar α in R and a vector (or mapping) f is defined as the vector 
 
 
 
 , and the sum of two vectors f and g is defined as the vector 
 
 
 
 . To turn the additive group R[G] into a ring, we define the product of f and g to be the vector


 
  The summation is legitimate because f and g are of finite support, and the ring axioms are readily verified.
Some variations in the notation and terminology are in use. In particular, the mappings such as f : G → R are sometimes written as what are called "formal linear combinations of elements of G, with coefficients in R":2


 
  or simply


 
  where this doesn't cause confusion.3
Two simple examples
Let G = Z3, the cyclic group of three elements with generator a and identity element 1G. An element r of C[G] may be written as



where z0, z1 and z2 are in C, the complex numbers. Writing a different element s as



their sum is



and their product is



Notice that the identity element 1G of G induces a canonical embedding of the coefficient ring (in this case C) into C[G]; however strictly speaking the multiplicative identity element of C[G] is 1⋅1G where the first 1 comes from C and the second from G. The additive identity element is of course zero.
When G is a non-commutative group, one must be careful to preserve the order of the group elements (and not accidentally commute them) when multiplying the terms.
A different example is that of the Laurent polynomials over a ring R: these are nothing more or less than the group ring of the infinite cyclic group Z over R.
Some basic properties
Assuming that the ring R has a unit element 1, and denoting the group unit by 1G, the ring R[G] contains a subring isomorphic to R, and its group of invertible elements contains a subgroup isomorphic to G. For considering the indicator function of {1G}, which is the vector f defined by


 
  the set of all scalar multiples of f is a subring of R[G] isomorphic to R. And if we map each element s of G to the indicator function of {s}, which is the vector f defined by


 
  the resulting mapping is an injective group homomorphism (with respect to multiplication, not addition, in R[G]).
If R and G are both commutative (i.e., R is commutative and G is an abelian group), R[G] is commutative.
If H is a subgroup of G, then R[H] is a subring of R[G]. Similarly, if S is a subring of R, S[G] is a subring of R[G].
Group algebra over a finite group
Group algebras occur naturally in the theory of group representations of finite groups. The group algebra K[G] over a field K is essentially the group ring, with the field K taking the place of the ring. As a set and vector space, it is the free vector space on G over the field K. That is, for x in K[G],



The algebra structure on the vector space is defined using the multiplication in the group:


 
  where on the left, g and h indicate elements of the group algebra, while the multiplication on the right is the group operation (denoted by juxtaposition).
Because the above multiplication can be confusing, one can also write the basis vectors of K[G] as eg (instead of g), in which case the multiplication is written as:



Interpretation as functions
Thinking of the free vector space as K-valued functions on G, the algebra multiplication is convolution of functions.
While the group algebra of a finite group can be identified with the space of functions on the group, for an infinite group these are different. The group algebra, consisting of finite sums, corresponds to functions on the group that vanish for cofinitely many points; topologically (using the discrete topology), these correspond to functions with compact support.
However, the group algebra K[G] and the space of functions KG := Hom(G,K) are dual: given an element of the group algebra



and a function on the group f : G → K these pair to give an element of K via



which is a well-defined sum because it is finite.
Regular representation
The group algebra is an algebra over itself; under the correspondence of representations over R and R[G] modules, it is the regular representation of the group.
Written as a representation, it is the representation g

 
  ρg with the action given by 
 
 
 
 , or



Properties
The dimension of the vector space K[G] is just equal to the number of elements in the group. The field K is commonly taken to be the complex numbers C or the reals R, so that one discusses the group algebras C[G] or R[G].
The group algebra C[G] of a finite group over the complex numbers is a semisimple ring. This result, Maschke's theorem, allows us to understand C[G] as a finite product of matrix rings with entries in C.
Group rings satisfy a universal property.4
Representations of a group algebra
Taking K[G] to be an abstract algebra, one may ask for concrete representations of the algebra over a vector space V. Such a representation



is an algebra homomorphism from the group algebra to the set of endomorphisms on V. Taking V to be an abelian group, with group addition given by vector addition, such a representation is in fact a [[module (mathematics)|left K[G]-module]] over the abelian group V. This is demonstrated below, where each axiom of a module is confirmed.
Pick r ∈ K[G] so that


 
  Then 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphism of abelian groups, in that



for any v1, v2 ∈ V. Next, one notes that the set of endomorphisms of an abelian group is an endomorphism ring. The representation 
 
 
 
  is a ring homomorphism, in that one has



for any two r, s ∈ K[G] and v ∈ V. Similarly, under multiplication,



Finally, one has that the unit is mapped to the identity:



where 1 is the multiplicative unit of K[G]; that is,



is the vector corresponding to the identity element e in G.
The last three equations show that 
 
 
 
  is a ring homomorphism from K[G] taken as a group ring, to the endomorphism ring. The first identity showed that individual elements are group homomorphisms. Thus, a representation 
 
 
 
  is a left K[G]-module over the abelian group V.
Note that given a general K[G]-module, a vector-space structure is induced on V, in that one has an additional axiom



for scalar a, b ∈ K.
Any group representation



with V a vector space over the field K, can be extended to an algebra representation



simply by letting 
 
 
 
  and extending linearly. Thus, representations of the group correspond exactly to representations of the algebra, and so, in a certain sense, talking about the one is the same as talking about the other.
Center of a group algebra
The center of the group algebra is the set of elements that commute with all elements of the group algebra:



The center is equal to the set of class functions, that is the set of elements that are constant on each conjugacy class



If , the set of irreducible characters of G forms an orthonormal basis of Z(K[G]) with respect to the inner product



Group rings over an infinite group
Much less is known in the case where G is countably infinite, or uncountable, and this is an area of active research.5 The case where R is the field of complex numbers is probably the one best studied. In this case, Irving Kaplansky proved that if a and b are elements of C[G] with ab = 1, then ba = 1. Whether this is true if R is a field of positive characteristic remains unknown.
A long-standing conjecture of Kaplansky (~1940) says that if G is a torsion-free group, and K is a field, then the group ring K[G] has no non-trivial zero divisors. This conjecture is equivalent to K[G] having no non-trivial nilpotents under the same hypotheses for K and G.
In fact, the condition that K is a field can be relaxed to any ring that can be embedded into an integral domain.
The conjecture remains open in full generality, however some special cases of torsion-free groups have been shown to satisfy the zero divisor conjecture. These include:

Unique product groups (e.g. orderable groups, in particular free groups)


Elementary amenable groups (e.g. virtually abelian groups)


Diffuse groups - in particular, groups that act freely isometrically on R-trees, and the fundamental groups of surface groups except for the fundamental groups of direct sums of one, two or three copies of the projective plane.

The case of G being a topological group is discussed in greater detail in the article on group algebras.
Representations of a group ring
A module M over R[G] is then the same as a linear representation of G over the field R. There is no particular reason to limit R to be a field here. However, the classical results were obtained first when R is the complex number field and G is a finite group, so this case deserves close attention. It was shown that R[G] is a semisimple ring, under those conditions, with profound implications for the representations of finite groups. More generally, whenever the characteristic of the field R does not divide the order of the finite group G, then R[G] is semisimple (Maschke's theorem).
When G is a finite abelian group, the group ring is commutative, and its structure is easy to express in terms of roots of unity. When R is a field of characteristic p, and the prime number p divides the order of the finite group G, then the group ring is not semisimple: it has a non-zero Jacobson radical, and this gives the corresponding subject of modular representation theory its own, deeper character.
Category theory
Adjoint
Categorically, the group ring construction is left adjoint to "group of units"; the following functors are an adjoint pair:





 
  where "GrpRng" takes a group to its group ring over R, and "GrpUnits" takes an R-algebra to its group of units.
When R = Z, this gives an adjunction between the category of groups and the category of rings, and the unit of the adjunction takes a group G to a group that contains trivial units: G × {±1} = {±g}. In general, group rings contain nontrivial units. If G contains elements a and b such that 
 
 
 
  and b does not normalize 
 
 
 
  then the square of



is zero, hence 
 
 
 
 . The element 1+x is a unit of infinite order.
Generalizations
The group algebra generalizes to the monoid ring and thence to the categorical algebra, of which another example is the incidence algebra.
Filtration
If a group has a length function – for example, if there is a choice of generators and one takes the word metric, as in Coxeter groups – then the group ring becomes a filtered algebra.
See also

Group algebra
Monoid ring

Representation theory

Group representation
Regular representation

Category theory

Categorical algebra
Group of units
Incidence algebra

Notes
References


Milies, César Polcino; Sehgal, Sudarshan K. An introduction to group rings. Algebras and applications, Volume 1. Springer, 2002. ISBN 978-1-4020-0238-0
Charles W. Curtis, Irving Reiner. Representation theory of finite groups and associative algebras, Interscience (1962)
D.S. Passman, The algebraic structure of group rings, Wiley (1977)

de:Monoidring"
Category:Ring theory Category:Representation theory of groups Category:Harmonic analysis



Polcino & Sehgal (2002), p. 131.↩
Polcino & Sehgal (2002), p. 129 and 131.↩


↩




