


Tarski's theorem about choice




Tarski's theorem about choice

In mathematics, the Tarski's theorem, proved by , states that in ZF the theorem "For every infinite set 
 
 
 
 , there is a bijective map between the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 " implies the axiom of choice. The opposite direction was already known, thus the theorem and axiom of choice are equivalent.
Tarski told  that when he tried to publish the theorem in Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences Paris, Fréchet and Lebesgue refused to present it. Fréchet wrote that an implication between two well known propositions is not a new result. Lebesgue wrote that an implication between two false propositions is of no interest.
Proof
Our goal is to prove that the axiom of choice is implied by the statement "For every infinite set 
 
 

 
 ". It is known that the well-ordering theorem is equivalent to the axiom of choice, thus it is enough to show that the statement implies that for every set 
 
 
 
  there exist a well-order.
For finite sets it is trivial, thus we will assume that 
 
 
 
  is infinite.
Since the collection of all ordinals such that there exist a surjective function from 
 
 
 
  to the ordinal is a set, there exist a minimal non-zero ordinal, 
 
 
 
 , such that there is no surjective function from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . We assume without loss of generality that the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are disjoint. By our initial assumption, 
 
 
 
 , thus there exists a bijection

 
 .
For every 
 
 
 
 , it is impossible that 
 
 
 
 , because otherwise we could define a surjective function from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, there exists at least one ordinal 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
 , thus the set 
 
 
 
  is not empty.
With this fact in our mind we can define a new function
 
 
 
 . This function is well defined since 
 
 
 
  is a non-empty set of ordinals, hence it has a minimum. Recall that for every 
 
 
 
  the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are disjoint. Therefore, we can define a well order on 
 
 
 
 , for every 
 
 
 
  we shall define 
 
 
 
 , since the image of 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 , is a set of ordinals and therefore well ordered.
References





fr:Ordinal de Hartogs#Produit cardinal"
Category:Set theory Category:Theorems in the foundations of mathematics Category:Axiom of choice Category:Cardinal numbers


