


Monad (category theory)




Monad (category theory)

In category theory, a branch of mathematics, a monad (also triple, triad, standard construction and fundamental construction)1 is a functor, together with two natural transformations. Monads are used in the theory of pairs of adjoint functors, and they generalize closure operators on partially ordered sets to arbitrary categories.
Introduction
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are a pair of adjoint functors, with 
 
 
 
  left adjoint to 
 
 
 
 , then the composition 
 
 
 
  is a monad. Therefore, a monad is an endofunctor. If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are inverse functors, the corresponding monad is the identity functor. In general, adjunctions are not equivalences — they relate categories of different natures. The monad theory matters as part of the effort to capture what it is that adjunctions 'preserve'. The other half of the theory, of what can be learned likewise from consideration of 
 
 
 
 , is discussed under the dual theory of comonads.
The monad axioms can be seen at work in a simple example: let 
 
 
 
  be the forgetful functor from the category Grp of groups to the category Set of sets. Then let 
 
 
 
  be the free group functor.
This means that the monad


 
  takes a set 
 
 
 
 
  and returns the underlying set of the free group 
 
 
 
 . In this situation, we are given two natural morphisms:


 
  by including any set 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  in the natural way, as strings of length 1. Further,


 
  can be made out of a natural concatenation or 'flattening' of 'strings of strings'. This amounts to two natural transformations


 
  and


 
  They will satisfy some axioms about identity and associativity that result from the adjunction properties.
Those axioms are formally similar to the monoid axioms. They are taken as the definition of a general monad (not assumed a priori to be connected to an adjunction) on a category.
If we specialize to categories arising from partially ordered sets

 
  (with a single morphism from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
iff

 
 ), then the formalism becomes much simpler: adjoint pairs are Galois connections and monads are closure operators.
Every monad arises from some adjunction, in fact typically from many adjunctions. Two constructions introduced below, the Kleisli category and the category of Eilenberg-Moore algebras, are extremal solutions of the problem of constructing an adjunction that gives rise to a given monad.
The example about free groups given above can be generalized to any type of algebra in the sense of a variety of algebras in universal algebra. Thus, every such type of algebra gives rise to a monad on the category of sets. Importantly, the algebra type can be recovered from the monad (as the category of Eilenberg-Moore algebras), so monads can also be seen as generalizing universal algebras. Even more generally, any adjunction is said to be monadic (or tripleable) if it shares this property of being (equivalent to) the Eilenberg-Moore category of its associated monad. Consequently Beck's monadicity theorem, which gives a criterion for monadicity, can be used to show that an arbitrary adjunction can be treated as a category of algebras in this way.
The notion of monad was invented by Roger Godement in 1958 under the name "standard construction." In the 1960s and 1970s, many people used the name "triple." The now standard term "monad" is due to Mac Lane.
Formal definition
If 
 
 
 
  is a category, a monad on 
 
 
 
  consists of a functor 
 
 
 
  together with two natural transformations

 
  (where 
 
 
 
  denotes the identity functor on 
 
 
 
 ) and 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is the functor 
 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ). These are required to fulfill the following conditions (sometimes called coherence conditions):



 
  (as natural transformations 
 
 
 
 );


 
 
  (as natural transformations 
 
 
 
 ; here 
 
 
 
  denotes the identity transformation from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ).

We can rewrite these conditions using following commutative diagrams:




(Figure)
Coherence law for the multiplication of a monad.svg


            
(Figure)
Coherence law for the unit of a monad.svg





See the article on natural transformations for the explanation of the notations 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , or see below the commutative diagrams not using these notions:




(Figure)
Monad multiplication explicit.svg


            
(Figure)
Monad unit explicit.svg





The first axiom is akin to the associativity in monoids, the second axiom to the existence of an identity element. Indeed, a monad on 
 
 
 
  can alternatively be defined as a monoid in the category 
 
 
 
  whose objects are the endofunctors of 
 
 
 
  and whose morphisms are the natural transformations between them, with the monoidal structure induced by the composition of endofunctors.
Comonads and their importance
The categorical dual definition is a formal definition of a comonad (or cotriple); this can be said quickly in the terms that a comonad for a category 
 
 
 
 
  is a monad for the opposite category

 
 . It is therefore a functor 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to itself, with a set of axioms for counit and comultiplication that come from reversing the arrows everywhere in the definition just given.
Since a comonoid is not a basic structure in abstract algebra, this is less familiar at an immediate level.
The importance of the definition comes in a class of theorems from the categorical (and algebraic geometry) theory of descent. What was realised in the period 1960 to 1970 is that recognising the categories of coalgebras for a comonad was an important tool of category theory (particularly topos theory). The results involved are based on Beck's theorem. Roughly what goes on is this: while it is simple set theory that a surjective mapping of sets is as good as the equivalence relation "x is in the same fiber as y" on the domain of the mapping, for geometric morphisms what you should do is pass to such a coalgebra subcategory.
Examples
The rich set of examples is given by adjunctions (see Monads and adjunctions), and the free group example mentioned above belongs to that set.
Here is another example, on the category 
 
 
 
 : For a set 
 
 
 
 
  let 
 
 
 
  be the power set of 
 
 
 
  and for a function 
 
 
 
  let 
 
 
 
  be the function between the power sets induced by taking direct images under 
 
 
 
 
 . For every set 
 
 
 
 , we have a map 
 
 
 
 , which assigns to every 
 
 
 
  the singleton

 
 . The function


 
  takes a set of sets to its union. These data describe a monad.
Closure operators are monads on preorder categories.
Algebras for a monad
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a given monad on a category 
 
 
 
 .
A 

 
 -algebra

 
  is an object 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  together with an arrow 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  called the structure map of the algebra such that the diagrams



(Figure)
Monad_multi_algebra.svg



and

(Figure)
Monad_unit_algebra.svg




commute.
A morphism 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 
 -algebras is an arrow 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that the diagram  commutes.
The category 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 -algebras and their morphisms is called the Eilenberg-Moore category or category of (Eilenberg-Moore) algebras of the monad 
 
 
 
 
 . The forgetful functor 
 
 
 
 →
 
 
 
  has a left adjoint 
 
 
 
 →
 
 
 
  taking 
 
 
 
 
  to the free algebra 
 
 
 
 .
Given the monad 
 
 
 
 , there exists another "canonical" category 
 
 
 
  called the Kleisli category of the monad 
 
 
 
 . This category is equivalent to the category of free algebras for the monad 
 
 
 
 
 , i. e. the full subcategory of 
 
 
 
  whose objects are of the form 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
  an object of 
 
 
 
 .
Monads and adjunctions
An adjunction

 
 
  between two categories 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is left adjoint to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are respectively the unit and the counit) always defines a monad 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, it is interesting to consider the adjunctions which define a given monad 
 
 
 
  this way. Let 
 
 
 
  be the category whose objects are the adjunctions 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and whose arrows are the morphisms of adjunctions which are the identity on 
 
 
 
 . Then this category has

an initial object 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Kleisli category,
a terminal object 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Eilenberg-Moore category.

An adjunction 
 
 
 
  between two categories 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a monadic adjunction when the category 
 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to the Eilenberg-Moore category 
 
 
 
  for the monad 
 
 
 
 . By extension, a functor 
 
 
 
  is said to be monadic if it has a left adjoint 
 
 
 
  forming a monadic adjunction. Beck's monadicity theorem gives a characterization of monadic functors.
Uses
Monads are used in functional programming to express types of sequential computation (sometimes with side-effects). See monads in functional programming, and the more mathematically oriented Wikibook module b:Haskell/Category theory.
In categorical logic, an analogy has been drawn between the monad-comonad theory, and modal logic via closure operators, interior algebras, and their relation to models of S4 and Intuitionistic logics.
Generalization
It is possible to define monads in a 2-category

 
 
 . Monads described above are monads for 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Distributive law between monads
Strong monad
Monad (disambiguation) for other meanings of the term.
Monad (functional programming)
Polyad

References
Further reading

Daniele Turi: Category Theory Lecture Notes (1996-2001), based on MacLane's book "Categories for the Working Mathematician"
Michael Barr and Charles Wells: Category Theory for Computing Science (1999).
Roger Godement: Topologie Algébrique et Théorie des Faisceaux. Actualités Sci. Ind. No. 1252. Publ. Math. Univ. Strasbourg. No. 13 Hermann, Paris 1958 viii+283 pp.


External links

Monads, five short lectures (with one appendix).
John Baez's This Week's Finds in Mathematical Physics (Week 89) covers monads in 2-categories.

"
Category:Adjoint functors



↩




