


Dickson's lemma




Dickson's lemma

In mathematics, Dickson's lemma states that every set of 
 
 
 
 -tuples of natural numbers has finitely many minimal elements. This simple fact from combinatorics has become attributed to the American algebraist L. E. Dickson, who used it to prove a result in number theory about perfect numbers.1 However, the lemma was certainly known earlier, for example to Paul Gordan in his research on invariant theory.2
Example
 Let 
 
 
 
  be a fixed number, and let 
 
 
 
  be the set of pairs of numbers whose product is at least 
 
 
 
 
 . When defined over the positive real numbers, 
 
 
 
  has infinitely many minimal elements of the form 
 
 
 
 , one for each positive number 
 
 
 
 ; this set of points forms one of the branches of a hyperbola. The pairs on this hyperbola are minimal, because it is not possible for a different pair that belongs to 
 
 
 
  to be less than or equal to 
 
 
 
 
  in both of its coordinates. However, Dickson's lemma concerns only tuples of natural numbers, and over the natural numbers there are only finitely many minimal pairs. Every minimal pair 
 
 
 
  of natural numbers has 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , for if x were greater than K then (x −1,y) would also belong to S, contradicting the minimality of (x,y), and symmetrically if y were greater than K then (x,y −1) would also belong to S. Therefore, over the natural numbers, 
 
 
 
  has at most 
 
 
 
 
  minimal elements, a finite number.3
Formal statement
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of non-negative integers (natural numbers), let n be any fixed constant, and let 
 
 
 
  be the set of 
 
 
 
 -tuples of natural numbers. These tuples may be given a pointwise partial order, the product order, in which 
 
 
 
  if and only if, for every 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . The set of tuples that are greater than or equal to some particular tuple 
 
 
 
  forms a positive orthant with its apex at the given tuple.
With this notation, Dickson's lemma may be stated in several equivalent forms:

In every subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , there are finitely many elements that are minimal elements of 
 
 
 
 
  for the pointwise partial order
In every infinite set of 
 
 
 
 -tuples of natural numbers, there exist two tuples 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that, for every 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 .4
The partially ordered set 
 
 
 
  is a well partial order.5
Every subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  may be covered by a finite set of positive orthants, whose apexes all belong to 
 
 


Generalizations and applications
Dickson used his lemma to prove that, for any given number 
 
 
 
 
 , there can exist only a finite number of odd perfect numbers that have at most 
 
 
prime factors.6 However, it remains open whether there exist any odd perfect numbers at all.
The divisibility relation among the P-smooth numbers, natural numbers whose prime factors all belong to the finite set P, gives these numbers the structure of a partially ordered set isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 . Thus, for any set S of P-smooth numbers, there is a finite subset of S such that every element of S is divisible by one of the numbers in this subset. This fact has been used, for instance, to show that there exists an algorithm for classifying the winning and losing moves from the initial position in the game of Sylver coinage, even though the algorithm itself remains unknown.7
The tuples 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  correspond one-for-one with the monomials

 
 
  over a set of 
 
 
 
  variables 
 
 
 
 . Under this correspondence, Dickson's lemma may be seen as a special case of Hilbert's basis theorem stating that every polynomial ideal has a finite basis, for the ideals generated by monomials. Indeed, Paul Gordan used this restatement of Dickson's lemma in 1899 as part of a proof of Hilbert's basis theorem.8
See also

Gordan's lemma

References
"
Category:Combinatorics Category:Lemmas Category:Wellfoundedness




.↩
With more care, it is possible to show that one of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is at most 
 
 
 
 
 , and that there is at most one minimal pair for each choice of one of the coordinates, from which it follows that there are at most 
 
 
 
  minimal elements.↩
.↩
.↩
.↩
. See especially "Are outcomes computable", p. 630.↩





