


Cayley graph




Cayley graph

  In mathematics, a Cayley graph, also known as a Cayley colour graph, Cayley diagram, group diagram, or colour group1 is a graph that encodes the abstract structure of a group. Its definition is suggested by Cayley's theorem (named after Arthur Cayley) and uses a specified, usually finite, set of generators for the group. It is a central tool in combinatorial and geometric group theory.
Definition
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a group and 
 
 
 
  is a generating set. The Cayley graph 
 
 
 
  is a colored directed graph constructed as follows: 2

Each element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is assigned a vertex: the vertex set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is identified with 
 
 

Each generator 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is assigned a color 
 
 
 
 .
For any 
 
 
 
  the vertices corresponding to the elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are joined by a directed edge of colour 
 
 
 
  Thus the edge set 
 
 
 
  consists of pairs of the form 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  providing the color.

In geometric group theory, the set 
 
 
 
  is usually assumed to be finite, symmetric (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) and not containing the identity element of the group. In this case, the uncolored Cayley graph is an ordinary graph: its edges are not oriented and it does not contain loops (single-element cycles).
Examples

Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is the infinite cyclic group and the set S consists of the standard generator 1 and its inverse (−1 in the additive notation) then the Cayley graph is an infinite path.


Similarly, if 
 
 
 
  is the finite cyclic group of order n and the set S consists of two elements, the standard generator of G and its inverse, then the Cayley graph is the cycle

 
 .


The Cayley graph of the direct product of groups (with the cartesian product of generating sets as a generating set) is the cartesian product of the corresponding Cayley graphs.3 Thus the Cayley graph of the abelian group 
 
 
 
  with the set of generators consisting of four elements 
 
 
 
  is the infinite grid on the plane 
 
 
 
 , while for the direct product 
 
 
 
  with similar generators the Cayley graph is the 
 
 
 
  finite grid on a torus.

 

A Cayley graph of the dihedral group D4 on two generators a and b is depicted to the left. Red arrows represent left-multiplication by element a. Since element b is self-inverse, the blue lines which represent left-multiplication by element b are undirected. Therefore the graph is mixed: it has eight vertices, eight arrows, and four edges. The Cayley table of the group D4 can be derived from the group presentation









A different Cayley graph of Dih4 is shown on the right. b is still the horizontal reflection and represented by blue lines; c is a diagonal reflection and represented by green lines. As both reflections are self-inverse the Cayley graph on the right is completely undirected. This graph corresponds to the presentation









The Cayley graph of the free group on two generators a, b corresponding to the set S = {a, b, a−1, b−1} is depicted at the top of the article, and e represents the identity element. Travelling along an edge to the right represents right multiplication by a, while travelling along an edge upward corresponds to the multiplication by b. Since the free group has no relations, the Cayley graph has no cycles. This Cayley graph is a key ingredient in the proof of the Banach–Tarski paradox.

(Figure)
Part of a Cayley graph of the Heisenberg group. (The coloring is only for visual aid.)


A Cayley graph of the discrete Heisenberg group 

1 & x & z\\
0 & 1 & y\\
0 & 0 & 1\\
\end{pmatrix},\ x,y,z \in \mathbb{Z}\right\}  is depicted to the right. The generators used in the picture are the three matrices X, Y, Z given by the three permutations of 1, 0, 0 for the entries x, y, z. They satisfy the relations 
 
 
 
 , which can also be read off from the picture. This is a non-commutative infinite group, and despite being three-dimensional in some sense, the Cayley graph has four-dimensional volume growth.
Characterization
The group 
 
 
acts on itself by the left multiplication (see Cayley's theorem). This action may be viewed as the action of 
 
 
 
  on its Cayley graph. Explicitly, an element 
 
 
 
  maps a vertex 
 
 
 
  to the vertex 
 
 
 
 . The set of edges of the Cayley graph is preserved by this action: the edge 
 
 
 
  is transformed into the edge 
 
 
 
 . The left multiplication action of any group on itself is simply transitive, in particular, the Cayley graph is vertex transitive. This leads to the following characterization of Cayley graphs:

Sabidussi Theorem: A graph 
 
 
 
  is a Cayley graph of a group 
 
 
 
  if and only if it admits a simply transitive action of 
 
 
 
  by graph automorphisms (i.e. preserving the set of edges).4


To recover the group 
 
 
 
  and the generating set 
 
 
 
  from the Cayley graph 
 
 
 
 , select a vertex 
 
 
 
  and label it by the identity element of the group. Then label each vertex 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  by the unique element of 
 
 
 
  that transforms 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  The set 
 
 
 
  of generators of 
 
 
 
  that yields 
 
 
 
  as the Cayley graph is the set of labels of the vertices adjacent to the selected vertex. The generating set is finite (this is a common assumption for Cayley graphs) if and only if the graph is locally finite (i.e. each vertex is adjacent to finitely many edges).
Elementary properties

If a member 
 
 
 
  of the generating set is its own inverse, 
 
 
 
 , then it is generally represented by an undirected edge.


The Cayley graph 
 
 
 
  depends in an essential way on the choice of the set 
 
 
 
  of generators. For example, if the generating set 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  elements then each vertex of the Cayley graph has 
 
 
 
  incoming and 
 
 
 
  outgoing directed edges. In the case of a symmetric generating set 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  elements, the Cayley graph is a regular directed graph of degree 
 
 



Cycles (or closed walks) in the Cayley graph indicate relations between the elements of 
 
 
 
  In the more elaborate construction of the Cayley complex of a group, closed paths corresponding to relations are "filled in" by polygons. This means that the problem of constructing the Cayley graph of a given presentation 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to solving the Word Problem for 
 
 
 
 .5


If 
 
 
 
  is a surjective group homomorphism and the images of the elements of the generating set 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  are distinct, then it induces a covering of graphs





 
  where 
 
 





In particular, if a group 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  generators, all of order different from 2, and the set 
 
 
 
  consists of these generators together with their inverses, then the Cayley graph 
 
 
 
  is covered by the infinite regular tree of degree 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the free group on the same set of generators.
 


A graph 
 
 
 
  can be constructed even if the set 
 
 
 
  does not generate the group 
 
 
 
  However, it is disconnected and is not considered to be a Cayley graph. In this case, each connected component of the graph represents a coset of the subgroup generated by 
 
 
 
 .


For any finite Cayley graph, considered as undirected, the vertex connectivity is at least equal to 2/3 of the degree of the graph. If the generating set is minimal (removal of any element and, if present, its inverse from the generating set leaves a set which is not generating), the vertex connectivity is equal to the degree. The edge connectivity is in all cases equal to the degree.6

Schreier coset graph
If one, instead, takes the vertices to be right cosets of a fixed subgroup 
 
 
 
 , one obtains a related construction, the Schreier coset graph, which is at the basis of coset enumeration or the Todd–Coxeter process.
Connection to group theory
Insights into the structure of the group can be obtained by studying the adjacency matrix of the graph and in particular applying the theorems of spectral graph theory.
Geometric group theory
For infinite groups, the coarse geometry of the Cayley graph is fundamental to geometric group theory. For a finitely generated group, this is independent of choice of finite set of generators, hence an intrinsic property of the group. This is only interesting for infinite groups: every finite group is coarsely equivalent to a point (or the trivial group), since one can choose as finite set of generators the entire group.
Formally, for a given choice of generators, one has the word metric (the natural distance on the Cayley graph), which determines a metric space. The coarse equivalence class of this space is an invariant of the group.
History
The Cayley Graph was first considered for finite groups by Arthur Cayley in 1878.7 Max Dehn in his unpublished lectures on group theory from 1909–10 reintroduced Cayley graphs under the name Gruppenbild (group diagram), which led to the geometric group theory of today. His most important application was the solution of the word problem for the fundamental group of surfaces with genus ≥ 2, which is equivalent to the topological problem of deciding which closed curves on the surface contract to a point.8
Bethe lattice
The Bethe lattice or Cayley tree, is the Cayley graph of the free group on n generators. A presentation of a group G by n generators corresponds to a surjective map from the free group on n generators to the group G, and at the level of Cayley graphs to a map from the Cayley tree to the Cayley graph. This can also be interpreted (in algebraic topology) as the universal cover of the Cayley graph, which is not in general simply connected.
See also

Vertex-transitive graph
Generating set of a group
Lovász conjecture
Cube-connected cycles
Algebraic graph theory
Cycle graph (algebra)

Notes
External links

Cayley diagrams


"
Category:Group theory Category:Permutation groups Category:Graph families Category:Application-specific graphs Category:Geometric group theory  



↩
 In his Collected Mathematical Papers 10: 403–405.↩
.↩
↩

See Theorem 3.7 of ↩

 Translated from the German and with introductions and an appendix by John Stillwell, and with an appendix by Otto Schreier.↩




