


Turán's theorem




Turán's theorem

In graph theory, Turán's theorem is a result on the number of edges in a Kr+1-free graph.
An 
 
 
 
 -vertex graph that does not contain any 
 
 
 
 -vertex clique may be formed by partitioning the set of vertices into 
 
 
 
  parts of equal or nearly equal size, and connecting two vertices by an edge whenever they belong to two different parts. We call the resulting graph the Turán graph

 
 . Turán's theorem states that the Turán graph has the largest number of edges among all -free 
 
 
 
 -vertex graphs.
Turán graphs were first described and studied by Hungarian mathematician Pál Turán in 1941, though a special case of the theorem was stated earlier by Mantel in 1907.
Formal statement

Turán's Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  be any graph with 
 
 
 
  vertices, such that 
 
 
 
  is Kr+1 -free. Then the number of edges in 
 
 
 
  is at most
 
 




An equivalent formulation is the following:

Turán's Theorem (Second Formulation). Among the 
 
 
 
 -vertex simple graphs with no 
 
 
 
 -cliques, 
 
 
 
  has the maximum number of edges.
 

Proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
 -vertex simple graph with no 
 
 
 
 -clique and with the maximum number of edges.

Overview: The proof consists of two claims about 
 
 
 
 , which we outline, before proving. The first claim is that 
 
 
 
  must be a complete r-partite graph (although it's stated more technically below). In other words, we can partition the vertex set into 
 
 
 
  subsets 
 
 
 
  such that if two vertices are in different sets, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then they have an edge between them, but if they are in the same set, then they have no edge between them. The second claim is that the sizes of these sets 
 
 
 
  differ from each other by at most 1. For example, if we want the graph on 23 vertices with the most edges that does not contain a triangle, then we partition the vertices into sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . We add all the edges between the two sets, so the graph will have 11*12 = 132 edges. This matches with the theorem, which says that 
 
 
 
  will have at most 
 
 
 
  edges.
 


Claim 1: Graph 
 
 
 
  does not contain any three vertices 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  contains edge 
 
 
 
 , but contains neither edge 
 
 
 
  nor 
 
 
 
 . (This claim is equivalent to the relation x~y iff x not connected to y being an equivalence relation. ~ is always reflexive and symmetric, but only in special cases is it transitive. ~ is not transitive precisely when we have 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  without 
 
 
 
 .)
 

Assume the claim is false. Construct a new 
 
 
 
 -vertex simple graph 
 
 
 
  that contains no 
 
 
 
 -clique but has more edges than 
 
 
 
 , as follows:
Case 1
 
 

Assume that 
 
 
 
 . Delete vertex 
 
 
 
  and create a copy of vertex 
 
 
 
  (with all of the same neighbors as 
 
 
 
 ); call it 
 
 
 
 . Any clique in the new graph contains at most one vertex among 
 
 
 
 . So this new graph does not contain any 
 
 
 
 -clique. However, it contains more edges:



Case 2
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Delete vertices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and create two new copies of vertex 
 
 
 
 . Again, the new graph does not contain any 
 
 
 
 -clique. However it contains more edges:



This proves Claim 1.
The claim proves that one can partition the vertices of 
 
 
 
  into equivalence classes based on their non-neighbors; i.e. two vertices are in the same equivalence class if they are nonadjacent. This implies that 
 
 
 
  is a complete multipartite graph (where the parts are the equivalence classes).

Claim 2: The number of edges in a complete 
 
 
 
 -partite graph is maximized when the size of the parts differs by at most one.
 

If 
 
 
 
  is a complete 
 
 
 
 -partite graph with parts A and B and 
 
 
 
 , then we can increase the number of edges in 
 
 
 
  by moving a vertex from part A to part 
 
 
 
 . By moving a vertex from part A to part B, the graph loses 
 
 
 
  edges, but gains 
 
 
 
  edges. Thus, it gains at least 
 
 
 
  edge. This proves Claim 2.
This proof shows that the Turan graph has the maximum number of edges. Additionally, the proof shows that the Turan graph is the only graph that has the maximum number of edges.
Mantel's theorem
As a special case of Turán's theorem, for r = 2, one obtains:

Mantel's Theorem. The maximum number of edges in an 
 
 
 
 -vertex triangle-free graph is 
 
 


In other words, one must delete nearly half of the edges in  to obtain a triangle-free graph.
A strengthened form of Mantel's theorem states that any hamiltonian graph with at least n2/4 edges must either be the complete bipartite graph Kn/2,n/2 or it must be pancyclic: not only does it contain a triangle, it must also contain cycles of all other possible lengths up to the number of vertices in the graph .
Another strengthening of Mantel's theorem states that the edges of every 
 
 
 
 -vertex graph may be covered by at most 
 
 
cliques which are either edges or triangles. As a corollary, the intersection number is at most 
 
 
 
  .
See also

Extremal graph theory
Erdős–Stone theorem
A probabilistic proof of Turán's theorem
Turán's method in analytic number theory

References


.

.

.


.

"
Category:Extremal graph theory Category:Theorems in graph theory Category:Articles containing proofs


