


Ford circle




Ford circle

upright=1.35|right|thumb|Ford circles for q from 1 to 20. Circles with q ≤ 10 are labelled as 
 
 
 
  and colour-coded according to q. Each circle is tangential to the base line and its neighboring circles. Irreducible fractions with the same denominator have circles of the same size.
In mathematics, a Ford circle is a circle with centre at 
 
 
 
  and radius

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an irreducible fraction, i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coprime integers. Each Ford circle is tangent to the horizontal axis 
 
 
 
  and any two circles are either tangent or disjoint from each other.1
History
Ford circles are a special case of mutually tangent circles; the base line can be thought of as a circle with infinite radius. Systems of mutually tangent circles were studied by Apollonius of Perga, after whom the problem of Apollonius and the Apollonian gasket are named.2 In the 17th century René Descartes discovered Descartes' theorem, a relationship between the reciprocals of the radii of mutually tangent circles.3
Ford circles also appear in the Sangaku (geometrical puzzles) of Japanese mathematics. A typical problem, which is presented on an 1824 tablet in the Gunma Prefecture, covers the relationship of three touching circles with a common tangent. Given the size of the two outer large circles, what is the size of the small circle between them? The answer is equivalent to a Ford circle:4



Ford circles are named after the American mathematician Lester R. Ford, Sr., who wrote about them in 1938.5
Properties
The Ford circle associated with the fraction 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  There is a Ford circle associated with every rational number. In addition, the line 
 
 
 
  is counted as a Ford circle – it can be thought of as the Ford circle associated with infinity, which is the case 
 
 

Two different Ford circles are either disjoint or tangent to one another. No two interiors of Ford circles intersect, even though there is a Ford circle tangent to the x-axis at each point on it with rational coordinates. If 
 
 
 
  is between 0 and 1, the Ford circles that are tangent to 
 
 
 
  can be described variously as

the circles 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
6
the circles associated with the fractions 
 
 
 
  that are the neighbours of 
 
 
 
  in some Farey sequence,7 or
the circles 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the next larger or the next smaller ancestor to 
 
 
 
  in the Stern–Brocot tree or where 
 
 
 
  is the next larger or next smaller ancestor to 
 
 
 
 .8

Ford circles can also be thought of as curves in the complex plane. The modular group of transformations of the complex plane maps Ford circles to other Ford circles.9
By interpreting the upper half of the complex plane as a model of the hyperbolic plane (the Poincaré half-plane model) Ford circles can also be interpreted as a tiling of the hyperbolic plane by horocycles. Any two Ford circles are congruent in hyperbolic geometry.10 If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are tangent Ford circles, then the half-circle joining 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that is perpendicular to the 
 
 
 
 -axis is a hyperbolic line that also passes through the point where the two circles are tangent to one another.
Ford circles are a sub-set of the circles in the Apollonian gasket generated by the lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and the circle 
 
 
11
Total area of Ford circles
There is a link between the area of Ford circles, Euler's totient function

 
  the Riemann zeta function

 
  and Apéry's constant

12 As no two Ford circles intersect, it follows immediately that the total area of the Ford circles



is less than 1. In fact the total area of these Ford circles is given by a convergent sum, which can be evaluated. From the definition, the area is



Simplifying this expression gives



where the last equality reflects the Dirichlet generating function for Euler's totient function

 
  Since 
 
 
 
  this finally becomes



References
External links

Ford's Touching Circles at cut-the-knot



"
Category:Circles Category:Fractions (mathematics)




.

.
.




.
.
.




