


Lebesgue–Stieltjes integration




Lebesgue–Stieltjes integration

In measure-theoretic analysis and related branches of mathematics, Lebesgue–Stieltjes integration generalizes Riemann–Stieltjes and Lebesgue integration, preserving the many advantages of the former in a more general measure-theoretic framework. The Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral is the ordinary Lebesgue integral with respect to a measure known as the Lebesgue–Stieltjes measure, which may be associated to any function of bounded variation on the real line. The Lebesgue–Stieltjes measure is a regular Borel measure, and conversely every regular Borel measure on the real line is of this kind.
Lebesgue–Stieltjes integrals, named for Henri Leon Lebesgue and Thomas Joannes Stieltjes, are also known as Lebesgue–Radon integrals or just Radon integrals, after Johann Radon, to whom much of the theory is due. They find common application in probability and stochastic processes, and in certain branches of analysis including potential theory.
Definition
The Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral



is defined when 
 
 
 
  is Borel-measurable and bounded and 
 
 
 
  is of bounded variation in 
 
 
 
  and right-continuous, or when 
 
 
 
  is non-negative and 
 
 
 
  is monotone and right-continuous. To start, assume that 
 
 
 
  is non-negative and 
 
 
 
  is monotone non-decreasing and right-continuous. Define 
 
 
 
  and  (Alternatively, the construction works for 
 
 
 
  left-continuous, 
 
 
 
  and ).
By Carathéodory's extension theorem, there is a unique Borel measure  on 
 
 
 
  which agrees with 
 
 
 
  on every interval 
 
 
 
 . The measure  arises from an outer measure (in fact, a metric outer measure) given by



the infimum taken over all coverings of 
 
 
 
  by countably many semiopen intervals. This measure is sometimes called1 the Lebesgue–Stieltjes measure associated with 
 
 
 
 .
The Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral



is defined as the Lebesgue integral of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the measure  in the usual way. If 
 
 
 
  is non-increasing, then define



the latter integral being defined by the preceding construction.
If 
 
 
 
  is of bounded variation and 
 
 
 
  is bounded, then it is possible to write



where  Vg}} is the total variation of 
 
 
 
  in the interval 
 
 
 
 , and  g1(x) − g(x)}}. Both  and  are monotone non-decreasing. Now the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral with respect to 
 
 
 
  is defined by



where the latter two integrals are well-defined by the preceding construction.
Daniell integral
An alternative approach  is to define the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral as the Daniell integral that extends the usual Riemann–Stieltjes integral. Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-increasing right-continuous function on 
 
 
 
 , and define 
 
 
 
  to be the Riemann–Stieltjes integral



for all continuous functions 
 
 
 
 . The functional

 
  defines a Radon measure on 
 
 
 
 . This functional can then be extended to the class of all non-negative functions by setting



For Borel measurable functions, one has



and either side of the identity then defines the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral of 
 
 
 
 . The outer measure  is defined via



where  is the indicator function of 
 
 
 
 .
Integrators of bounded variation are handled as above by decomposing into positive and negative variations.
Example
Suppose that  is a rectifiable curve in the plane and  is Borel measurable. Then we may define the length of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the Euclidean metric weighted by ρ to be



where 
 
 
 
  is the length of the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . This is sometimes called the 
 
 
 
 -length of 
 
 
 
 . This notion is quite useful for various applications: for example, in muddy terrain the speed in which a person can move may depend on how deep the mud is. If 
 
 
 
  denotes the inverse of the walking speed at or near 
 
 
 
 , then the 
 
 
 
 -length of 
 
 
 
  is the time it would take to traverse 
 
 
 
 . The concept of extremal length uses this notion of the 
 
 
 
 -length of curves and is useful in the study of conformal mappings.
Integration by parts
A function 
 
 
 
  is said to be "regular" at a point 
 
 
 
  if the right and left hand limits 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  exist, and the function takes the average value,



at the limiting point. Given two functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of finite variation, if at each point either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is continuous, or if both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are regular, then there is an integration by parts formula for the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral:



Under a slight generalization of this formula, the extra conditions on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be dropped.2
An alternative result, of significant importance in the theory of Stochastic calculus is the following. Given two functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of finite variation, which are both right-continuous and have left-limits (they are cadlag functions) then



where  U(t) − U(t−)}}. This result can be seen as a precursor to Itō's lemma, and is of use in the general theory of Stochastic integration. The final term is 
 
 
 
 which arises from the quadratic covariation of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . (The earlier result can then be seen as a result pertaining to the Stratonovich integral.)
Related concepts
Lebesgue integration
When 
 
 
 
  for all real 
 
 
 
 , then  is the Lebesgue measure, and the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to the Lebesgue integral of 
 
 
 
 .
Riemann–Stieltjes integration and probability theory
Where 
 
 
 
  is a continuous real-valued function of a real variable and 
 
 
 
  is a non-decreasing real function, the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral is equivalent to the Riemann–Stieltjes integral, in which case we often write


 
  for the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral, letting the measure  remain implicit. This is particularly common in probability theory when 
 
 
 
  is the cumulative distribution function of a real-valued random variable 
 
 
 
 , in which case


 
  (See the article on Riemann–Stieltjes integration for more detail on dealing with such cases.)
Notes
References



.
Saks, Stanislaw (1937) [http://matwbn.icm.edu.pl/kstresc.php?tom=7&wyd;;=10 Theory of the Integral.]
Shilov, G. E., and Gurevich, B. L., 1978. Integral, Measure, and Derivative: A Unified Approach, Richard A. Silverman, trans. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-63519-8.

de:Stieltjesintegral id:Integrasi Lebesgue-Stieltjes it:Integrale di Lebesgue-Stieltjes es:Integración de Lebesgue–Stieltjes"
Category:Definitions of mathematical integration



Halmos (1974), Sec. 15↩
↩




