   Real tree      Real tree   In mathematics , a real tree , or an   𝐑   𝐑   \mathbf{R}   - tree , is a metric space ( M , d ) such that for any x , y in M there is a unique arc from x to y . Here by an arc from x to y we mean the image in M of a topological embedding  f from an interval [ a , b ] to M such that f ( a )= x and f ( b )= y (for some real numbers a and b ). Note that uniqueness refers to the image in M . Moreover, by choosing a and b so that d(x, y) =| a-b | and using arclength parametrization for the interval [ a , b ], we may assume that this arc is a geodesic segment . The condition that the arc is a geodesic segment means that the map f above is an isometric  embedding , that is, for every z, t in [ a , b ] we have d(f(z), f(t)) =| z-t |.  Equivalently, a geodesic metric space  M is a real tree if and only if M is a δ-hyperbolic space with δ=0.  Complete real trees are injective metric spaces .  There is a theory of group actions on R -trees, known as the Rips machine , which is part of geometric group theory .  Simplicial R-trees  A simplicial  R -tree is an R -tree that is free from certain "topological strangeness". More precisely, a point x in an R -tree T is called ordinary if T − x has exactly two components. The points which are not ordinary are singular . We define a simplicial R -tree to be an R -tree whose set of singular points is discrete and closed .  Examples   Each discrete tree can be regarded as an R -tree by a simple construction such that neighboring vertices have distance one.  The Paris metric makes the plane into an R -tree. If two points are on the same ray in the plane, their distance is defined as the Euclidean distance . Otherwise, their distance is defined to be the sum of the Euclidean distances of these two points to the origin. More generally any hedgehog space is an example of a real tree.  The R -tree obtained in the following way is nonsimplicial. Start with the interval [0,2] and glue , for each positive integer n , an interval of length 1/ n to the point 1−1/ n in the original interval. The set of singular points is discrete, but fails to be closed since 1 is an ordinary point in this R -tree. Gluing an interval to 1 would result in a closed set of singular points at the expense of discreteness.   See also   Dendroid (topology)  Tree-graded space   References    .   .   .   .   "  Category:Group theory  Category:Geometry  Category:Topology  Category:Trees (topology)   