


Tensor product of algebras




Tensor product of algebras

In mathematics, the tensor product of two R-algebras is also an R-algebra. This gives us a tensor product of algebras. The special case R = Z gives us a tensor product of rings, since rings may be regarded as Z-algebras.
Definition
Let R be a commutative ring and let A and B be R-algebras. Since A and B may both be regarded as R-modules, we may form their tensor product


 
  which is also an R-module. We can give the tensor product the structure of an algebra by defining1


 
  and then extending by linearity to all of . This product is easily seen to be R-bilinear, associative, and unital with an identity element given by ,2 where 1A and 1B are the identities of A and B. If A and B are both commutative then the tensor product is commutative as well.
The tensor product turns the category of all R-algebras into a symmetric monoidal category.
Further properties
There are natural homomorphisms of A and B to  given by3





 
  These maps make the tensor product a coproduct in the category of commutative R-algebras. The tensor product is not the coproduct in the category of all R-algebras. There the coproduct is given by a more general free product of algebras. Nevertheless the tensor product of non-commutative algebras can be described by an universal property similar to that of the coproduct:


 
  The natural isomorphism is given by identifying a morphism 
 
 
 
  on the left hand side with the pair of morphism 
 
 
 
 
  on the right hand side where 
 
 
 
  and similarly 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
The tensor product of algebras is of constant use in algebraic geometry: working in the opposite category to that of commutative R-algebras, it provides pullbacks of affine schemes, otherwise known as fiber products.
See also

Extension of scalars
Tensor product of modules
Tensor product of fields
Linearly disjoint
Multilinear subspace learning

Notes
References


.


"
Category:Algebras Category:Ring theory Category:Commutative algebra Category:Multilinear algebra



Kassel (1995), [ p. 32].↩
Kassel (1995), [ p. 32].↩
Kassel (1995), [ p. 32].↩




