


Grassmannian




Grassmannian

In mathematics, the Grassmannian

 
  is a space which parameterizes all linear subspaces of a vector space

 
  of given dimension

 
 . For example, the Grassmannian 
 
 
 
  is the space of lines through the origin in 
 
 
 
 , so it is the same as the projective space of one dimension lower than 
 
 
 
 .
When 
 
 
 
  is a real or complex vector space, Grassmannians are compact smooth manifolds.1 In general they have the structure of a smooth algebraic variety.
The earliest work on a non-trivial Grassmannian is due to Julius Plücker, who studied the set of lines in projective 3-space and parameterized them by what are now called Plücker coordinates. Grassmannians are named after Hermann Grassmann, who introduced the concept in general.
Notations vary between authors, with 
 
 
 
  being equivalent to 
 
 
 
 , and with some authors using 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  to denote the Grassmannian of 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of an unspecified 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space.
Motivation
By giving a collection of subspaces of some vector space a topological structure, it is possible to talk about a continuous choice of subspace or open and closed collections of subspaces; by giving them the structure of a differential manifold one can talk about smooth choices of subspace.
A natural example comes from tangent bundles of smooth manifolds embedded in Euclidean space. Suppose we have a manifold 
 
 
 
  of dimension 
 
 
 
  embedded in . At each point 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the tangent space to 
 
 
 
  can be considered as a subspace of the tangent space of , which is just . The map assigning to 
 
 
 
  its tangent space defines a map from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . (In order to do this, we have to translate the geometrical tangent space to 
 
 
 
  so that it passes through the origin rather than 
 
 
 
 , and hence defines a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector subspace. This idea is very similar to the Gauss map for surfaces in a 3-dimensional space.)
This idea can with some effort be extended to all vector bundles over a manifold 
 
 
 
 , so that every vector bundle generates a continuous map from 
 
 
 
  to a suitably generalised Grassmannian—although various embedding theorems must be proved to show this. We then find that the properties of our vector bundles are related to the properties of the corresponding maps viewed as continuous maps. In particular we find that vector bundles inducing homotopic maps to the Grassmannian are isomorphic. But the definition of homotopic relies on a notion of continuity, and hence a topology.
Low dimensions
For 
 
 
 
 , The Grassmannian 
 
 
 
  is the space of lines through the origin in 3-space, so it is the same as the projective plane.
For 
 
 
 
 , the Grassmannian is the space of all planes through the origin. In Euclidean 3-space, a plane containing the origin is completely characterized by the one and only line through the origin perpendicular to that plane (and vice versa); hence , the projective plane.
The simplest Grassmannian that is not a projective space is 
 
 
 
 , which may be parameterized via Plücker coordinates.
The Grassmannian as a set
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite-dimensional vector space over a field

 
 . The Grassmannian 
 
 
 
  is the set of all 
 
 
 
 -dimensional linear subspaces of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  has dimension 
 
 
 
 , then the Grassmannian is also denoted 
 
 
 
 .
Vector subspaces of 
 
 
 
  are equivalent to linear subspaces of the projective space 
 
 
 
 , so it is equivalent to think of the Grassmannian as the set of all linear subspaces of 
 
 
 
 . When the Grassmannian is thought of this way, it is often written as 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
The Grassmannian as a homogeneous space
The quickest way of giving the Grassmannian a geometric structure is to express it as a homogeneous space. First, recall that the general linear group

acts transitively on the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, if 
 
 
 
  is the set of stabilizers of this action, we have



 
 .
 

If the underlying field is 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is considered as a Lie group, then this construction makes the Grassmannian into a smooth manifold. It also becomes possible to use other groups to make this construction. To do this, fix an inner product on 
 
 
 
 . Over 
 
 
 
 , one replaces 
 
 
 
  by the orthogonal group

 
 , and by restricting to orthonormal frames, one gets the identity



 
 .
 

In particular, the dimension of the Grassmannian is 
 
 
 
 .
Over 
 
 
 
 , one replaces 
 
 
 
  by the unitary group

 
 . This shows that the Grassmannian is compact. These constructions also make the Grassmannian into a metric space: For a subspace 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , let  be the projection of 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
 . Then



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the operator norm, is a metric on 
 
 
 
 . The exact inner product used does not matter, because a different inner product will give an equivalent norm on 
 
 
 
 , and so give an equivalent metric.
If the ground field

 
  is arbitrary and 
 
 
 
  is considered as an algebraic group, then this construction shows that the Grassmannian is a non-singular algebraic variety. It follows from the existence of the Plücker embedding that the Grassmannian is complete as an algebraic variety. In particular, 
 
 
 
  is a parabolic subgroup of 
 
 
 
 .
The Grassmannian as a scheme
In the realm of algebraic geometry, the Grassmannian can be constructed as a scheme by expressing it as a representable functor.2
Representable functor
Let 
 
 
 
  be a quasi-coherent sheaf on a scheme 
 
 
 
 . Fix a positive integer 
 
 
 
 . Then to each 
 
 
 
 -scheme 
 
 
 
 , the Grassmannian functor associates the set of quotient modules of



locally free of rank 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . We denote this set by 
 
 
 
 .
This functor is representable by a separated 
 
 
 
 -scheme 
 
 
 
 . The latter is projective if 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated. When 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of a field 
 
 
 
 , then the sheaf 
 
 
 
  is given by a vector space 
 
 
 
  and we recover the usual Grassmannian variety of the dual space of 
 
 
 
 , namely: .
By construction, the Grassmannian scheme is compatible with base changes: for any 
 
 
 
 -scheme 
 
 
 
 , we have a canonical isomorphism



In particular, for any point 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the canonical morphism , induces an isomorphism from the fiber 
 
 
 
  to the usual Grassmannian 
 
 
 
  over the residue field 
 
 
 
 .
Universal family
Since the Grassmannian scheme represents a functor, it comes with a universal object, 
 
 
 
 , which is an object of



and therefore a quotient module 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , locally free of rank 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . The quotient homomorphism induces a closed immersion from the projective bundle 
 
 
 
 :



For any morphism of 
 
 
 
 -schemes:



this closed immersion induces a closed immersion



Conversely, any such closed immersion comes from a surjective homomorphism of -modules from 
 
 
 
  to a locally free module of rank 
 
 
 
 .3 Therefore, the elements of 
 
 
 
  are exactly the projective subbundles of rank 
 
 
 
  in



Under this identification, when 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of a field 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is given by a vector space 
 
 
 
 , the set of rational points 
 
 
 
  correspond to the projective linear subspaces of dimension 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , and the image of 
 
 
 
  in



is the set



The Plücker embedding
The Plücker embedding is a natural embedding of a Grassmannian into a projective space:



Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspace of 
 
 
 
 . To define 
 
 
 
 , choose a basis  of 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be the wedge product of these basis elements:



A different basis for 
 
 
 
  will give a different wedge product, but the two products will differ only by a non-zero scalar (the determinant of the change of basis matrix). Since the right-hand side takes values in a projective space, 
 
 
 
  is well-defined. To see that 
 
 
 
  is an embedding, notice that it is possible to recover 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  as the set of all vectors 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
The embedding of the Grassmannian satisfies some very simple quadratic polynomials called the Plücker relations. These show that the Grassmannian embeds as an algebraic subvariety of  and give another method of constructing the Grassmannian. To state the Plücker relations, choose two 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  with bases  and  respectively. Then, for any integer 
 
 
 
 , the following equation is true in the homogeneous coordinate ring of :



When 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , the simplest Grassmannian which is not a projective space, the above reduces to a single equation. Denoting the coordinates of  by , we have that 
 
 
 
  is defined by the equation

 0.}}


In general, however, many more equations are needed to define the Plücker embedding of a Grassmannian in projective space.
The Grassmannian as a real affine algebraic variety
Let  denote the Grassmannian of 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the space of real 
 
 
 
  matrices. Consider the set of matrices 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
  if and only if the three conditions are satisfied:



 
  is a projection operator:  X}}.


 
  is symmetric:  X}}.


 
  has trace 
 
 
 
 : 
 
 
 
 .



 
  and  are homeomorphic, with a correspondence established by sending 
 
 
 
  to the column space of 
 
 
 
 .
Duality
Every 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspace 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  determines an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional quotient space 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . This gives the natural short exact sequence:



 
 .
 

Taking the dual to each of these three spaces and linear transformations yields an inclusion of  in  with quotient :

.
 

Using the natural isomorphism of a finite-dimensional vector space with its double dual shows that taking the dual again recovers the original short exact sequence. Consequently there is a one-to-one correspondence between 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of . In terms of the Grassmannian, this is a canonical isomorphism

.
 

Choosing an isomorphism of 
 
 
 
  with  therefore determines a (non-canonical) isomorphism of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . An isomorphism of 
 
 
 
  with  is equivalent to a choice of an inner product, and with respect to the chosen inner product, this isomorphism of Grassmannians sends an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspace into its 
 
 
 
 -dimensional orthogonal complement.
Schubert cells
The detailed study of the Grassmannians uses a decomposition into subsets called Schubert cells, which were first applied in enumerative geometry. The Schubert cells for 
 
 
 
  are defined in terms of an auxiliary flag: take subspaces , with . Then we consider the corresponding subset of 
 
 
 
 , consisting of the 
 
 
 
  having intersection with  of dimension at least 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
 . The manipulation of Schubert cells is Schubert calculus.
Here is an example of the technique. Consider the problem of determining the Euler characteristic of the Grassmannian of 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of . Fix a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspace  and consider the partition of 
 
 
 
  into those 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of  that contain 
 
 
 
  and those that do not. The former is 
 
 
 
  and the latter is a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector bundle over 
 
 
 
 . This gives recursive formulas:



If one solves this recurrence relation, one gets the formula:  0}} if and only if 
 
 
 
  is even and 
 
 
 
  is odd. Otherwise:



Cohomology ring of the complex Grassmannian
Every point in the complex Grassmannian manifold 
 
 
 
  defines an 
 
 
 
 -plane in 
 
 
 
 -space. Fibering these planes over the Grassmannian one arrives at the vector bundle

 
  which generalizes the tautological bundle of a projective space. Similarly the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional orthogonal complements of these planes yield an orthogonal vector bundle 
 
 
 
 . The integral cohomology of the Grassmannians is generated, as a ring, by the Chern classes of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, all of the integral cohomology is at even degree as in the case of a projective space.
These generators are subject to a set of relations, which defines the ring. The defining relations are easy to express for a larger set of generators, which consists of the Chern classes of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then the relations merely state that the direct sum of the bundles 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is trivial. Functoriality of the total Chern classes allows one to write this relation as



The quantum cohomology ring was calculated by Edward Witten in The Verlinde Algebra And The Cohomology Of The Grassmannian. The generators are identical to those of the classical cohomology ring, but the top relation is changed to



reflecting the existence in the corresponding quantum field theory of an instanton with 
 
 
 
  fermionic zero-modes which violates the degree of the cohomology corresponding to a state by 
 
 
 
  units.
Associated measure
When 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space, one may define a uniform measure on 
 
 
 
  in the following way. Let  be the unit Haar measure on the orthogonal group

 
  and fix 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Then for a set 
 
 
 
 , define



This measure is invariant under actions from the group 
 
 
 
 , that is,  γr, n(A)}} for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Since  1}}, we have  1}}. Moreover,  is a Radon measure with respect to the metric space topology and is uniform in the sense that every ball of the same radius (with respect to this metric) is of the same measure.
Oriented Grassmannian
This is the manifold consisting of all oriented

 
 -dimensional subspaces of . It is a double cover of 
 
 
 
  and is denoted by:



As a homogeneous space can be expressed as:



Applications
Grassmann manifolds have found application in computer vision tasks of video-based face recognition and shape recognition.4
Grassmannians allow the scattering amplitudes of subatomic particles to be calculated via a positive Grassmannian construct called the amplituhedron.5
See also

For an example of use of Grassmannians in differential geometry, see Gauss map and in projective geometry, see Plücker co-ordinates.
Flag manifolds are generalizations of Grassmannians and Stiefel manifolds are closely related.
Given a distinguished class of subspaces, one can define Grassmannians of these subspaces, such as the Lagrangian Grassmannian.
Grassmannians provide classifying spaces in K-theory, notably the classifying space for U(n). In the homotopy theory of schemes, the Grassmannian plays a similar rôle for algebraic K-theory.6
Affine Grassmannian.

Notes


References


section 1.2

see chapters 5-7
Joe Harris, Algebraic Geometry, A First Course, (1992) Springer, New York, ISBN 0-387-97716-3
Pertti Mattila, Geometry of Sets and Measures in Euclidean Spaces, (1995) Cambridge University Press, New York, ISBN 0-521-65595-1

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Projective geometry Category:Algebraic homogeneous spaces Category:Algebraic geometry



, pp. 57–59.↩
, Chapter I.9↩
EGA, II.3.6.3.↩
Pavan Taruga, Ashok Veeraraghavan, Rama Chellappa: Statistical analysis on Stiefel and Grassmann manifolds with applications in computer vision, CVPR 23–28 June 2008, IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2008, ISBN 978-1-4244-2242-5, pp. 1–8 (abstract, full text)↩
↩
, see section 4.3., pp. 137–140↩




