


Hankel matrix




Hankel matrix

In linear algebra, a Hankel matrix (or catalecticant matrix), named after Hermann Hankel, is a square matrix with constant skew-diagonals (positive sloping diagonals), e.g.:



If the i,j element of A is denoted Ai,j, then we have



The Hankel matrix is closely related to the Toeplitz matrix (a Hankel matrix is an upside-down Toeplitz matrix). For a special case of this matrix see Hilbert matrix.
A Hankel operator on a Hilbert space is one whose matrix with respect to an orthonormal basis is a (possibly infinite) Hankel matrix 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  depends only on 
 
 
 
 .
The determinant of a Hankel matrix is called a catalecticant.
Hankel transform
The Hankel transform is the name sometimes given to the transformation of a sequence, where the transformed sequence corresponds to the determinant of the Hankel matrix. That is, the sequence 
 
 
 
  is the Hankel transform of the sequence 
 
 
 
  when



Here, 
 
 
 
  is the Hankel matrix of the sequence 
 
 
 
 . The Hankel transform is invariant under the binomial transform of a sequence. That is, if one writes



as the binomial transform of the sequence 
 
 
 
 , then one has



Hankel matrices for system identification
Hankel matrices are formed when given a sequence of output data and a realization of an underlying state-space or hidden Markov model is desired. The singular value decomposition of the Hankel matrix provides a means of computing the A, B, and C matrices which define the state-space realization.
Orthogonal polynomials on the real line
Positive Hankel matrices and the Hamburger moment problems
Orthogonal polynomials on the real line
Tridiagonal model of positive Hankel operators
Relation between Hankel and Toeplitz matrices
Let 
 
 
 
  be the reflection matrix of order 
 
 
 
 . For example the reflection matrix of order 
 
 
 
  is as follows: 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  Hankel matrix, then 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  Toeplitz matrix.
Relations between structured matrices
See also

Cauchy matrix
Vandermonde matrix
Displacement rank

Notes
References

Brent R.P. (1999), "Stability of fast algorithms for structured linear systems", Fast Reliable Algorithms for Matrices with Structure (editors—T. Kailath, A.H. Sayed), ch.4 (SIAM).



"
Category:Matrices Category:Transforms


