


Fourier inversion theorem




Fourier inversion theorem

In mathematics, the Fourier inversion theorem says that for many types of functions it is possible to recover a function from its Fourier transform. Intuitively it may be viewed as the statement that if we know all frequency and phase information about a wave then we may reconstruct the original wave precisely.
The theorem says that if we have a function 
 
 
 
  satisfying certain conditions, and we use the convention for the Fourier transform that



then



In other words, the theorem says that



This last equation is called the Fourier integral theorem.
Another way to state the theorem is to note that if 
 
 
 
  is the flip operator i.e. 
 
 
 
 , then



The theorem holds if both 
 
 
 
  and its Fourier transform are absolutely integrable (in the Lebesgue sense) and 
 
 
 
  is continuous at the point 
 
 
 
 . However, even under more general conditions versions of the Fourier inversion theorem hold. In these cases the integrals above may not make sense, or the theorem may hold for almost all

 
  rather than for all 
 
 
 
 .
Statement
In this section we assume that 
 
 
 
  is an integrable continuous function. Use the convention for the Fourier transform that



Furthermore, we assume that the Fourier transform is also integrable.
Inverse Fourier transform as an integral
The most common statement of the Fourier inversion theorem is to state the inverse transform as an integral. For any integrable function 
 
 
 
  and all  set



Then for all  we have



Fourier integral theorem
The theorem can be restated as



If 
 
 
 
  is real valued then by taking the real part of each side of the above we obtain



Inverse transform in terms of flip operator
For any function 
 
 
 
  define the flip operator1

 
  by



Then we may instead define



It is immediate from the definition of the Fourier transform and the flip operator that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  match the integral definition of 
 
 
 
 , and in particular are equal to each other and satisfy 
 
 
 
 .
Two sided inverse
The form of the Fourier inversion theorem stated above, as is common, is that



In other words, 
 
 
 
  is a left inverse for the Fourier transform. However it is also a right inverse for the Fourier transform i.e.



Since 
 
 
 
  is so similar to 
 
 
 
 , this follows very easily from the Fourier inversion theorem (changing variables 
 
 
 
 ):



Alternatively, this can be seen from the relation between 
 
 
 
  and the flip operator and the associativity of function composition, since



Conditions on the function
When used in physics and engineering, the Fourier inversion theorem is often used under the assumption that everything "behaves nicely". In mathematics such heuristic arguments are not permitted, and the Fourier inversion theorem includes an explicit specification of what class of functions is being allowed. However, there is no "best" class of functions to consider so several variants of the Fourier inversion theorem exist, albeit with compatible conclusions.
Schwartz functions
The Fourier inversion theorem holds for all Schwartz functions (roughly speaking, smooth functions that decay quickly and whose derivatives all decay quickly). This condition has the benefit that it is an elementary direct statement about the function (as opposed to imposing a condition on its Fourier transform), and the integral that defines the Fourier transform and its inverse are absolutely integrable. This version of the theorem is used in the proof of the Fourier inversion theorem for tempered distributions (see below).
Integrable functions with integrable Fourier transform
The Fourier inversion theorem holds for all continuous functions that are absolutely integrable (i.e. ) with absolutely integrable Fourier transform. This includes all Schwartz functions, so is a strictly stronger form of the theorem than the previous one mentioned. These conditions have the benefit that the integrals that define the Fourier transform and its inverse are absolutely integrable. This condition is the one used above in the statement section.
A slight variant is to drop the condition that the function 
 
 
 
  be continuous but still require that it and its Fourier transform are absolutely integrable. Then 
 
 
almost everywhere where 
 
 
 
  is a continuous function, and 
 
 
 
  for every .
Integrable functions in one dimension

Piecewise smooth; one dimension

If the function is absolutely integrable in one dimension (i.e. ) and is piecewise smooth then a version of the Fourier inversion theorem holds. In this case we define



Then for all 
 
 




i.e. 
 
 
 
  equals the average of the left and right limits of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 . Note that at points where 
 
 
 
  is continuous this simply equals 
 
 
 
 .
A higher-dimensional analogue of this form of the theorem also holds, but according to Folland (1992) is "rather delicate and not terribly useful".

Piecewise continuous; one dimension

If the function is absolutely integrable in one dimension (i.e. ) but merely piecewise continuous then a version of the Fourier inversion theorem still holds. In this case the integral in the inverse Fourier transform is defined with the aid of a smooth rather than a sharp cut off function; specifically we define



The conclusion of the theorem is then the same as for the piecewise smooth case discussed above.

Continuous; any number of dimensions

If 
 
 
 
  is continuous and absolutely integrable on  then the Fourier inversion theorem still holds so long as we again define the inverse transform with a smooth cut off function i.e.



The conclusion is now simply that for all 




No regularity condition; any number of dimensions

If we drop all assumptions about the (piecewise) continuity of 
 
 
 
  and assume merely that it is absolutely integrable, then a version of the theorem still holds. The inverse transform is again be define the smooth cut off, but with the conclusion that



for almost every

 
 .
Square integrable functions
In this case the Fourier transform cannot be defined directly as an integral since the it may not be absolutely convergent, so it is instead defined by a density argument (see the Fourier transform article). For example, putting


 
  we can set 
 
 
 
  where the limit is taken in the  norm. The inverse transform may be defined by density in the same way or by defining it terms of the Fourier transform and the flip operator. We then have



for almost every

 
 .
Tempered distributions
The Fourier transform may be defined on the space of tempered distributions

 
  by duality of the Fourier transform on the space of Schwartz functions. Specifically for 
 
 
 
  and for all test functions 
 
 
 
  we set


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is defined using the integral formula. If 
 
 
 
  is a function in  then this agrees with the usual definition. We may define the inverse transform 
 
 
 
 , either by duality from the inverse transform on Schwartz functions in the same way, or by defining it in terms of the flip operator (where the flip operator is defined by duality). We then have



Relation to Fourier series

''When considering the Fourier series of a function it is conventional to rescale it so that it acts on 

 (or is 

 periodic). In this section we instead use the somewhat unusual convention taking 

 to act on 

, since that matches the convention of the Fourier transform used here.''
 

The Fourier inversion theorem is analogous to the convergence of Fourier series. In the Fourier transform case we have








 
  In the Fourier series case we instead have









In particular, in one dimension 
 
 
 
  is simply an integer and the sum runs from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
(Figure)
Some problems, such as certain differential equations, become easier to solve when the Fourier transform is applied. In that case the solution to the original problem is recovered using the inverse Fourier transform.

In applications of the Fourier transform the Fourier inversion theorem often plays a critical role. In many situations the basic strategy is to apply the Fourier transform, perform some operation or simplification, and then apply the inverse Fourier transform.
More abstractly, the Fourier inversion theorem is a statement about the Fourier transform as an operator (see Fourier transform on function spaces). For example, the Fourier inversion theorem on  shows that the Fourier transform is a unitary operator on .
Properties of inverse transform
The inverse Fourier transform is extremely similar to the original Fourier transform: as discussed above, it differs only in the application of a flip operator. For this reason the properties of the Fourier transform hold for the inverse Fourier transform, such as the Convolution theorem and the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma.
Tables of Fourier transforms may easily be used for the inverse Fourier transform by composing the looked-up function with the flip operator. For example, looking up the Fourier transform of the rect function we see that



so the corresponding fact for the inverse transform is



Proof
The proof uses a few facts.

If  and , then 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .
For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in , Fubini's theorem implies that 
 
 
 
 .
Define x{{!}}2}}; then 
 
 

Define . Then with 
 
 
 
  denoting convolution,  is an approximation to the identity: for any continuous  and point ,  (where the convergence is pointwise).

First note that, since, by assumption, 
 
 
 
 , then it follows by the dominated convergence theorem that



Define ξ{{!}}2+2πix⋅ξ}}. Applying facts 1, 2 and 4 from we obtain



Using fact 3 from above on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we thus have



the convolution of 
 
 
 
  with an approximate identity. But since  fact 5 says that



Putting together the above we have shown that



Notes
References




"
Category:Generalized functions Category:Theorems in Fourier analysis



An operator is a transformation that maps functions to functions. The flip operator, the Fourier transform, the inverse Fourier transform and the identity transform are all examples of operators.↩




