


Ramification (mathematics)




Ramification (mathematics)

 In geometry, ramification is 'branching out', in the way that the square root function, for complex numbers, can be seen to have two branches differing in sign. The term is also used from the opposite perspective (branches coming together) as when a covering map degenerates at a point of a space, with some collapsing together of the fibers of the mapping.
In complex analysis
In complex analysis, the basic model can be taken as the z

zn mapping in the complex plane, near z = 0. This is the standard local picture in Riemann surface theory, of ramification of order n. It occurs for example in the Riemann–Hurwitz formula for the effect of mappings on the genus. See also branch point.
In algebraic topology
In a covering map the Euler-Poincaré characteristic should multiply by the number of sheets; ramification can therefore be detected by some dropping from that. The z

zn mapping shows this as a local pattern: if we exclude 0, looking at 0 \mathbb{Q} ===

See also Splitting of prime ideals in Galois extensions


Ramification in algebraic number theory means prime numbers factoring into some repeated prime ideal factors. Let R be the ring of integers of an algebraic number field K and P a prime ideal of R. For each extension field L of K we can consider the integral closure S of R in L and the ideal PS of S. This may or may not be prime, but assuming [L:K] is finite it is a product of prime ideals

P1e(1) ... Pke(k)


where the Pi are distinct prime ideals of S. Then P is said to ramify in L if e(i) > 1 for some i. If for all i e(i) = 1 it is said to be . In other words, P ramifies in L if the ramification index e(i) is greater than one for some Pi. An equivalent condition is that S/PS has a non-zero nilpotent element: it is not a product of finite fields. The analogy with the Riemann surface case was already pointed out by Richard Dedekind and Heinrich M. Weber in the nineteenth century.
The ramification is encoded in K by the relative discriminant and in L by the relative different. The former is an ideal of the ring of integers of K and is divisible by P if and only if some ideal Pi of S dividing P is ramified. The latter is an ideal of the ring of integers of L and is divisible by the prime ideal Pi of S precisely when Pi is ramified.
The ramification is tame when the ramification indices e(i) are all relatively prime to the residue characteristic p of P, otherwise wild. This condition is important in Galois module theory. A finite generically étale extension 
 
 
 
  of Dedekind domains is tame iff the trace 
 
 
 
 
  is surjective.
In local fields
The more detailed analysis of ramification in number fields can be carried out using extensions of the p-adic numbers, because it is a local question. In that case a quantitative measure of ramification is defined for Galois extensions, basically by asking how far the Galois group moves field elements with respect to the metric. A sequence of ramification groups is defined, reifying (amongst other things) wild (non-tame) ramification. This goes beyond the geometric analogue.
In algebra
In valuation theory, the ramification theory of valuations studies the set of extensions of a valuation of a field K to an extension field of K. This generalizes the notions in algebraic number theory, local fields, and Dedekind domains.
In algebraic geometry
There is also corresponding notion of unramified morphism in algebraic geometry. It serves to define étale morphisms.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a morphism of schemes. The support of the quasicoherent sheaf 
 
 
 
  is called the ramification locus of 
 
 
 
  and the image of the ramification locus, 
 
 
 
 , is called the branch locus of 
 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  we say that 
 
 
 
  is formally unramified and if 
 
 
 
  is also of locally finite presentation we say that 
 
 
 
  is unramified [see Vakil's notes].
See also

Eisenstein polynomial
Newton polygon
Puiseux expansion
Branched covering

References


Vakil, Ravi, "Foundations of Algebraic Geometry", Lecture Notes, http://math.stanford.edu/~vakil/216blog/

External links



"
Category:Algebraic number theory Category:Algebraic topology Category:Complex analysis


