


Eisenstein's criterion




Eisenstein's criterion

In mathematics, Eisenstein's criterion gives a sufficient condition for a polynomial with integer coefficients to be irreducible over the rational numbers—that is, for it to be unfactorable into the product of non-constant polynomials with rational coefficients.
This criterion is not applicable to all polynomials with integer coefficients that are irreducible over the rational numbers, but it does allow in certain important cases to prove irreducibility with very little effort. It may apply either directly or after transformation of the original polynomial.
This criterion is named after Gotthold Eisenstein. In the early 20th century, it was also known as the Schönemann–Eisenstein theorem because Theodor Schönemann was the first to publish it.12
Criterion
Suppose we have the following polynomial with integer coefficients.



If there exists a prime number

 
  such that the following three conditions all apply:



 
  divides each  for 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  does not divide , and
 does not divide ,

then 
 
 
 
  is irreducible over the rational numbers. It will also be irreducible over the integers, unless all its coefficients have a nontrivial factor in common (in which case 
 
 
 
  as integer polynomial will have some prime number, necessarily distinct from 
 
 
 
 , as an irreducible factor). The latter possibility can be avoided by first making 
 
 
primitive, by dividing it by the greatest common divisor of its coefficients (the content of 
 
 
 
 ). This division does not change whether 
 
 
 
  is reducible or not over the rational numbers (see Primitive part–content factorization for details), and will not invalidate the hypotheses of the criterion for 
 
 
 
  (on the contrary it could make the criterion hold for some prime, even if it did not before the division).
Examples
Eisenstein's criterion may apply either directly (i.e., using the original polynomial) or after transformation of the original polynomial.
Direct (without transformation)
Consider the polynomial  3x4 + 15x2 + 10}}. In order for Eisenstein's criterion to apply for a prime number 
 
 
 
  it must divide both non-leading coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , which means only 
 
 
 
  could work, and indeed it does since 
 
 
 
  does not divide the leading coefficient 
 
 
 
 , and its square 
 
 
 
  does not divide the constant coefficient 
 
 
 
 . One may therefore conclude that 
 
 
 
  is irreducible over 
 
 
 
  (and since it is primitive, over 
 
 
 
  as well). Note that since 
 
 
 
  is of degree 4, this conclusion could not have been established by only checking that 
 
 
 
  has no rational roots (which eliminates possible factors of degree 1), since a decomposition into two quadratic factors could also be possible.
Indirect (after transformation)
Often Eisenstein's criterion does not apply for any prime number. It may however be that it applies (for some prime number) to the polynomial obtained after substitution (for some integer 
 
 
 
 ) of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . The fact that the polynomial after substitution is irreducible then allows concluding that the original polynomial is as well. This procedure is known as applying a shift.
For example consider  x2 + x + 2}}, in which the coefficient 1 of 
 
 
 
  is not divisible by any prime, Eisenstein's criterion does not apply to 
 
 
 
 . But if one substitutes 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , one obtains the polynomial , which satisfies Eisenstein's criterion for the prime number 
 
 
 
 . Since the substitution is an automorphism of the ring 
 
 
 
 , the fact that we obtain an irreducible polynomial after substitution implies that we had an irreducible polynomial originally. In this particular example it would have been simpler to argue that 
 
 
 
  (being monic of degree 2) could only be reducible if it had an integer root, which it obviously does not; however the general principle of trying substitutions in order to make Eisenstein's criterion apply is a useful way to broaden its scope.
Another possibility to transform a polynomial so as to satisfy the criterion, which may be combined with applying a shift, is reversing the order of its coefficients, provided its constant term is nonzero (without which it would be divisible by 
 
 
 
  anyway). This is so because such polynomials are reducible in 
 
 
 
  if and only if they are reducible in  (for any integral domain 
 
 
 
 ), and in that ring the substitution of  for 
 
 
 
  reverses the order of the coefficients (in a manner symmetric about the constant coefficient, but a following shift in the exponent amounts to multiplication by a unit). As an example  satisfies the criterion for 
 
 
 
  after reversing its coefficients, and (being primitive) is therefore irreducible in 
 
 
 
 .
Cyclotomic polynomials
An important class of polynomials whose irreducibility can be established using Eisenstein's criterion is that of the cyclotomic polynomials for prime numbers 
 
 
 
 . Such a polynomial is obtained by dividing the polynomial  by the linear factor 
 
 
 
 , corresponding to its obvious root 
 
 
 
  (which is its only rational root if 
 
 
 
 ):



Here, as in the earlier example of 
 
 
 
 , the coefficients 
 
 
 
  prevent Eisenstein's criterion from applying directly. However the polynomial will satisfy the criterion for 
 
 
 
  after substitution of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 : this gives



all of whose non-leading coefficients are divisible by 
 
 
 
  by properties of binomial coefficients, and whose constant coefficient equal to 
 
 
 
 , and therefore not divisible by . An alternative way to arrive at this conclusion is to use the identity  ap + bp}} which is valid in characteristic

 
  (and which is based on the same properties of binomial coefficients, and gives rise to the Frobenius endomorphism), to compute the reduction modulo 
 
 
 
  of the quotient of polynomials:



which means that the non-leading coefficients of the quotient are all divisible by 
 
 
 
 ; the remaining verification that the constant term of the quotient is 
 
 
 
  can be done by substituting 
 
 
 
  (instead of 
 
 
 
 ) for 
 
 
 
  into the expanded form .
History
Theodor Schönemann was the first to publish a version of the criterion,3 in 1846 in Crelle's Journal,4 which reads in translation

That  will be irreducible to the modulus  when 
 
 
 
  to the modulus 
 
 
 
  does not contain a factor 
 
 
 
 .

This formulation already incorporates a shift to 
 
 
 
  in place of 
 
 
 
 ; the condition on 
 
 
 
  means that 
 
 
 
  is not divisible by 
 
 
 
 , and so 
 
 
 
  is divisible by 
 
 
 
  but not by . As stated it is not entirely correct in that it makes no assumptions on the degree of the polynomial 
 
 
 
 , so that the polynomial considered need not be of the degree 
 
 
 
  that its expression suggests; the example , shows the conclusion is not valid without such hypothesis. Assuming that the degree of 
 
 
 
  does not exceed 
 
 
 
 , the criterion is correct however, and somewhat stronger than the formulation given above, since if  is irreducible modulo , it certainly cannot decompose in 
 
 
 
  into non-constant factors.
Subsequently Eisenstein published a somewhat different version in 1850, also in Crelle's Journal.5 This version reads in translation

When in a polynomial 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  of arbitrary degree the coefficient of the highest term is 
 
 
 
 , and all following coefficients are whole (real, complex) numbers, into which a certain (real resp. complex) prime number 
 
 
 
  divides, and when furthermore the last coefficient is equal to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes a number not divisible by 
 
 
 
 : then it is impossible to bring 
 
 
 
  into the form



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are whole (real resp. complex) numbers; the equation 
 
 
 
  is therefore irreducible.

Here "whole real numbers" are ordinary integers and "whole complex numbers" are Gaussian integers; one should similarly interpret "real and complex prime numbers". The application for which Eisenstein developed his criterion was establishing the irreducibility of certain polynomials with coefficients in the Gaussian integers that arise in the study of the division of the lemniscate into pieces of equal arc-length.
Remarkably Schönemann and Eisenstein, once having formulated their respective criteria for irreducibility, both immediately apply it to give an elementary proof of the irreducibility of the cyclotomic polynomials for prime numbers, a result that Gauss had obtained in his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae with a much more complicated proof. In fact, Eisenstein adds in a footnote that the only proof for this irreducibility known to him, other than that of Gauss, is one given by Kronecker in 1845. This shows that he was unaware of the two different proofs of this statement that Schönemann had given in his 1846 article, where the second proof was based on the above-mentioned criterion. This is all the more surprising given the fact that two pages further, Eisenstein actually refers (for a different matter) to the first part of Schönemann's article. In a note ("Notiz") that appeared in the following issue of the Journal,6 Schönemann points this out to Eisenstein, and indicates that the latter's method is not essentially different from the one he used in the second proof.
Basic proof
To prove the validity of the criterion, suppose 
 
 
 
  satisfies the criterion for the prime number 
 
 
 
 , but that it is nevertheless reducible in 
 
 
 
 , from which we wish to obtain a contradiction. From Gauss' lemma it follows that 
 
 
 
  is reducible in 
 
 
 
  as well, and in fact can be written as the product 
 
 
 
  of two non-constant polynomials 
 
 
 
  (in case 
 
 
 
  is not primitive, one applies the lemma to the primitive polynomial 
 
 
 
  (where the integer 
 
 
 
  is the content of 
 
 
 
 ) to obtain a decomposition for it, and multiplies 
 
 
 
  into one of the factors to obtain a decomposition for 
 
 
 
 ). Now reduce 
 
 
 
  modulo 
 
 
 
  to obtain a decomposition in 
 
 
 
 . But by hypothesis this reduction for 
 
 
 
  leaves its leading term, of the form  for a non-zero constant 
 
 
 
 , as the only nonzero term. But then necessarily the reductions modulo 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  also make all non-leading terms vanish (and cannot make their leading terms vanish), since no other decompositions of  are possible in 
 
 
 
 , which is a unique factorization domain. In particular the constant terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  vanish in the reduction, so they are divisible by 
 
 
 
 , but then the constant term of 
 
 
 
 , which is their product, is divisible by , contrary to the hypothesis, and one has a contradiction.
Advanced explanation
Applying the theory of the Newton polygon for the 

 
 -adic number field, for an Eisenstein polynomial, we are supposed to take the lower convex envelope of the points

,
 

where  is the 

 
 -adic valuation of  (i.e. the highest power of 
 
 
 
  dividing it). Now the data we are given on the  for 
 
 

This tells us that each root of 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
 -adic valuation 
 
 
 
  and hence that 
 
 
 
  is irreducible over the 
 
 
 
 -adic field (since, for instance, no product of any proper subset of the roots has integer valuation); and a fortiori over the rational number field.
This argument is much more complicated than the direct argument by reduction mod 
 
 
 
 . It does however allow one to see, in terms of algebraic number theory, how frequently Eisenstein's criterion might apply, after some change of variable; and so limit severely the possible choices of 
 
 
 
  with respect to which the polynomial could have an Eisenstein translate (that is, become Eisenstein after an additive change of variables as in the case of the 
 
 
 
 -th cyclotomic polynomial).
In fact only primes 
 
 
ramifying in the extension of 
 
 
 
  generated by a root of 
 
 
 
  have any chance of working. These can be found in terms of the discriminant of 
 
 
 
 . For example, in the case  given above, the discriminant is 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is the only prime that has a chance of making it satisfy the criterion. Modulo 
 
 
 
 , it becomes — a repeated root is inevitable, since the discriminant is 
 
 
 
 . Therefore the variable shift is actually something predictable.
Again, for the cyclotomic polynomial, it becomes

;
 

the discriminant can be shown to be (up to sign) , by linear algebra methods.
More precisely, only totally ramified primes have a chance of being Eisenstein primes for the polynomial. (In quadratic fields, ramification is always total, so the distinction is not seen in the quadratic case like  above.) In fact, Eisenstein polynomials are directly linked to totally ramified primes, as follows: if a field extension of the rationals is generated by the root of a polynomial that is Eisenstein at 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is totally ramified in the extension, and conversely if 
 
 
 
  is totally ramified in a number field then the field is generated by the root of an Eisenstein polynomial at 
 
 
 
 .
Generalization
Generalized criterion
Given an integral domain

 
 , let



be an element of 
 
 
 
 , the polynomial ring with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose there exists a prime ideal

 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that

 for each 
 
 
 
 ,
, and
, where  is the ideal product of 
 
 
 
  with itself.

Then 
 
 
 
  cannot be written as a product of two non-constant polynomials in 
 
 
 
 . If in addition 
 
 
 
  is primitive (i.e., it has no non-trivial constant divisors), then it is irreducible in 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a unique factorization domain with field of fractions

 
 , then by Gauss's lemma

 
  is irreducible in 
 
 
 
 , whether or not it is primitive (since constant factors are invertible in 
 
 
 
 ); in this case a possible choice of prime ideal is the principal ideal generated by any irreducible element of 
 
 
 
 . The latter statement gives original theorem for 
 
 
 
  or (in Eisenstein's formulation) for 
 
 
 
 .
Proof
The proof of this generalization is similar to the one for the original statement, considering the reduction of the coefficients modulo 
 
 
 
 ; the essential point is that a single-term polynomial over the integral domain 
 
 
 
  cannot decompose as a product in which at least one of the factors has more than one term (because in such a product there can be no cancellation in the coefficient either of the highest or the lowest possible degree).
Example
After 
 
 
 
 , one of the basic examples of an integral domain is the polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  in the variable 
 
 
 
  over the field 
 
 
 
 . In this case, the principal ideal generated by 
 
 
 
  is a prime ideal. Eisenstein's criterion can then be used to prove the irreducibility of a polynomial such as  x3 + ux + u}} in 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, 
 
 
 
  does not divide ,  does not divide , and 
 
 
 
  divides  and . This shows that this polynomial satisfies the hypotheses of the generalization of Eisenstein's criterion for the prime ideal 
 
 
 
  since, for a principal ideal 
 
 
 
 , being an element of 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to being divisible by 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Cohn's irreducibility criterion

Notes
References


.



.



.



.



.



.



.

"
Category:Polynomials Category:Field theory Category:Articles containing proofs




.↩
.↩
.↩
.↩
.↩




