


Irreducible representation




Irreducible representation

In mathematics, specifically in the representation theory of groups and algebras, an irreducible representation

 
  or irrep of an algebraic structure 
 
 
 
 
  is a nonzero representation that has no proper subrepresentation 
 
 
 
  closed under the action of 
 
 
 
 .
Every finite-dimensional unitary representation on a Hermitian vector space 
 
 
 
  is the direct sum of irreducible representations. As irreducible representations are always indecomposable (i.e. cannot be decomposed further into a direct sum of representations), these terms are often confused; however, in general there are many reducible but indecomposable representations, such as the two-dimensional representation of the real numbers acting by upper triangular unipotent matrices.
History
Group representation theory was generalized by Richard Brauer from the 1940s to give modular representation theory, in which the matrix operators act over a field

 
  of arbitrary characteristic, rather than a vector of real or complex numbers. The structure analogous to an irreducible representation in the resulting theory is a simple module.
Overview
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a representation i.e. a homomorphism 
 
 
 
  of a group 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a vector space over a field

 
 . If we pick a basis 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  can be thought of as a function (a homomorphism) from a group into a set of invertible matrices and in this context is called a matrix representation. However, it simplifies things greatly if we think of the space 
 
 
 
  without a basis.
A linear subspace

 
  is called 

 
 
 -invariant if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
 . The restriction of 
 
 
 
  to a 
 
 
 
 
 -invariant subspace 
 
 
 
  is known as a subrepresentation. A representation 
 
 
 
  is said to be irreducible if it has only trivial subrepresentations (all representations can form a subrepresentation with the trivial 
 
 
 
 -invariant subspaces, e.g. the whole vector space 
 
 
 
 , and {0}). If there is a proper non-trivial invariant subspace, 
 
 
 
 
  is said to be reducible.
Notation and terminology of group representations
Group elements can be represented by matrices, although the term "represented" has a specific and precise meaning in this context. A representation of a group is a mapping from the group elements to the general linear group of matrices. As notation, let 
 
 
 
  denote elements of a group 
 
 
 
  with group product signified without any symbol, so 
 
 
 
  is the group product of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  and is also an element of 
 
 
 
 , and let representations be indicated by 
 
 
 
 . The representation of a is written



By definition of group representations, the representation of a group product is translated into matrix multiplication of the representations:



If 
 
 
 
  is the identity element of the group (so that 
 
 
 
 , etc.), then 
 
 
 
  is an identity matrix, or identically a block matrix of identity matrices, since we must have



and similarly for all other group elements.
Decomposable and Indecomposable representations
A representation is decomposable if a similar matrix

 
 
  can be found for the similarity transformation:1



which diagonalizes every matrix in the representation into the same pattern of diagonal blocks – each of the blocks are representation of the group independent of each other. The representations 
 
 
 
  and  are said to be equivalent representations.2 The representation can be decomposed into a direct sum of k matrices:



so 
 
 
 
 
  is decomposable, and it is customary to label the decomposed matrices by a superscript in brackets, as in  for 
 
 
 
 , although some authors just write the numerical label without brackets.
The dimension of 
 
 
 
  is the sum of the dimensions of the blocks:



If this is not possible, then the representation is indecomposable.34
Applications in theoretical physics and chemistry
In quantum physics and quantum chemistry, each set of degenerate eigenstates of the Hamiltonian operator makes up a representation of the symmetry group of the Hamiltonian, that barring accidental degeneracies will correspond to an irreducible representation. Identifying the irreducible representations therefore allows one to label the states, predict how they will split under perturbations; and predict non-zero transition elements.
In quantum mechanics, irreducible representations of the symmetry group of the system label the energy levels of the system, allowing the selection rules to be determined.5
Lie groups
Lorentz group
The irreps of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the generator of rotations and 
 
 
 
  the generator of boosts, can be used to build to spin representations of the Lorentz group, because they are related to the spin matrices of quantum mechanics. This allows them to derive relativistic wave equations.6
See also
Associative algebras

Simple module
Indecomposable module
Representation of an associative algebra

Lie groups

Representation theory of Lie algebras
Representation theory of SU(2)
Representation theory of SL2(R)
Representation theory of the Galilean group
Representation theory of diffeomorphism groups
Representation theory of the Poincaré group

References
Books



























Papers




Further reading



External links

(2010) Commission on Mathematical and Theoretical Crystallography, Summer Schools on Mathematical Crystallography
Some notes on group theory
Representation Theory
Some Notes on Young Tableaux as useful for irreps of su(n)
Irreducible Representation (IR) Symmetry Labels
Representations of Lorentz Group
Representations of Lorentz and Poincaré groups
Quantum Mechanics for Mathematicians: Representations of the Lorentz Group
Representations of the Symmetry Group of Spacetime
Lie Algebra for the Poincaré, and Lorentz, Groups
The unitary representations of the Poincaré group in any spacetime dimension


"
Category:Group theory Category:Representation theory Category:Theoretical physics Category:Theoretical chemistry Category:Symmetry



↩
↩

↩
↩
↩




