


Mellin transform




Mellin transform

In mathematics, the Mellin transform is an integral transform that may be regarded as the multiplicative version of the two-sided Laplace transform. This integral transform is closely connected to the theory of Dirichlet series, and is often used in number theory, mathematical statistics, and the theory of asymptotic expansions; it is closely related to the Laplace transform and the Fourier transform, and the theory of the gamma function and allied special functions.
The Mellin transform of a function f is



The inverse transform is



The notation implies this is a line integral taken over a vertical line in the complex plane. Conditions under which this inversion is valid are given in the Mellin inversion theorem.
The transform is named after the Finnish mathematician Hjalmar Mellin.
Relationship to other transforms
The two-sided Laplace transform may be defined in terms of the Mellin transform by


 
  and conversely we can get the Mellin transform from the two-sided Laplace transform by



The Mellin transform may be thought of as integrating using a kernel xs with respect to the multiplicative Haar measure, 
 
 
 
 , which is invariant under dilation 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  the two-sided Laplace transform integrates with respect to the additive Haar measure 
 
 
 
 , which is translation invariant, so that 
 
 
 
 .
We also may define the Fourier transform in terms of the Mellin transform and vice versa; if we define the two-sided Laplace transform as above, then



We may also reverse the process and obtain



The Mellin transform also connects the Newton series or binomial transform together with the Poisson generating function, by means of the Poisson–Mellin–Newton cycle.
Examples
Cahen–Mellin integral
For 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on the principal branch, one has



where 
 
 
 
  is the gamma function. This integral is known as the Cahen-Mellin integral.1
Number theory
An important application in number theory includes the simple function 
 
 
 
  for which


 
  assuming 
 
 

As an isometry on L2 spaces
In the study of Hilbert spaces, the Mellin transform is often posed in a slightly different way. For functions in 
 
 
 
 
  (see Lp space) the fundamental strip always includes 
 
 
 
 , so we may define a linear operator

 
  as



In other words we have set



This operator is usually denoted by just plain 
 
 
 
 
  and called the "Mellin transform", but 
 
 
 
  is used here to distinguish from the definition used elsewhere in this article. The Mellin inversion theorem then shows that 
 
 
 
  is invertible with inverse



Furthermore this operator is an isometry, that is to say 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 
  (this explains why the factor of 
 
 
 
  was used).
In probability theory
In probability theory, the Mellin transform is an essential tool in studying the distributions of products of random variables.2 If X is a random variable, and } denotes its positive part, while } is its negative part, then the Mellin transform of X is defined as 3


 
  where γ is a formal indeterminate with  1}}. This transform exists for all s in some complex strip }, where .4
The Mellin transform 
 
 
 
  of a random variable X uniquely determines its distribution function FX.5 The importance of the Mellin transform in probability theory lies in the fact that if X and Y are two independent random variables, then the Mellin transform of their products is equal to the product of the Mellin transforms of X and Y:6



Problems with Laplacian in cylindrical coordinate system
In the Laplacian in cylindrical coordinates in a generic dimension (orthogonal coordinates with one angle and one radius, and the remaining lengths) there is always a term:



For example in 2-D polar coordinates the laplacian is:



and in 3-D cylindrical coordinates the laplacian is,



This term can be easily treated with the Mellin transform,7 since:



For example the 2-D Laplace equation in polar coordinates is the PDE in two variables:



and by multiplication:



with a Mellin transform on radius becomes the simple harmonic oscillator:



with general solution:



Now let's impose for example some simple wedge boundary conditions to the original Laplace equation:



these are particularly simple for Mellin transform, becoming:


 
 .
These conditions imposed to the solution particularise it to:



Now by the convolution theorem for Mellin transform, the solution in the Mellin domain can be inverted:



where the following inverse transform relation was employed:



where 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
The Mellin Transform is widely used in computer science for the analysis of algorithms because of its scale invariance property. The magnitude of the Mellin Transform of a scaled function is identical to the magnitude of the original function. This scale invariance property is analogous to the Fourier Transform's shift invariance property. The magnitude of a Fourier transform of a time-shifted function is identical to the magnitude of the Fourier transform of the original function.
This property is useful in image recognition. An image of an object is easily scaled when the object is moved towards or away from the camera.
Examples

Perron's formula describes the inverse Mellin transform applied to a Dirichlet series.
The Mellin transform is used in analysis of the prime-counting function and occurs in discussions of the Riemann zeta function.
Inverse Mellin transforms commonly occur in Riesz means.
The Mellin transform can be used in Audio timescale-pitch modification (needs substantive reference).

See also

Mellin inversion theorem
Perron's formula

Notes


References





Tables of Integral Transforms at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.



External links

Philippe Flajolet, Xavier Gourdon, Philippe Dumas, Mellin Transforms and Asymptotics: Harmonic sums.
Antonio Gonzáles, Marko Riedel Celebrando un clásico, newsgroup es.ciencia.matematicas
Juan Sacerdoti, Funciones Eulerianas (in Spanish).
Mellin Transform Methods, Digital Library of Mathematical Functions, 2011-08-29, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Antonio De Sena and Davide Rocchesso, A FAST MELLIN TRANSFORM WITH APPLICATIONS IN DAFX

"
Category:Complex analysis Category:Integral transforms



 (See notes therein for further references to Cahen's and Mellin's work, including Cahen's thesis.)





Bhimsen, Shivamoggi, Chapter 6: The Mellin Transform, par. 4.3: Distribution of a Potential in a Wedge, p. 267-8




