


Kähler manifold




Kähler manifold

In mathematics and especially differential geometry, a Kähler manifold is a manifold with three mutually compatible structures; a complex structure, a Riemannian structure, and a symplectic structure. On a Kähler manifold X there exists Kähler potential and the Levi-Civita connection corresponding to the metric of X gives rise to a connection on the canonical line bundle.
Smooth projective algebraic varieties are examples of Kähler manifolds. By Kodaira embedding theorem, Kähler manifolds that have a positive line bundle can always be embedded into projective spaces.
They are named after German mathematician Erich Kähler.
Definitions
Since Kähler manifolds are naturally equipped with several compatible structures, there are many equivalent ways of creating Kähler forms.
Symplectic viewpoint
A Kähler manifold is a symplectic manifold

 
  equipped with an integrable almost-complex structure which is compatible with the symplectic form.1
Complex viewpoint
A Kähler manifold is a Hermitian manifold whose associated Hermitian form is closed. The closed Hermitian form is called the Kähler metric.
Equivalence of definitions
Every Hermitian manifold 
 
 
 
  is a complex manifold which comes naturally equipped with a Hermitian form 
 
 
 
  and an integrable, almost complex structure

 
 . Assuming that 
 
 
 
  is closed, there is a canonical symplectic form defined as 
 
 
 
  which is compatible with 
 
 
 
 , hence satisfying the first definition.
On the other hand, any symplectic form compatible with an almost complex structure must be a complex differential form of type 
 
 
 
 , written in a coordinate chart 
 
 
 
  as


 
  for 
 
 
 
 . The added assertions that 
 
 
 
  be real-valued, closed, and non-degenerate guarantee that the 
 
 
 
  define Hermitian forms at each point in 
 
 
 
 .2
Connection between Hermitian and symplectic definitions
Let 
 
 
 
  be the Hermitian form, 
 
 
 
  the symplectic form, and 
 
 
 
  the almost complex structure. Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are compatible, the new form 
 
 
 
  is Riemannian.3 One may then summarize the connection between these structures via the identity 
 
 
 
 .
Kähler potentials
If 
 
 
 
  is a complex manifold, it can be shown4 that every strictly plurisubharmonic function

 
  gives rise to a Kähler form as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the Dolbeault operators. The function 
 
 
 
  is said to be a Kähler potential.
In fact, utilizing the holomorphic version of the Poincaré lemma, a partial converse holds true locally. More specifically, if 
 
 
 
  is a Kähler manifold then about every point 
 
 
 
  there is a neighbourhood 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
  and a function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and here 
 
 
 
  is termed a (local) Kähler potential.
Ricci tensor and Kähler manifolds

see Kähler manifolds in Ricci tensor.
 

The Laplacians on Kähler manifolds
On any Riemannian manifold we can define the Laplacian as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the exterior derivative and 
 
 
 
 , with the Hodge operator

 
  (alternatively, 
 
 
 
  is the adjoint of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the 
 
 
 
  scalar product). Furthermore if X is Kähler then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are decomposed as



and we can define two other Laplacians



that satisfy



From these facts we obtain the Hodge decomposition (see Hodge theory)



where 
 
 
 
  is r-degree harmonic form and 
 
 
 
  is {p,q}-degree harmonic form on X. Namely, a differential form 
 
 
 
  is harmonic if and only if each 
 
 
 
  belong to the {i,j}-degree harmonic form.
Further, if X is compact then we obtain


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -harmonic cohomology group. This means that if 
 
 
 
  is a differential form with {p,q}-degree there is only one element in {p,q}-harmonic form due to Dolbeault theorem.
Let 
 
 
 
 , called Hodge number, then we obtain


 
  The LHS of the first identity, br, is r-th Betti number, the second identity comes from that since the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  is a real operator 
 
 
 
  and the third identity comes from Serre duality.
Applications
On a Kähler manifold, the associated Kähler form and metric are called Kähler–Einstein (or sometimes Einstein–Kähler) if its Ricci tensor is proportional to the metric tensor, 
 
 
 
 , for some constant λ. This name is a reminder of Einstein's considerations about the cosmological constant. See the article on Einstein manifolds for more details.
Originally the Kähler condition is independent on the Einstein condition, in which Ricci tensor is proportional to Riemannian metric with constant real number. The important point is that if X is Kähler then Christoffel symbols

 
  vanish and Ricci curvature is much simplified. The Kähler condition, therefore, is closely related with Ricci curvature. In fact Aubin and Yau proved the Calabi conjecture using the fact that on a compact Kähler manifold with the first Chern class c1=0 there is a unique Ricci-flat Kähler metric in each Kähler class. But in non-compact case the situation turns to be more complicated and the final solution might not be reached.
Examples

Complex Euclidean space Cn with the standard Hermitian metric is a Kähler manifold.
A torus Cn/Λ (Λ a full lattice) inherits a flat metric from the Euclidean metric on Cn, and is therefore a compact Kähler manifold.
Every Riemannian metric on a Riemann surface is Kähler, since the condition for ω to be closed is trivial in 2 (real) dimensions.
Complex projective space CPn admits a homogeneous Kähler metric, the Fubini–Study metric. An Hermitian form in (the vector space) Cn + 1 defines a unitary subgroup U(n + 1) in GL(n + 1,C); a Fubini–Study metric is determined up to homothety (overall scaling) by invariance under such a U(n + 1) action. By elementary linear algebra, any two Fubini–Study metrics are isometric under a projective automorphism of CPn, so it is common to speak of "the" Fubini–Study metric.
The induced metric on a complex submanifold of a Kähler manifold is Kähler. In particular, any Stein manifold (embedded in Cn) or projective algebraic variety (embedded in CPn) is of Kähler type. This is fundamental to their analytic theory.
The unit complex ball Bn admits a Kähler metric called the Bergman metric which has constant holomorphic sectional curvature.
Every K3 surface is Kähler (by a theorem of Y.-T. Siu).

An important subclass of Kähler manifolds are Calabi–Yau manifolds.
See also

Hermitian manifold
Almost complex manifold
Hyper-Kähler manifold
Kähler–Einstein metric
Quaternion-Kähler manifold
Complex Poisson manifold
Einstein manifold
Calabi conjecture

References






Alan Huckleberry and Tilman Wurzbacher, eds. Infinite Dimensional Kähler Manifolds (2001), Birkhauser Verlag, Basel ISBN 3-7643-6602-8.

Andrei Moroianu, Lectures on Kähler Geometry (2004), http://www.math.polytechnique.fr/~moroianu/tex/kg.pdf
André Weil, Introduction à l'étude des variétés kählériennes (1958)

External links



"
Category:Riemannian manifolds Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Complex manifolds Category:Symplectic geometry



↩







