


Subbase




Subbase

In topology, a subbase (or subbasis) for a topological space

 
  with topology

 
  is a subcollection 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  that generates 
 
 
 
 
 , in the sense that 
 
 
 
  is the smallest topology containing 
 
 
 
 . A slightly different definition is used by some authors, and there are other useful equivalent formulations of the definition; these are discussed below.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a topological space with topology 
 
 
 
 . A subbase of 
 
 
 
 
  is usually defined as a subcollection 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  satisfying one of the two following equivalent conditions:

The subcollection 
 
 
generates the topology 
 
 
 
 . This means that 
 
 
 
 
  is the smallest topology containing 
 
 
 
 : any topology 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
  must also contain 
 
 
 
 
 .
The collection of open sets consisting of all finite intersections of elements of 
 
 
 
 , together with the set 
 
 
 
 , forms a basis for 
 
 
 
 . This means that every proper open set in 
 
 
 
  can be written as a union of finite intersections of elements of 
 
 
 
 
 . Explicitly, given a point 
 
 
 
  in an open set 
 
 
 
 , there are finitely many sets  of 
 
 
 
 , such that the intersection of these sets contains 
 
 
 
  and is contained in 
 
 
 
 
 .

(Note that if we use the nullary intersection convention, then there is no need to include 
 
 
 
  in the second definition.)
For any subcollection 
 
 
 
  of the power set

 
 , there is a unique topology having 
 
 
 
  as a subbase. In particular, the intersection of all topologies on 
 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
  satisfies this condition. In general, however, there is no unique subbasis for a given topology.
Thus, we can start with a fixed topology and find subbases for that topology, and we can also start with an arbitrary subcollection of the power set 
 
 
 
  and form the topology generated by that subcollection. We can freely use either equivalent definition above; indeed, in many cases, one of the two conditions is more useful than the other.
Alternative definition
Sometimes, a slightly different definition of subbase is given which requires that the subbase 
 
 
 
  cover 
 
 
 
 .1 In this case, 
 
 
 
 
  is the union of all sets contained in 
 
 
 
 . This means that there can be no confusion regarding the use of nullary intersections in the definition.
However, with this definition, the two definitions above are not always equivalent. In other words, there exist spaces 
 
 
 
  with topology 
 
 
 
 , such that there exists a subcollection 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is the smallest topology containing 
 
 
 
 , yet 
 
 
 
  does not cover 
 
 
 
 . In practice, this is a rare occurrence; e.g. a subbase of a space that has at least two points and satisfies the T1 separation axiom must be a cover of that space.
Examples
The usual topology on the real numbers

 
 
  has a subbase consisting of all semi-infinite open intervals either of the form 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real numbers. Together, these generate the usual topology, since the intersections 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 

The subbase consisting of all semi-infinite open intervals of the form 
 
 
 
  alone, where 
 
 
 
  is a real number, does not generate the usual topology. The resulting topology does not satisfy the T1 separation axiom, since all open sets have a non-empty intersection.
The initial topology on 
 
 
 
  defined by a family of functions , where each  has a topology, is the coarsest topology on 
 
 
 
 
  such that each  is continuous. Because continuity can be defined in terms of the inverse images of open sets, this means that the initial topology on 
 
 
 
  is given by taking all , where 
 
 
 
  ranges over all open subsets of , as a subbasis.
Two important special cases of the initial topology are the product topology, where the family of functions is the set of projections from the product to each factor, and the subspace topology, where the family consists of just one function, the inclusion map.
The compact-open topology on the space of continuous functions from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  has for a subbase the set of functions


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is compact and 
 
 
 
  is open subset of 
 
 
 
 .
Results using subbases
One nice fact about subbases is that continuity of a function need only be checked on a subbase of the range. That is, if 
 
 
 
  is a subbase for 
 
 
 
 
 , a function 
 
 
 
  is continuous iff  is open in 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
Alexander subbase theorem
There is one significant result concerning subbases, due to James Waddell Alexander II.

Alexander Subbase Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a topological space with a subbasis 
 
 
 
 . If every cover by elements from 
 
 
 
  has a finite subcover, then the space is compact.
 

Note that the corresponding result for basic covers is trivial.

Proof Outline: Assume by way of contradiction that the space 
 
 
 
  is not compact, yet every subbasic cover from 
 
 
 
  has a finite subcover. Use Zorn's Lemma to find an open cover 
 
 
 
 
  without finite subcover that is maximal amongst such covers. That means that if 
 
 
 
  is not in 
 
 
 
 , then  has a finite subcover, necessarily of the form 
 


Consider 
 
 
 
 , that is, the subbasic subfamily of 
 
 
 
 . If it covered 
 
 
 
 
 , then by hypothesis, it would have a finite subcover. But 
 
 
 
  does not have such, so 
 
 
 
  does not cover 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  be uncovered. 
 
 
 
  covers 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 
  is a subbasis, so for some , we have: .
 


Since 
 
 
 
  is uncovered, . As noted above, this means that for each 
 
 
 
 ,  along with a finite subfamily  of 
 
 
 
 , covers 
 
 
 
 . But then 
 
 
 
 
  and all the  cover 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  has a finite subcover after all. Q.E.D.


Although this proof makes use of Zorn's Lemma, the proof does not need the full strength of choice. Instead, it relies on the intermediate Ultrafilter principle.
Using this theorem with the subbase for 
 
 
 
  above, one can give a very easy proof that bounded closed intervals in 
 
 
 
  are compact.
Tychonoff's theorem, that the product of compact spaces is compact, also has a short proof. The product topology on  has, by definition, a subbase consisting of cylinder sets that are the inverse projections of an open set in one factor. Given a subbasic family 
 
 
 
 
  of the product that does not have a finite subcover, we can partition  ∪i Ci}} into subfamilies that consist of exactly those cylinder sets corresponding to a given factor space. By assumption, no  has a finite subcover. Being cylinder sets, this means their projections onto  have no finite subcover, and since each  is compact, we can find a point  that is not covered by the projections of  onto . But then  is not covered by $C$.
Note, that in the last step we implicitly used the axiom of choice (which is actually equivalent to Zorn's lemma) to ensure the existence of .
See also

Base (topology)

References



de:Basis (Topologie)"
Category:General topology Category:Articles containing proofs








