


Euler product




Euler product

In number theory, an Euler product is an expansion of a Dirichlet series into an infinite product indexed by prime numbers. The name arose from the case of the Riemann zeta-function, where such a product representation was proved by Leonhard Euler.
Definition
In general, if 
 
 
 
  is a multiplicative function, then the Dirichlet series



is equal to



where the product is taken over prime numbers 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the sum



In fact, if we consider these as formal generating functions, the existence of such a formal Euler product expansion is a necessary and sufficient condition that 
 
 
 
  be multiplicative: this says exactly that 
 
 
 
  is the product of the 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
  factors as the product of the powers 
 
 
 
  of distinct primes 
 
 
 
 .
An important special case is that in which 
 
 
 
  is totally multiplicative, so that 
 
 
 
  is a geometric series. Then



as is the case for the Riemann zeta-function, where 
 
 
 
 , and more generally for Dirichlet characters.
Convergence
In practice all the important cases are such that the infinite series and infinite product expansions are absolutely convergent in some region

Re(s) > C


that is, in some right half-plane in the complex numbers. This already gives some information, since the infinite product, to converge, must give a non-zero value; hence the function given by the infinite series is not zero in such a half-plane.
In the theory of modular forms it is typical to have Euler products with quadratic polynomials in the denominator here. The general Langlands philosophy includes a comparable explanation of the connection of polynomials of degree m, and the representation theory for GLm.
Examples
The Euler product attached to the Riemann zeta function

 
 , using also the sum of the geometric series, is


 
 .
while for the Liouville function

 
 , it is,



Using their reciprocals, two Euler products for the Möbius function

 
  are,



and,



and taking the ratio of these two gives,



Since for even s the Riemann zeta function 
 
 
 
  has an analytic expression in terms of a rational multiple of 
 
 
 
 , then for even exponents, this infinite product evaluates to a rational number. For example, since 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , then,






and so on, with the first result known by Ramanujan. This family of infinite products is also equivalent to,



where 
 
 
 
  counts the number of distinct prime factors of n and 
 
 
 
  the number of square-free divisors.
If 
 
 
 
  is a Dirichlet character of conductor

 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  is totally multiplicative and 
 
 
 
  only depends on n modulo N, and 
 
 
 
  if n is not coprime to N then,


 
 .
Here it is convenient to omit the primes p dividing the conductor N from the product. Ramanujan in his notebooks tried to generalize the Euler product for Zeta function in the form:



for 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the polylogarithm. For 
 
 
 
  the product above is just 
 
 

Notable constants
Many well known constants have Euler product expansions.
The Leibniz formula for π,


 
  can be interpreted as a Dirichlet series using the (unique) Dirichlet character modulo 4, and converted to an Euler product of superparticular ratios


 
  where each numerator is a prime number and each denominator is the nearest multiple of four.1
Other Euler products for known constants include:
Twin prime constant:



Landau-Ramanujan constant:






Murata's constant :



Strongly carefree constant

 
  :



Artin's constant :



Landau's totient constant :



Carefree constant

 
  :



(with reciprocal) :



Feller-Tornier constant :



Quadratic class number constant :



Totient summatory constant :



Sarnak's constant :



Carefree constant :



Strongly carefree constant :



Stephens' constant :



Barban's constant :



Taniguchi's constant :



Heath-Brown and Moroz constant :



Notes
References

G. Polya, Induction and Analogy in Mathematics Volume 1 Princeton University Press (1954) L.C. Card 53-6388 (A very accessible English translation of Euler's memoir regarding this "Most Extraordinary Law of the Numbers" appears starting on page 91)

(Provides an introductory discussion of the Euler product in the context of classical number theory.)
G.H. Hardy and E.M. Wright, An introduction to the theory of numbers, 5th ed., Oxford (1979) ISBN 0-19-853171-0 (Chapter 17 gives further examples.)
George E. Andrews, Bruce C. Berndt, Ramanujan's Lost Notebook: Part I, Springer (2005), ISBN 0-387-25529-X
G. Niklasch, ''Some number theoretical constants: 1000-digit values"

External links






"
Category:Analytic number theory Category:Zeta and L-functions Category:Mathematical constants



.




