


Dawson function




Dawson function

  In mathematics, the Dawson function or Dawson integral (named for H. G. Dawson1) is either


 
 , also denoted as F(x) or D(x), or alternatively


 
 .
The Dawson function is the one-sided Fourier-Laplace sine transform of the Gaussian function,


 
  It is closely related to the error function erf, as


 
  where erfi is the imaginary error function,  Similarly,


 
  in terms of the real error function, erf.
In terms of either erfi or the Faddeeva function w(z), the Dawson function can be extended to the entire complex plane:2


 
 , which simplifies to





 
  for real x.
For |x| near zero,  and for |x| large,  More specifically, near the origin it has the series expansion


 
 ,
while for large x it has the asymptotic expansion


 
 ,
where n!! is the double factorial.
F(x) satisfies the differential equation



with the initial condition F(0) = 0. Consequently, it has extrema for


 
 ,
resulting in x = ±0.92413887… (), F(x) = ±0.54104422… ().
Inflection points follow for


 
 ,
resulting in x = ±1.50197526… (), F(x) = ±0.42768661… (). (Apart from the trivial inflection point at x = 0, F(x) = 0.)
Relation to Hilbert transform of Gaussian
The Hilbert Transform of the Gaussian is defined as



P.V. denotes the Cauchy principal value, and we restrict ourselves to real 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  can be related to the Dawson function as follows. Inside a principal value integral, we can treat 
 
 
 
  as a generalized function or distribution, and use the Fourier representation



With 
 
 
 
 
 , we use the exponential representation of 
 
 
 
  and complete the square with respect to 
 
 
 
  to find



We can shift the integral over 
 
 
 
  to the real axis, and it gives 
 
 
 
 
 . Thus



We complete the square with respect to 
 
 
 
  and obtain



We change variables to 
 
 
 
 :



The integral can be performed as a contour integral around a rectangle in the complex plane. Taking the imaginary part of the result gives



where 
 
 
 
  is the Dawson function as defined above.
The Hilbert transform of 
 
 
 
  is also related to the Dawson function. We see this with the technique of differentiating inside the integral sign. Let


 
  Introduce


 
  The nth derivative is


 
  We thus find


 
  The derivatives are performed first, then the result evaluated at 
 
 
 
 . A change of variable also gives 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
 , we can write 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are polynomials. For example, 
 
 
 
 . Alternatively, 
 
 
 
 
  can be calculated using the recurrence relation (for 
 
 
 
 )


 
 .
References






External links

gsl_sf_dawson in the GNU Scientific Library
Cephes – C and C++ language special functions math library
Faddeeva Package – C++ code for the Dawson function of both real and complex arguments, via the Faddeeva function
Dawson's Integral (at Mathworld)
Error functions

"
Category:Special functions Category:Gaussian function



↩
Mofreh R. Zaghloul and Ahmed N. Ali, "Algorithm 916: Computing the Faddeyeva and Voigt Functions," ACM Trans. Math. Soft. 38 (2), 15 (2011). Preprint available at arXiv:1106.0151.↩




