


Clausen function




Clausen function

(Figure)
Graph of the Clausen function Cl2(θ)

In mathematics, the Clausen function - introduced by  - is a transcendental, special function of a single variable. It can variously be expressed in the form of a definite integral, a trigonometric series, and various other special functions. It is intimately connected with the Polylogarithm, Inverse tangent integral, Polygamma function, Riemann Zeta function, Dirichlet eta function, and Dirichlet beta function.
The Clausen function of order 2 - often referred to at the Clausen function, despite being but one of a class of many - is given by the integral:



In the range 
 
 
 
  the Sine function inside the absolute value sign remains strictly positive, so the absolute value signs may be omitted. The Clausen function also has the Fourier series representation:



The Clausen functions - as a class of functions - feature extensively in many areas of modern mathematical research, particularly in relation to the evaluation of many classes of logarithmic and Polylogarithmic integrals, both definite and indefinite. They also have numerous applications with regard to the summation of Hypergeometric series, Central Binomial sums, sums of the Polygamma function, and Dirichlet L-series.
Basic properties
The Clausen function (of order 2) has simple zeros at all (integer) multiples of 
 
 
 
  since if 
 
 
 
  is an integer, 
 
 




It has maxima at 
 
 




and minima at 
 
 




The following properties are immediate consequences of the series definition:






(Ref: See Lu and Perez, 1992, below for these results - although no proofs are given).
General definition
More generally, one defines the two generalized Clausen functions:






which are valid for complex z with Re z >1. The definition may be extended to all of the complex plane through analytic continuation.
When z is replaced with a non-negative integer, the Standard Clausen Functions are defined by the following Fourier series:












N.B. The SL-type Clausen functions have the alternative notation 
 
 
 
  and are sometimes referred to as the Glaisher-Clausen functions (after James Whitbread Lee Glaisher, hence the GL-notation).
Relation to the Bernoulli Polynomials
The SL-type Clausen function are polynomials in 
 
 
 
 , and are closely related to the Bernoulli polynomials. This connection is apparent from the Fourier series representations of the Bernoulli Polynomials:






Setting 
 
 
 
  in the above, and then rearranging the terms gives the following closed form (polynomial) expressions:






Where the Bernoulli polynomials

 
  are defined in terms of the Bernoulli numbers

 
  by the relation:



Explicit evaluations derived from the above include:












Duplication formula
For 
 
 
 
 , the duplication formula can be proven directly from the Integral definition (see also Lu and Perez, 1992, below for the result - although no proof is given):



Immediate consequences of the duplication formula, along with use of the special value 
 
 
 
 , include the relations:






For higher order Clausen functions, duplication formulae can be obtained from the one given above; simply replace 
 
 
 
  with the dummy variable

 
 , and integrate over the interval 
 
 
 
  Applying the same process repeatedly yields:












And more generally, upon induction on 
 
 




Use of the generalized duplication formula allows for an extension of the result for the Clausen function of order 2 - involving Catalan's constant. For 
 
 




Where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirichlet beta function.
Proof of the Duplication formula
From the integral definition,



Apply the duplication formula for the Sine function, 
 
 
 
  to obtain






Apply the substitution 
 
 
 
  on both integrals









On that last integral, set 
 
 
 
 , and use the trigonometric identity 
 
 
 
  to show that:







Therefore



Derivatives of general order Clausen functions
Direct differentiation of the Fourier series expansions for the Clausen functions give:












By appealing to the First Fundamental Theorem Of Calculus, we also have:



Relation to the Inverse Tangent Integral
The Inverse tangent integral is defined on the interval 
 
 
 
  by



It has the following closed form in terms of the Clausen Function:



Proof of the Inverse Tangent Integral relation
From the integral definition of the Inverse tangent integral, we have



Performing an integration by parts






Apply the substitution 
 
 
 
  to obtain



For that last integral, apply the transform 
 
 
 
  to get















Finally, as with the proof of the Duplication formula, the substitution 
 
 
 
  reduces that last integral to



Thus



Relation to the Barnes' G-function
For real 
 
 
 
 , the Clausen function of second order can be expressed in terms of the Barnes G-function and (Euler) Gamma function:



Or equivalently



Ref: See Adamchik, "Contributions to the Theory of the Barnes function", below.
Relation to the Polylogarithm
The Clausen functions represent the real and imaginary parts of the Polylogarithm, on the Unit Circle:






This is easily seen by appealing to the series definition of the Polylogarithm.



By Euler's Theorem,



and by de Moivre's Theorem (DeMoivre's Formula)



Hence






Relation to the Polygamma function
The Clausen functions are intimately connected to the Polygamma function. Indeed, it is possible to express Clausen functions as linear combinations of sine functions and Polygamma functions. One such relation is shown here, and proven below:



Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be positive integers, such that 
 
 
 
  is a rational number 
 
 
 
 , then, by the series definition for the higher order Clausen function (of even index):



We split this sum into exactly p-parts, so that the first series contains all, and only, those terms congruous to 
 
 
 
  the second series contains all terms congruous to 
 
 
 
  etc., up to the final p-th part, that contain all terms congruous to 
 
 










We can index these sums to form a double sum:






Applying the addition formula for the Sine function, 
 
 
 
  the sine term in the numerator becomes:









Consequently,



To convert the inner sum in the double sum into a non-alternating sum, split in two in parts in exactly the same way as the earlier sum was split into p-parts:









For 
 
 
 
 
 , the Polygamma function has the series representation



So, in terms of the Polygamma function, the previous inner sum becomes:



Plugging this back into the double sum gives the desired result:



Relation to the Generalized Logsine Integral
The Generalized Logsine Integral is defined by:



In this generalized notation, the Clausen function can be expressed in the form:



Kummer's relation
Ernst Kummer and Rogers give the relation



valid for 
 
 
 
 .
Relation to the Lobachevsky function
The Lobachevsky function Λ or Л is essentially the same function with a change of variable:



though the name "Lobachevsky function" is not quite historically accurate, as Lobachevsky's formulas for hyperbolic volume used the slightly different function



Relation to Dirichlet L-functions
For rational values of 
 
 
 
 
  (that is, for 
 
 
 
  for some integers p and q), the function 
 
 
 
  can be understood to represent a periodic orbit of an element in the cyclic group, and thus 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as a simple sum involving the Hurwitz zeta function. This allows relations between certain Dirichlet L-functions to be easily computed.
Series acceleration
A series acceleration for the Clausen function is given by



which holds for 
 
 
 
 . Here, 
 
 
 
  is the Riemann zeta function. A more rapidly convergent form is given by



Convergence is aided by the fact that 
 
 
 
  approaches zero rapidly for large values of n. Both forms are obtainable through the types of resummation techniques used to obtain rational zeta series. (ref. Borwein, et al., 2000, below).
Special values
Some special values include





















Generalized special values
Some special values for higher order Clausen functions include















where 
 
 
 
  is Catalan's constant, 
 
 
 
  is the Dirichlet beta function, 
 
 
 
  is the Eta function (also called the alternating Zeta function), and 
 
 
 
  is the Riemann Zeta function.



Integrals of the direct function
The following integrals are easily proven from the series representations of the Clausen function:












Integral evaluations involving the direct function
A large number of trigonometric and logarithmo-trigonometric integrals can be evaluated in terms of the Clausen function, and various common mathematical constants like 
 
 
 
  (Catalan's constant), 
 
 
 
 , and the special cases of the Zeta function, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The examples listed below follow directly from the integral representation of the Clausen function, and the proofs require little more than basic trigonometry, integration by parts, and occasional term-by-term integration of the Fourier series definitions of the Clausen functions.





















References





Leonard Lewin, (Ed.). Structural Properties of Polylogarithms (1991) American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI. ISBN 0-8218-4532-2








"
Category:Zeta and L-functions


