


Digamma function




Digamma function

(Figure)
The color representation of the Digamma function, 
 
 
 
 , in a rectangular region of the complex plane.

In mathematics, the digamma function is defined as the logarithmic derivative of the gamma function:12



It is the first of the polygamma functions.
Relation to harmonic numbers
The digamma function, often denoted also as  or 
 
 
 
  (after the shape of the archaic Greek letter Ϝ digamma), is related to the harmonic numbers in that



where  is the 
 
 
 
 -th harmonic number, and γ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. For half-integer values, it may be expressed as



Integral representations
 If the real part of 
 
 
 
  is positive then the digamma function has the following integral representation


 
 .
This may be written as



which follows from Euler's integral formula for the harmonic numbers.
Series formula
Digamma can be computed in the complex plane outside negative integers (Abramowitz and Stegun 6.3.16),3 using



or



This can be utilized to evaluate infinite sums of rational functions, i.e.,



where p(n) and q(n) are polynomials of n.
Performing partial fraction on  in the complex field, in the case when all roots of q(n) are simple roots,



For the series to converge,



or otherwise the series will be greater than harmonic series and thus diverges.
Hence



and



With the series expansion of higher rank polygamma function a generalized formula can be given as



provided the series on the left converges.
Taylor series
The digamma has a rational zeta series, given by the Taylor series at 
 
 
 
 . This is


 
 ,
which converges for 
 
 

Newton series
The Newton series for the digamma follows from Euler's integral formula:



where 
 
 
 
  is the binomial coefficient.
Reflection formula
The digamma function satisfies a reflection formula similar to that of the Gamma function,



Recurrence formula and characterization
The digamma function satisfies the recurrence relation



Thus, it can be said to "telescope" 1/x, for one has



where Δ is the forward difference operator. This satisfies the recurrence relation of a partial sum of the harmonic series, thus implying the formula



where 
 
 
 
  is the Euler-Mascheroni constant.
More generally, one has



Actually, 
 
 
 
  is the only solution of the functional equation



that is monotone on  and satisfies 
 
 
 
 . This fact follows immediately from the uniqueness of the 
 
 
 
  function given its recurrence equation and convexity-restriction. This implies the useful difference equation:



Some finite sums involving the digamma function
There are numerous finite summation formulas for the digamma function. Basic summation formulas, such as











 
  are due to Gauss.45 More complicated formulas, such as




















 
  are due to works of certain modern authors (see e.g. Appendix B in6).
Gauss's digamma theorem
For positive integers r and m (
 
 




which holds, because of its recurrence equation, for all rational arguments.
Computation and approximation
According to the Euler Maclaurin formula applied for7



the digamma function for 
 
 
 
 , also a real number, can be approximated by



which is the beginning of the asymptotical expansion of 
 
 
 
 . The full asymptotic series of this expansions is



where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -th Bernoulli number and 
 
 
 
  is the Riemann zeta function. Although the infinite sum converges for no 
 
 
 
 , this expansion becomes more accurate for larger values of 
 
 
 
  and any finite partial sum cut off from the full series. To compute 
 
 
 
  for small 
 
 
 
 , the recurrence relation



can be used to shift the value of 
 
 
 
  to a higher value. Beal8 suggests using the above recurrence to shift 
 
 
 
 
  to a value greater than 6 and then applying the above expansion with terms above 
 
 
 
  cut off, which yields "more than enough precision" (at least 12 digits except near the zeroes).



From the above asymptotic series for 
 
 
 
  you can derive asymptotic series for 
 
 
 
  that contain only rational functions and constants. The first series matches the overall behaviour of 
 
 
 
  well, that is, it behaves asymptotically identically for large arguments and has a zero of unbounded multiplicity at the origin, too. It can be considered a Taylor expansion of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 .



The other expansion is more precise for large arguments and saves computing terms of even order.



Special values
The digamma function has values in closed form for rational numbers, as a result of Gauss's digamma theorem. Some are listed below:



Moreover, by the series representation, it can easily be deduced that at the imaginary unit



The roots of the digamma function are the saddle points of the complex-valued gamma function. Thus they lie all on the real axis. The only one on the positive real axis is the unique minimum of the real-valued gamma function on  at 
 
 
 
 . All others occur single between the poles on the negative axis:



Already 1881 Hermite observed that



holds asymptotically. A better approximation of the location of the roots is given by



and using a further term it becomes still better



which both spring off the reflection formula via



and substituting 
 
 
 
  by its not convergent asymptotic expansion. The correct 2nd term of this expansion is of course 
 
 
 
 , where the given one works good to approximate roots with small index n.
Regularization
The Digamma function appears in the regularization of divergent integrals
$$\int_{0}^{\infty} \frac{dx}{x+a},$$
this integral can be approximated by a divergent general Harmonic series, but the following value can be attached to the series
$$\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n+a}= - \psi (a).$$
See also

Polygamma function
Trigamma function
Chebyshev expansions of the Digamma function in 

References

9 10

External links

Cephes - C and C++ language special functions math library

psi(1/2),  psi(1/3),  psi(2/3),  psi(1/4),  psi(3/4),  to  psi(1/5) to psi(4/5).

km:អនុគមន៍ ឌីហ្គាំម៉ា"
Category:Gamma and related functions






R. Campbell. Les intégrales eulériennes et leurs applications, Dunod, Paris, 1966.↩
H.M. Srivastava and J. Choi. Series Associated with the Zeta and Related Functions, Kluwer Academic Publishers, the Netherlands, 2001.↩
Iaroslav V. Blagouchine A theorem for the closed-form evaluation of the first generalized Stieltjes constant at rational arguments and some related summations Journal of Number Theory (Elsevier), vol. 148, pp. 537-592, 2015. arXiv PDF↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




