


Hurwitz zeta function




Hurwitz zeta function

In mathematics, the Hurwitz zeta function, named after Adolf Hurwitz, is one of the many zeta functions. It is formally defined for complex arguments s with Re(s) > 1 and q with Re(q) > 0 by



This series is absolutely convergent for the given values of s and q and can be extended to a meromorphic function defined for all s≠1. The Riemann zeta function is ζ(s,1).
]
Analytic continuation
 If 
 
 
 
  the Hurwitz zeta function can be defined by the equation


 
  where the contour

 
  is a loop around the negative real axis. This provides an analytic continuation of 
 
 
 
 .
The Hurwitz zeta function can be extended by analytic continuation to a meromorphic function defined for all complex numbers 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . At 
 
 
 
  it has a simple pole with residue

 
 . The constant term is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the Gamma function and 
 
 
 
 
  is the digamma function.
Series representation
 A convergent Newton series representation defined for (real) q > 0 and any complex s ≠ 1 was given by Helmut Hasse in 1930:1



This series converges uniformly on compact subsets of the s-plane to an entire function. The inner sum may be understood to be the nth forward difference of 
 
 
 
 ; that is,



where Δ is the forward difference operator. Thus, one may write



Integral representation
The function has an integral representation in terms of the Mellin transform as



for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Hurwitz's formula
Hurwitz's formula is the theorem that


 
  where


 
  is a representation of the zeta that is valid for 
 
 
 
  and s > 1. Here, 
 
 
 
  is the polylogarithm.
Functional equation
The functional equation relates values of the zeta on the left- and right-hand sides of the complex plane. For integers 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  holds for all values of s.
Taylor series
The derivative of the zeta in the second argument is a shift:



Thus, the Taylor series has the distinctly umbral form:



Alternatively,



with 
 
 
 
 .2
Closely related is the Stark–Keiper formula:



which holds for integer N and arbitrary s. See also Faulhaber's formula for a similar relation on finite sums of powers of integers.
Laurent series
The Laurent series expansion can be used to define Stieltjes constants that occur in the series


 
  Specifically 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Fourier transform
The discrete Fourier transform of the Hurwitz zeta function with respect to the order s is the Legendre chi function.
Relation to Bernoulli polynomials
The function 
 
 
 
  defined above generalizes the Bernoulli polynomials:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the real part of z. Alternately,



In particular, the relation holds for 
 
 
 
  and one has



Relation to Jacobi theta function
If 
 
 
 
  is the Jacobi theta function, then



holds for 
 
 
 
  and z complex, but not an integer. For z=n an integer, this simplifies to



where ζ here is the Riemann zeta function. Note that this latter form is the functional equation for the Riemann zeta function, as originally given by Riemann. The distinction based on z being an integer or not accounts for the fact that the Jacobi theta function converges to the Dirac delta function in z as 
 
 
 
 .
Relation to Dirichlet L-functions
At rational arguments the Hurwitz zeta function may be expressed as a linear combination of Dirichlet L-functions and vice versa: The Hurwitz zeta function coincides with Riemann's zeta function ζ(s) when q = 1, when q = 1/2 it is equal to (2s−1)ζ(s),3 and if q = n/k with k > 2, (n,k) > 1 and 0 



the sum running over all Dirichlet characters mod k. In the opposite direction we have the linear combination4



There is also the multiplication theorem



of which a useful generalization is the distribution relation5



(This last form is valid whenever q a natural number and 1 − qa is not.)
Zeros
If q=1 the Hurwitz zeta function reduces to the Riemann zeta function itself; if q=1/2 it reduces to the Riemann zeta function multiplied by a simple function of the complex argument s (vide supra), leading in each case to the difficult study of the zeros of Riemann's zeta function. In particular, there will be no zeros with real part greater than or equal to 1. However, if 0 and by Cassels for algebraic irrational q.67
Rational values
The Hurwitz zeta function occurs in a number of striking identities at rational values.8 In particular, values in terms of the Euler polynomials

 
 :



and



One also has



which holds for 
 
 
 
 . Here, the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are defined by means of the Legendre chi function

 
 
  as



and



For integer values of ν, these may be expressed in terms of the Euler polynomials. These relations may be derived by employing the functional equation together with Hurwitz's formula, given above.
Applications
Hurwitz's zeta function occurs in a variety of disciplines. Most commonly, it occurs in number theory, where its theory is the deepest and most developed. However, it also occurs in the study of fractals and dynamical systems. In applied statistics, it occurs in Zipf's law and the Zipf–Mandelbrot law. In particle physics, it occurs in a formula by Julian Schwinger,9 giving an exact result for the pair production rate of a Dirac electron in a uniform electric field.
Special cases and generalizations
The Hurwitz zeta function with a positive integer m is related to the polygamma function:


 
  For negative integer −n the values are related to the Bernoulli polynomials:10



The Barnes zeta function generalizes the Hurwitz zeta function.
The Lerch transcendent generalizes the Hurwitz zeta:


 
  and thus



Hypergeometric function


 
  where 
 
 

Meijer G-function



Notes


References


See chapter 12 of 
Milton Abramowitz and Irene A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions, (1964) Dover Publications, New York. ISBN 0-486-61272-4. (See Paragraph 6.4.10 for relationship to polygamma function.)





External links



"
Category:Zeta and L-functions



↩
↩


↩
Davenport (1967) p.73↩
↩
Given by ↩
↩
Apostol (1976) p.264↩




