


Cauchy principal value




Cauchy principal value

In mathematics, the Cauchy principal value, named after Augustin Louis Cauchy, is a method for assigning values to certain improper integrals which would otherwise be undefined.
Formulation
Depending on the type of singularity in the integrand f, the Cauchy principal value is defined as one of the following:

1) The finite number










where b is a point at which the behavior of the function f is such that
 





 
  for any a < b and
 







 
  for any c > b

(see plus or minus for precise usage of notations ±, ∓).
 




2) The infinite number











where 
 
 






and 
 
 
 
 .
 




In some cases it is necessary to deal simultaneously with singularities both at a finite number b and at infinity. This is usually done by a limit of the form
 










3) In terms of contour integrals

of a complex-valued function f(z); z = x + iy, with a pole on the contour. The pole is enclosed with a circle of radius ε and the portion of the path outside this circle is denoted L(ε). Provided the function f(z) is integrable over L(ε) no matter how small ε becomes, then the Cauchy principal value is the limit:1









where two of the common notations for the Cauchy principal value appear on the left of this equation.
 

In the case of Lebesgue-integrable functions, that is, functions which are integrable in absolute value, these definitions coincide with the standard definition of the integral.
Principal value integrals play a central role in the discussion of Hilbert transforms 2
Distribution theory
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of bump functions, i.e., the space of smooth functions with compact support on the real line

 
 . Then the map



defined via the Cauchy principal value as



is a distribution. The map itself may sometimes be called the principal value (hence the notation p.v.). This distribution appears, for example, in the Fourier transform of the Heaviside step function.
Well-definedness as a distribution
To prove the existence of the limit


 
  for a Schwartz function

 
 , first observe that 
 
 
 
  is continuous on 
 
 
 
 , as


 
  and hence



since 
 
 
 
  is continuous and LHospitals rule applies.
Therefore 
 
 
 
  exists and by applying the mean value theorem to 
 
 
 
 , we get that


 
 .
As furthermore



we note that the map 
 
 
 
  is bounded by the usual seminorms for Schwartz functions

 
 . Therefore this map defines, as it is obviously linear, a continuous functional on the Schwartz space and therefore a tempered distribution.
Note that the proof needs 
 
 
 
  merely to be continuously differentiable in a neighbourhood of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to be bounded towards infinity. The principal value therefore is defined on even weaker assumptions such as 
 
 
 
  integrable with compact support and differentiable at 0.
More general definitions
The principal value is the inverse distribution of the function 
 
 
 
  and is almost the only distribution with this property:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a constant and 
 
 
 
  the Dirac distribution.
In a broader sense, the principal value can be defined for a wide class of singular integral kernels on the Euclidean space 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  has an isolated singularity at the origin, but is an otherwise "nice" function, then the principal-value distribution is defined on compactly supported smooth functions by


 
  Such a limit may not be well defined, or, being well-defined, it may not necessarily define a distribution. It is, however, well-defined if 
 
 
 
  is a continuous homogeneous function of degree 
 
 
 
  whose integral over any sphere centered at the origin vanishes. This is the case, for instance, with the Riesz transforms.
Examples
Consider the difference in values of two limits:






The former is the Cauchy principal value of the otherwise ill-defined expression



Similarly, we have



but



The former is the principal value of the otherwise ill-defined expression



Nomenclature
The Cauchy principal value of a function 
 
 
 
 
  can take on several nomenclatures, varying for different authors. Among these are:










as well as 
 
 
 
  P.V., 
 
 


 
  and V.P.
 

See also

Hadamard finite part integral
Hilbert transform
Sokhotski–Plemelj theorem

References


"
Category:Mathematical analysis Category:Generalized functions Category:Integrals Category:Summability methods









