   H-alpha      H-alpha   (Figure)  H-alpha Emission : In the simplified Rutherford Bohr model of the hydrogen atom , the Balmer lines result from an electron jump between the second energy level closest to the nucleus, and those levels more distant. The    3  →  2     normal-→  3  2    \scriptstyle 3\rightarrow 2   transition depicted here produces an H-alpha photon, and the first line of the Balmer series . For hydrogen (    Z  =  1      Z  1    Z=1   ) this transition results in a photon of wavelength 656 nm (red).   H-alpha ( Hα ) is a specific deep-red visible spectral line in the Balmer series created by hydrogen with a wavelength of 656.28 nm , which occurs when a hydrogen electron falls from its third to second lowest energy level. H-alpha light is important to astronomers as it is emitted by many emission nebulae and can be used to observe features in the sun's atmosphere including solar prominences .  Balmer series  According to the Bohr model of the atom , electrons exist in quantized energy levels surrounding the atom's nucleus . These energy levels are described by the principal quantum number  n = 1, 2, 3, ... . Electrons may only exist in these states, and may only transit between these states.  The set of transitions from n ≥ 3 to n = 2 is called the Balmer series and its members are named sequentially by Greek letters:   n = 3 to n = 2 is called Balmer-alpha or H-alpha,  n = 4 to n = 2 is called Balmer-beta or H-beta,  n = 5 to n = 2 is called Balmer-gamma or H-gamma, etc.   For the Lyman series the naming convention is:   n = 2 to n = 1 is called Lyman-alpha,  n = 3 to n = 1 is called Lyman-beta, etc.   H-alpha has a wavelength of 656.281 nm , 1 is visible in the red part of the electromagnetic spectrum , and is the easiest way for astronomers to trace the ionized hydrogen content of gas clouds. Since it takes nearly as much energy to excite the hydrogen atom's electron from n = 1 to n = 3 as it does to ionize the hydrogen atom, the probability of the electron being excited to n = 3 without being removed from the atom is very small. Instead, after being ionized, the electron and proton recombine to form a new hydrogen atom. In the new atom, the electron may begin in any energy level, and subsequently cascades to the ground state ( n = 1), emitting photons with each transition. Approximately half the time, this cascade will include the n = 3 to n = 2 transition and the atom will emit H-alpha light. Therefore, the H-alpha line occurs where hydrogen is being ionized.  The H-alpha line saturates (self-absorbs) relatively easily because hydrogen is the primary component of nebulae , so while it can indicate the shape and extent of the cloud, it cannot be used to accurately determine the cloud's mass. Instead, molecules such as carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , formaldehyde , ammonia , or acetonitrile are typically used to determine the mass of a cloud.    Filter    A hydrogen-alpha filter is an optical filter designed to transmit a narrow bandwidth of light generally centred on the H-alpha wavelength. They are characterized by a bandpass width that measures the width of the wavelength band that is transmitted. 2 These filters can be dichroic filters manufactured by multiple (~50) vacuum-deposited layers. These layers are selected to produce interference effects that filter out any wavelengths except at the requisite band. 3  Taken in isolation, H-alpha dichroic filters are useful in astrophotography and for reducing the effects of light pollution . They do not have narrow enough bandwidth for observing the sun's atmosphere.  For observing the sun, a much narrower band filter can be made from three parts: an "energy rejection filter" which is usually a piece of red glass that absorbs most of the unwanted wavelengths, a Fabry–Pérot etalon which transmits several wavelengths including one centred on the H-alpha emission line, and a "blocking filter" -a dichroic filter which transmits the H-alpha line while stopping those other wavelengths that passed through the etalon. This combination will pass only a narrow (  External links   Description of etalon filter by Colin Kaminski   "  Category:Atomic physics  Category:Astronomical spectroscopy  Category:Hydrogen physics     ↩  ↩  ↩     