


Square triangular number




Square triangular number

 
In mathematics, a square triangular number (or triangular square number) is a number which is both a triangular number and a perfect square. There are an infinite number of square triangular numbers; the first few are 0, 1, 36, 1225, 41616, 1413721, 48024900, 1631432881, 55420693056, 1882672131025 .
Explicit formulas
Write Nk for the kth square triangular number, and write sk and tk for the sides of the corresponding square and triangle, so that



Define the triangular root of a triangular number 
 
 
 
  to be 
 
 
 
 . From this definition and the quadratic formula, 
 
 
 
 
  Therefore, 
 
 
 
  is triangular if and only if 
 
 
 
  is square, and naturally 
 
 
 
  is square and triangular if and only if 
 
 
 
  is square, i. e., there are numbers 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . This is an instance of the Pell equation, with n=8. All Pell equations have the trivial solution (1,0), for any n; this solution is called the zeroth, and indexed as 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  denotes the k'th non-trivial solution to any Pell equation for a particular n, it can be shown by the method of descent that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Hence there are an infinity of solutions to any Pell equation for which there is one non-trivial one, which holds whenever n is not a square. The first non-trivial solution when n=8 is easy to find: it is (3,1). A solution 
 
 
 
  to the Pell equation for n=8 yields a square triangular number and its square and triangular roots as follows
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  Hence, the first square triangular number, derived from (3,1), is 1, and the next, derived from (17,6) (=6×(3,1)-(1,0)), is 36.
The sequences Nk, sk and tk are the OEIS sequences , , and  respectively.
In 1778 Leonhard Euler determined the explicit formula12


 
  Other equivalent formulas (obtained by expanding this formula) that may be convenient include


 
 
  The corresponding explicit formulas for sk and tk are 3


 
  and



Pell's equation
The problem of finding square triangular numbers reduces to Pell's equation in the following way.4 Every triangular number is of the form t(t + 1)/2. Therefore we seek integers t, s such that



With a bit of algebra this becomes



and then letting x = 2t + 1 and y = 2s, we get the Diophantine equation



which is an instance of Pell's equation. This particular equation is solved by the Pell numbers Pk as5



and therefore all solutions are given by



There are many identities about the Pell numbers, and these translate into identities about the square triangular numbers.
Recurrence relations
There are recurrence relations for the square triangular numbers, as well as for the sides of the square and triangle involved. We have6






We have78






Other characterizations
All square triangular numbers have the form b2c2, where b / c is a convergent to the continued fraction for the square root of 2.9
A. V. Sylwester gave a short proof that there are an infinity of square triangular numbers, to wit:10
If the triangular number n(n+1)/2 is square, then so is the larger triangular number



We know this result has to be a square, because it is a product of three squares: 2^2 (by the exponent), (n(n+1))/2 (the n'th triangular number, by proof assumption), and the (2n+1)^2 (by the exponent). The product of any numbers that are squares is naturally going to result in another square. This can be seen from the fact that a necessary and sufficient condition for a number to be square is that there should be only even powers of primes in its prime factorisation, and multiplying two square numbers preserves this property in the product.
The triangular roots 
 
 
 
  are alternately simultaneously one less than a square and twice a square, if k is even, and simultaneously a square and one less than twice a square, if k is odd. Thus, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  In each case, the two square roots involved multiply to give 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 
 
  In other words, the difference between two consecutive square triangular numbers is the square root of another square triangular number.
The generating function for the square triangular numbers is:11



Numerical data
As 
 
 
 
  becomes larger, the ratio 
 
 
 
  approaches 
 
 
 
  and the ratio of successive square triangular numbers approaches 
 
 
 
 . The table below shows values of 
 
 
 
  between 0 and 7.







































































































































































































































Notes
External links

Triangular numbers that are also square at cut-the-knot

Michael Dummett's solution

"
Category:Figurate numbers Category:Integer sequences



↩
↩

↩
↩
↩


↩
↩
↩




