


Sigma




Sigma

Sigma (upper-case Σ, lower-case σ, lower-case in word-final position ς; Greek σίγμα) is the eighteenth letter of the Greek alphabet, and carries the 's' sound. In the system of Greek numerals, it has a value of 200. When used at the end of a word, when the word is not all upper-case, the final form (ς) is used, e.g.  (Odysseus); note the two sigmas in the center of the name, and the word-final sigma at the end.
History
The shape and alphabetic position of Sigma is derived from Phoenician shin .
Etymology
The name of sigma, according to one hypothesis,1 may continue that of Phoenician Samekh. According to a different theory,2 its original name may have been "San " (the name today associated with another, obsolete letter), while "sigma" was a Greek innovation that simply meant "hissing", based on a nominalization of a verb  (sízō, from earlier *sig-jō, meaning 'I hiss').
Uppercase of esh
The uppercase form of sigma was re-borrowed into the Latin alphabet to serve as the uppercase of modern esh (lowercase: ).
Lunate sigma
  In handwritten Greek during the Hellenistic period (4th and 3rd centuries BC), the epigraphic form of Σ was simplified into a C-like shape.3 It is also found on coins from the fourth century BC onward.4 This became the universal standard form of sigma during late antiquity and the Middle Ages. It is today known as lunate sigma (upper-case , lower-case ), because of its crescent-like shape.
It is still widely used in decorative typefaces in Greece, especially in religious and church contexts, as well as in some modern print editions of classical Greek texts. The forms of the Cyrillic letter С (representing ) and Coptic letter sima are derived from lunate sigma.
A dotted lunate sigma (sigma periestigmenon, encoded at U+03FE ) was used by Aristarchus of Samothrace as an editorial sign indicating that the line so marked is at an incorrect position. Similarly, an antisigma or reversed sigma () may mark a line that is out of place. A dotted antisigma or dotted reversed sigma (antisigma periestigmenon: ) may indicate a line after which rearrangements should be made, or to variant readings of uncertain priority.
Uses
Greek
In both Ancient and Modern Greek, the sigma represents the voiceless alveolar fricative . Both in Ancient and Modern Greek, this sound is voiced to  before  or .
Berber
Upper-case Σ may be used in the Berber Latin alphabet for [ʕ], though the INALCO standard uses Ɛ instead.
Science and mathematics
Upper-case
Upper-case Σ is used as a symbol for:

the summation operator
a class of baryons in particle physics
macroscopic cross sections in nuclear and particle physics
self-energy in condensed matter physics
the balance of the invoice classes and the overall amount of the debts and demands in economics
the set of symbols that form an alphabet in linguistics and computer science
the covariance matrix of a set of random variables in probability theory and statistics, sometimes in the form 
 
 
 
  to distinguish it from the summation operator.
The busy beaver function

Lower-case
Lower-case σ is used for:

sigma bonds in chemistry
to represent an unknown angle in mathematics
Velocity dispersion in astronomy
Sigma constant in science
the sigma receptor in biology
the standard deviation of a population or probability distribution in statistics
a quality model for business, Six Sigma, based on the standard deviation, often referred to as "6σ"
sigma-algebras, sigma-fields, and sigma-finiteness in measure theory; in general terms, the symbol σ serves as a shorthand for "countably", e.g. a σ-compact topological space is one that can be written as a countable union of compact subsets.
the generated sigma-algebra of a set 
 
 
 
  is denoted 
 
 

the sum-of-divisors function in number theory
the Stefan–Boltzmann constant
the "sigma factor" of RNA polymerase
a measure of electrical conductivity
the Surface charge density in electrostatics
Normal stress in continuum mechanics
volatility of a stock generally needed for options pricing
a syllable in phonology
the spectrum of a matrix

 
 , denoted as 
 
 
 
 , in applied mathematics
surface tension
the unary operation of selection on a database relation in relational algebra
the Pauli matrices in quantum mechanics
a target's radar cross-section (RCS) in radar jamming or Electronic Warfare (EW)
the life span of a basic multicellular unit (BMU) in bone remodeling
the Damping Parameter in Signal processing
a millisecond in early 20th-century physiology literature.5
The Weierstrass sigma-function

Politics
During the 1930s, an upper-case Σ was in use as the symbol of the Ação Integralista Brasileira, a fascist political party in Brazil.
Companies
Sigma Corporation uses the name of the letter but not the letter itself, however in many Internet forums photographers refer to the company or its lenses using the sigma letter. Sigma Aldrich incorporate both the name and the character in their logo.
Character encodings

Greek Sigma

6

Coptic Sima


Mathematical Sigma

These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.
See also

Antisigma
Greek letters used in mathematics, science, and engineering
Sampi
Stigma (letter)
Sibilant consonant
∑, or summation
"Sigm-" as a combining form, as in sigmodon, sigmurethra, or in the derivative "sigmoid", as in sigmoid sinus, sigmoid colon, sigmoidoscopy, etc.

References
"
Category:Greek letters





Edward M. Thompson (1912), Introduction to Greek and Latin paleography, Oxford: Clarendon. p. 108, 144
Parthia.com: Numismatica Font Projects.

Unicode Code Charts: Greek and Coptic (Range: 0370-03FF)




