


Calculus of communicating systems




Calculus of communicating systems

The Calculus of Communicating Systems (CCS) is a process calculus introduced by Robin Milner around 1980 and the title of a book describing the calculus. Its actions model indivisible communications between exactly two participants. The formal language includes primitives for describing parallel composition, choice between actions and scope restriction. CCS is useful for evaluating the qualitative correctness of properties of a system such as deadlock or livelock.1
According to Milner, "There is nothing canonical about the choice of the basic combinators, even though they were chosen with great attention to economy. What characterises our calculus is not the exact choice of combinators, but rather the choice of interpretation and of mathematical framework".
The expressions of the language are interpreted as a labelled transition system. Between these models, bisimilarity is used as a semantic equivalence.
Syntax
Given a set of action names, the set of CCS processes is defined by the following BNF grammar:



The parts of the syntax are, in the order given above

empty process : the empty process 
 
 
 
  is a valid CCS process
 action : the process 
 
 
 
  can perform an action 
 
 
 
  and continue as the process 
 
 

 process identifier : write 
 
 
 
  to use the identifier 
 
 
 
  to refer to the process 
 
 
 
  (which may contain the identifier 
 
 
 
  itself, i.e., recursive definitions are allowed)
 choice : the process 
 
 
 
  can proceed either as the process 
 
 
 
  or the process 
 
 

 parallel composition 
 
 
 
  tells that processes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  exist simultaneously
 renaming 
 
 
 
  is the process 
 
 
 
  with all actions named 
 
 
 
  renamed as 
 
 

 restriction 
 
 
 
  is the process 
 
 
 
  without action 
 
 


Related calculi and models

Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP), developed by Tony Hoare, is a language that arose at a similar time to CCS.
The pi-calculus, developed by Milner in the late 80's, provides mobility of communication links by allowing processes to communicate the names of communication channels themselves.
PEPA, developed by Jane Hillston introduces activity timing in terms of exponentially distributed rates and probabilistic choice, allowing performance metrics to be evaluated.

Some other languages based on CCS:

Calculus of Broadcasting Systems
Language Of Temporal Ordering Specification (LOTOS)

Models that have been used in the study of CCS-like systems:

History monoid
Actor model

References

Robin Milner: A Calculus of Communicating Systems, Springer Verlag, ISBN 0-387-10235-3. 1980.
Robin Milner, Communication and Concurrency, Prentice Hall, International Series in Computer Science, ISBN 0-13-115007-3. 1989

"
Category:1980 in computer science Category:Process calculi








