


Rho




Rho

Rho (; uppercase Ρ, lowercase ρ or ; ) is the 17th letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals, it has a value of 100. It is derived from Phoenician letter res . Its uppercase form is not to be confused with the Latin letter P, although both types use the same glyph; P.
Uses
(Figure)
The Greek alphabet on a black figure vessel, with an R-shaped rho.

Greek
Rho is classed as a liquid consonant (together with lambda and sometimes the nasals mu and nu), which has important implications for morphology. In both Ancient and Modern Greek, it represents a trilled or tapped r.
In polytonic orthography a rho at the beginning of a word is written with a rough breathing (equivalent to h) —  rh — and a double rho within a word is written with a smooth breathing over the first rho and a rough breathing over the second —  rrh — apparently reflecting an aspirated or voiceless pronunciation in Ancient Greek, hence the various Greek-derived English words that start with rh or contain rrh.
The name of the letter is written in Greek as  (polytonic) or ρω/ρο (monotonic).
Other alphabets
Letters that arose from rho include Roman R and Cyrillic Er (Р).
Mathematics and science
The characters Ρ, ρ and  are also used outside its Greek alphabetical context in science and mathematics.

In the physical sciences to represent:
 
Densities: mass density, or charge density (ρ)
Resistivity (ρ)
Rho meson (ρ+, ρ−, ρ0)
General quantum states
Hammett Equation, ρ is used to represent the reaction constant, this is independent of the position and nature of the substituents of the benzene ring.



In mathematics to represent:
 
The radius in the cylindrical or spherical coordinate systems
The correlation coefficient of a population parameter
The spectral radius of a matrix 
 
 
 
  denoted as 
 
 

The plastic number
The sensitivity to interest rates of a pricing function
The expected return of a given policy (
 
 
 
 ) in reinforcement learning, denoted 
 
 




In economics to represent the discount rate of future pence cash flows


In molecular biology to represent the Rho protein responsible for termination of RNA synthesis. In such occasions, it is often represented as  ("rho symbol" U+03F1), to avoid confusion with the Latin letter p


In ecology to represent the population damping ratio where ρ = λ1 / |λ2|.


In computer programming

For LaTeX, the symbols are \rho (
 
 
 
 ), and \varrho (
 
 
 
 ) (note: \Rho is not defined by default)
The lower-case rho "ρ" has a special meaning in the APL programming language



In statistics to represent Spearman's rank correlation coefficient, commonly known as Spearman's rho


In options theory to represent the rate of change of a portfolio with respect to interest rates

Chi Rho
The letter rho overlaid with chi forms the Chi Rho symbol, used to represent Jesus Christ.
Rhodes Scholars
Former Rhodes Scholars are entitled to use the Greek letter rho as a designation of their status. When used, the symbol should precede the name.1
Character encodings
Greek Rho2
Greek Rho symbols
Coptic Ro
Technical Symbol
Mathematical Rho
These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.
See also

Р, р - Er (Cyrillic)
R, r - Latin
P, p - Latin

References


"
Category:Greek letters




Unicode Code Charts: Greek and Coptic (Range: 0370-03FF)




