


Skolem normal form




Skolem normal form

In mathematical logic, reduction to Skolem normal form (SNF) is a method for removing existential quantifiers from formal logic statements, often performed as the first step in an automated theorem prover.
A formula of first-order logic is in Skolem normal form (named after Thoralf Skolem) if it is in prenex normal form with only universal first-order quantifiers. Every first-order formula may be converted into Skolem normal form while not changing its satisfiability via a process called Skolemization (sometimes spelled "Skolemnization"). The resulting formula is not necessarily equivalent to the original one, but is equisatisfiable with it: it is satisfiable if and only if the original one is satisfiable.1
The simplest form of Skolemization is for existentially quantified variables which are not inside the scope of a universal quantifier. These may be replaced simply by creating new constants. For example, 
 
 
 
  may be changed to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a new constant (does not occur anywhere else in the formula).
More generally, Skolemization is performed by replacing every existentially quantified variable 
 
 
 
  with a term 
 
 
 
  whose function symbol 
 
 
 
  is new. The variables of this term are as follows. If the formula is in prenex normal form, 
 
 
 
  are the variables that are universally quantified and whose quantifiers precede that of 
 
 
 
 . In general, they are the variables that are quantified universally  and such that 
 
 
 
  occurs in the scope of their quantifiers. The function 
 
 
 
  introduced in this process is called a Skolem function (or Skolem constant if it is of zero arity) and the term is called a Skolem term.
As an example, the formula 
 
 
 
  is not in Skolem normal form because it contains the existential quantifier 
 
 
 
 . Skolemization replaces 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a new function symbol, and removes the quantification over 
 
 
 
 . The resulting formula is 
 
 
 
 . The Skolem term 
 
 
 
  contains 
 
 
 
 , but not 
 
 
 
 , because the quantifier to be removed 
 
 
 
  is in the scope of 
 
 
 
 , but not in that of 
 
 
 
 ; since this formula is in prenex normal form, this is equivalent to saying that, in the list of quantifers, 
 
 
 
  precedes 
 
 
 
  while 
 
 
 
  does not. The formula obtained by this transformation is satisfiable if and only if, the original formula is.
How Skolemization works
Skolemization works by applying a second-order equivalence in conjunction to the definition of first-order satisfiability. The equivalence provides a way for "moving" an existential quantifier before a universal one.


 
  where


 
  is a function that maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Intuitively, the sentence "for every 
 
 
 
  there exists a 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 " is converted into the equivalent form "there exists a function 
 
 
 
  mapping every 
 
 
 
  into a 
 
 
 
  such that, for every 
 
 
 
  it holds 
 
 
 
 ".
This equivalence is useful because the definition of first-order satisfiability implicitly existentially quantifies over the evaluation of function symbols. In particular, a first-order formula 
 
 
 
  is satisfiable if there exists a model 
 
 
 
  and an evaluation 
 
 
 
  of the free variables of the formula that evaluate the formula to true. The model contains the evaluation of all function symbols; therefore, Skolem functions are implicitly, existentially quantified. In the example above, 
 
 
 
  is satisfiable if and only if, there exists a model 
 
 
 
 , which contains an evaluation for 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  is true for some evaluation of its free variables (none in this case). This may be expressed in second order as 
 
 
 
 . By the above equivalence, this is the same as the satisfiability of 
 
 
 
 .
At the meta-level, first-order satisfiability of a formula 
 
 
 
  may be written with a little abuse of notation as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a model, 
 
 
 
  is an evaluation of the free variables, and 
 
 
 
  means that 
 
 
 
  is true in 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 . Since first-order models contain the evaluation of all function symbols, any Skolem function 
 
 
 
  contains is implicitly, existentially quantified by 
 
 
 
 . As a result, after replacing an existential quantifier over variables into an existential quantifiers over functions at the front of the formula, the formula still may be treated as a first-order one by removing these existential quantifiers. This final step of treating 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  may be completed because functions are implicitly existentially quantified by 
 
 
 
  in the definition of first-order satisfiability.
Correctness of Skolemization may be shown on the example formula 
 
 
 
  as follows. This formula is satisfied by a model

 
  if and only if, for each possible value for 
 
 
 
  in the domain of the model there exists a value for 
 
 
 
  in the domain of the model that makes 
 
 
 
  true. By the axiom of choice, there exists a function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . As a result, the formula 
 
 
 
  is satisfiable, because it has the model obtained by adding the evaluation of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . This shows that 
 
 
 
  is satisfiable only if 
 
 
 
  is satisfiable as well. In the other way around, if 
 
 
 
  is satisfiable, then there exists a model 
 
 
 
  that satisfies it; this model includes an evaluation for the function 
 
 
 
  such that, for every value of 
 
 
 
 , the formula 
 
 
 
  holds. As a result, 
 
 
 
  is satisfied by the same model because one may choose, for every value of 
 
 
 
 , the value 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is evaluated according to 
 
 
 
 .
Uses of Skolemization
One of the uses of Skolemization is automated theorem proving. For example, in the method of analytic tableaux, whenever a formula whose leading quantifier is existential occurs, the formula obtained by removing that quantifier via Skolemization may be generated. For example, if 
 
 
 
  occurs in a tableau, where 
 
 
 
  are the free variables of 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  may be added to the same branch of the tableau. This addition does not alter the satisfiability of the tableau: every model of the old formula may be extended, by adding a suitable evaluation of 
 
 
 
 , to a model of the new formula.
This form of Skolemization is an improvement over "classical" Skolemization in that, only variables that are free in the formula are placed in the Skolem term. This is an improvement because the semantics of tableau may implicitly place the formula in the scope of some universally quantified variables that are not in the formula itself; these variables are not in the Skolem term, while they would be there according to the original definition of Skolemization. Another improvement that may be used is applying the same Skolem function symbol for formulae that are identical up to variable renaming.2
Another use is in the resolution method for first order logic, where formulas are represented as sets of clauses understood to be universally quantified. (For an example see drinker paradox.)
Skolem theories
In general, if 
 
 
 
  is a theory and for each formula 
 
 
 
  with free variables

 
  there is a Skolem function, then 
 
 
 
  is called a Skolem theory.3 For example, by the above, arithmetic with the Axiom of Choice is a Skolem theory.
Every Skolem theory is model complete, i.e. every substructure of a model is an elementary substructure. Given a model M of a Skolem theory T, the smallest substructure containing a certain set A is called the Skolem hull of A. The Skolem hull of A is an atomic prime model over A.
See also

Herbrandization, the dual of Skolemization
Predicate functor logic

Notes


References



External links


Skolemization on PlanetMath.org
Skolemization by Hector Zenil, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project.


"
Category:Normal forms (logic) Category:Model theory




R. Hähnle. Tableaux and related methods. Handbook of Automated Reasoning.
1




