


Psi (letter)




Psi (letter)

(Figure)
The Greek alphabet on a black-figure pottery vessel, with an archaic chickenfoot-shaped psi.

Psi (uppercase , lowercase ;  Psi) is the 23rd letter of the Greek alphabet and has a numeric value of 700. In both Classical and Modern Greek, the letter indicates the combination /ps/ (as in English word "lapse").
For Greek loanwords in Latin and modern languages with Latin alphabets, psi is usually transliterated as "ps". In English, the letter is pronounced  or sometimes . (In Greek, it is pronounced .)
The letter's origin is uncertain. It may or may not derive from the Phoenician alphabet. It appears in the 7th century BC, expressing /ps/ in the Eastern alphabets, but /kʰ/ in the Western alphabets (the sound expressed by Χ in the Eastern alphabets). In writing, the early letter appears in an angular shape (). There were early graphical variants that omitted the stem ("chickenfoot-shaped psi" as:  or ).
The Western letter (expressing /kʰ/, later /x/) was adopted into the Old Italic alphabets, and its shape is also continued into the Algiz rune of the Elder Futhark. The classical Greek letter was adopted into the early Cyrillic alphabet as "".
Use as a symbol
The letter psi is commonly used in physics to represent wave functions in quantum mechanics, such as in the Schrödinger equation and bra–ket notation

 
 . It is also used to represent the (generalized) positional states of a qubit in a quantum computer.
Psi is also used as the symbol for the polygamma function, defined by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the gamma function.
The letters Ψ or ψ can also be a symbol for:

psychology, psychiatry, and sometimes parapsychology (involving paranormal or relating with the supernatural subjects, especially research into extrasensory perception).
In mathematics, the reciprocal Fibonacci constant.
Water potential in movement of water between plant cells.
In biochemistry, it denotes the rare nucleotide pseudouridilic acid.
Stream function in fluid mechanics defining the curve to which the flow velocity is always tangent.
One of the dihedral angles in the backbones of proteins
The planet Neptune
Indiana University (as a superimposed I and U)
Gangster Disciples
A sai, the name of which is pronounced the same way.
Pharmacology, general pharmacy
In virology the ψ site is a viral packaging signal.
The J/ψ meson, in particle physics.
In the computability theory, 
 
 
 
  represents the return value 
 
 
 
  of a program 
 
 
 
 .
In circadian physiology, ψ represents the phase relationship between a zeitgeber and a biological rhythm.
In building, to represent an adjustment to a U-value, accounting for thermal bridge effects.
The ordinal collapsing function and notation developed by Wilfried Buchholz1

Character Encodings

Greek / Coptic Psi

2

Cyrillic Psi


Mathematical Psi

These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.
See also

Psi and phi type figurine
Psi (Cyrillic)

Notes and references


"
Category:Greek letters



Buchholz, 1986 (Ann. Pure Appl. Logic)
Unicode Code Charts: Greek and Coptic (Range: 0370-03FF)




