


Chrysotile




Chrysotile

Chrysotile or white asbestos is the most commonly encountered form of asbestos,1 accounting for approximately 95% of the asbestos in the United States2 and a similar proportion in other countries.3 It is a soft, fibrous silicate mineral in the serpentine group of phyllosilicates; as such, it is distinct from other asbestiform minerals in the amphibole group. Its idealized chemical formula is Mg

 
 (Si

O

 
 )(OH)
 
 
 
 .4
Polytypes
Three polytypes of chrysotile are known.5 These are very difficult to distinguish in hand specimens, and polarized light microscopy6 must normally be used. Some older publications refer to chrysotile as a group of minerals—the three polytypes listed below, and sometimes pecoraite as well—but the 2006 recommendations of the International Mineralogical Association prefer to treat it as a single mineral with a certain variation in its naturally-occurring forms.7




Name

Crystal system

Type locality

mindat.org reference

Unit cell parameters

Crystal structure reference





Clinochrysotile

monoclinic

Złoty Stok*, Lower Silesia, Poland

1071

a = 5.3 Å; b = 9.19 Å; c = 14.63 Å; β = 93°

8



Orthochrysotile

orthorhombic

Kadapa* district, Andhra Pradesh, India

3025

a = 5.34 Å; b = 9.24 Å; c = 14.2 Å

9



Parachrysotile

orthorhombic

uncertain

3083

a = 5.3 Å; b = 9.24 Å; c = 14.71 Å

10



Source: mindat.org.
 *Złoty Stok and Kadapa have formerly been known as Reichenstein and Cuddapah respectively, and these names may appear in some publications.



Clinochrysotile is the most common of the three forms, found notably at Asbestos, Quebec, Canada. Its two measurable refractive indices tend to be lower than those of the other two forms.11 The orthorhombic paratypes may be distinguished by the fact that, for orthochrysotile, the higher of the two observable refractive indices is measured parallel to the long axis of the fibres (as for clinochrysotile); whereas for parachrysotile the higher refractive index is measured perpendicular to the long axis of the fibres.
Physical properties
 Bulk chrysotile, whose hardness is about the same as that of a human fingernail, is easily crumbled to fibres that are, in fact, bundles of fibrils. Naturally-occurring fibre bundles range in length from several millimetres to more than ten centimetres,12 although industrially-processed chrysotile usually has shorter fibre bundles. The diameter of the fibre bundles is 0.1–1 µm, and the individual fibrils are even finer, 0.02–0.03 µm, each fibre bundle containing tens or hundreds of fibrils.13 Chrysotile fibres have considerable tensile strength, and may be spun into thread and woven into cloth. They are also resistant to heat and are excellent thermal, electrical and acoustic insulators.1415
Chemical properties
The idealized chemical formula of chrysotile is Mg

 
 (Si

O

 
 )(OH)
 
 
 
 , although some of the magnesium ions may be replaced by iron or other cations. Substitution of the hydroxide ions for fluoride, oxide or chloride is also known, but rarer.16 A related, but much rarer, mineral is pecoraite, in which all the magnesium cations of chrysotile are substituted by nickel cations.
Chrysotile is resistant to even strong bases (asbestos is thus stable in high pH pore water of Portland cement), but the fibres are attacked by acids: the magnesium ions are selectively dissolved, leaving a silica skeleton. It is thermally stable up to around 550 °C, at which temperature it starts to dehydrate. Dehydration is complete at about 750 °C, with the final products being forsterite (magnesium silicate), silica and water.17
The global mass balance reaction of the chrysotile dehydration can be written as follows:
 :Chrysotile (serpentine) → Forsterite + silica + water


 
    →   
 
 
 
  The chrysotile (serpentine) dehydration reaction corresponds to the reverse of the forsterite (Mg-olivine) hydrolysis in the presence of dissolved silica (silicic acid).
Safety concerns
(Figure)
Chrysotile asbestos

Chrysotile has been included with other forms of asbestos in being considered to be a human carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)18 and by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.19 These state that "Asbestos exposure is associated with parenchymal asbestosis, asbestos-related pleural abnormalities, peritoneal mesothelioma, and lung cancer, and it may be associated with cancer at some extra-thoracic sites".20 In other scientific publications, epidemiologists have published peer reviewed scientific papers establishing that chrysotile is the main cause of pleural mesothelioma.212223
Chrysotile has been recommended for inclusion in the Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent,24 an international treaty that restricts the global trade in hazardous materials. If listed, exports of chrysotile would only be permitted to countries that explicitly consent to imports. Canada, a major producer of the mineral, has been harshly criticized by the Canadian Medical Association2526 for its opposition to including chrysotile in the Convention.27
Critics of safety regulations
1990s: Canada-European dispute GATT dispute
In May 1998, Canada requested consultations before the WTO and the European Commission concerning France's 1996 prohibition of the importation and sale of all forms of asbestos. Canada said that the French measures contravened provisions of the Agreements on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and on Technical Barriers to Trade, and the GATT 1994. The EC claimed that safer substitute materials existed to take the place of asbestos. It stressed that the French measures were not discriminatory under the terms of international trade treaties, and were fully justified for public health reasons. The EC further claimed that in the July consultations, it had tried to convince Canada that the measures were justified, and that just as Canada broke off consultations, it (the EC) was in the process of submitting substantial scientific data in favour of the asbestos ban.28
2000s: Canadian exports face mounting global criticism
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the Canadian federal government continued to claim that chrysotile was much less dangerous than other types of asbestos.29 Chrysotile continued to be used in new construction across Canada, in ways that are very similar to those for which chrysotile was exported.30 Similarly, Natural Resources Canada once stated that chrysotile, one of the fibres that make up asbestos, was not as dangerous as once thought. According to a fact sheet from 2003, "current knowledge and modern technology can successfully control the potential for health and environmental harm posed by chrysotile".31 The Chrysotile Institute, an association partially funded by the Canadian government, also prominently asserted that the use of chrysotile did not pose an environmental problem and the inherent risks in its use were limited to the workplace.32
However, under increasing criticism by environmental groups, in May, 2012, the Canadian government stopped funding the Chrysotile Institute.3334 As a result, the Chrysotile Institute has now closed.353637
The Canadian government continues to draw both domestic and international criticism for its stance on chrysotile, most recently in international meetings about the Rotterdam Convention hearings regarding chrysotile. The CFMEU pointed out that most exports go to developing countries. Canada has pressured countries, including Chile, and other UN member states to avoid chrysotile bans.38 In November, 2011, the Australian Upper House passed a motion to pressure the Canadian government to end policies supporting asbestos exports.39
In September 2012, governments in Quebec and Canada ended official support for Canada's last asbestos mine in Asbestos, Quebec.40
See also

Serpentinite reactions

References
External links

The Chrysotile Institute

Webmineral
Mindat clinochrysotile
Mindat orthochrysotile
Mindat parachrysotile
"Asbestos-containing Floor Tile and Mastic Abatement: Is there Enough Exposure to Cause Asbestos-related Disease?"
Deer William Alexander, Howie Robert Andrew, Zussman Jack, An introduction to the rock-forming minerals, ISBN 0-582-30094-0, OCLC 183009096 pp. 344–352, 1992
Ledoux, RL (ed), Short course in mineralogical techniques of asbestos determination, Mineralogical Association of Canada, pp. 35–73, 185, 1979.
http://www.microlabgallery.com/ChrysotileFile.aspx Photomicrographs of parachrysotile and clinochrysotile
Nolan, RP, Langer AM, Ross M, Wicks FJ, Martin RF (eds), "The health effects of chrysotile asbestos", The Canadian Mineralogist, Special Publication 5, 2001.

"
Category:Serpentine group Category:Magnesium minerals Category:Asbestos Category:IARC Group 1 carcinogens



↩
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor (2007). 29 C.F.R. 1910.1001. Appendix J.↩
Institut national de recherche sur la sécurité (1997). "Amiante." Fiches toxicologiques. n° 167. (in French)↩

↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
In principle, all polytypes of chrysotile should have three independent refractive indices: in practice, two of the three are so close as to be indistinguishable by experimental measurement.↩






International Agency for Research on Cancer (1998). "Asbestos." However, the study states " In some of these case reports and in other studies, asbestos fibres have been identified in the lung. Amphibole fibres have usually predominated, but in a few cases mainly or only chrysotile fibres were found." IARC Monographs on Evaluating the Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Supplement 7.↩

Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATDSR), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2007). "Asbestos Toxicity." Case Studies in Environmental Medicine.↩
1 See e.g., Smith, Allen "Chrysotile is the main cause of pleural mesothelioma", Amer.J.Indus.Med., Vol. 32, pp. 252 to 266 (1996)↩
2 Tossavainen A, "Asbestos, asbestosis, and cancer: the Helsinki criteria for diagnosis and attribution" Scand J Work Environ Health 1997;23(4):311–316 (stating that all types of malignant mesothelioma can be induced by asbestos, with the amphiboles showing greater carcinogenic potency than chrysotile)↩
3 Lemen RA 2010. Chrysotile Asbestos and Mesothelioma. Environ Health Perspect 118:a282-a282↩
Rotterdam Convention: Chrysotile↩
↩
↩
↩
EC measures affecting asbestos products. World Trade Organization News. 29 October 1998↩
↩
 ↩
 ↩
↩
Asbestos Advocacy Group Shuts Its Doors, Montreal Gazette↩
Canadian Cancer Society Disappointed with Proposed Federal Government Funding for Chrysotile Institute, 3 March 2012↩
R.I.P. Chrysotile Institute, The Mad Scientist Blog>↩
Asbestos Advocacy Group Shuts Its Doors, Vancouver Sun, 29 April 2012↩
"Minister Flaherty: Stop Funding The Chrysotile Institute", 2 Feb. 2011↩
Stop Canada's Export Of Asbestos CFMEU↩
Australian Senate Slams Canada's Asbestos Industry, 17 November 2011↩
↩




