


Lagrange's four-square theorem




Lagrange's four-square theorem

Lagrange's four-square theorem, also known as Bachet's conjecture, states that every natural number can be represented as the sum of four integer squares.



where the four numbers 
 
 
 
  are integers. For illustration, 3, 31 and 310 can be represented as the sum of four squares as follows:



This theorem was proved by Joseph Louis Lagrange in 1770.
Historical development
From examples given in the Arithmetica it is clear that Diophantus was aware of the theorem. This book was translated in 1621 into Latin by Bachet (Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac), who stated the theorem in the notes of his translation. But the theorem was not proved until 1770 by Lagrange.1
Adrien-Marie Legendre completed the theorem in 1797–8 with his three-square theorem, by proving that a positive integer can be expressed as the sum of three squares if and only if it is not of the form 
 
 
 
  for integers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Later, in 1834, Carl Gustav Jakob Jacobi discovered a simple formula for the number of representations of an integer as the sum of four squares with his own four-square theorem.
The formula is also linked to Descartes' theorem of four "kissing circles", which involves the sum of the squares of the curvatures of four circles. This is also linked to Apollonian gaskets, which were more recently related to the Ramanujan–Petersson conjecture.2
The classical proof
Several very similar modern versions345 of Lagrange's proof are easy to find in the literature. The proof below is a slightly simplified version, in which the cases for which m is even or odd do not require separate arguments.
It is sufficient to prove the theorem for every odd prime number p. This immediately follows from Euler's four-square identity (and from the fact that the theorem is true for the numbers 1 and 2).
The residues of a2 modulo p are distinct for every a between 0 and (p − 1)/2 (included). To see this, take some a and define c as a2 mod p. a is a root of the polynomial x2 − c over the field 

. So is p − a (which is different from a). In a field K, any polynomial of degree n has at most n distinct roots, so there are no other a with this property, in particular not among 0 to (p − 1)/2.
Contingently, for b taking integral values between 0 and (p − 1)/2 (included), the −b2 − 1 are distinct. By the pigeonhole principle, there are a and b in this range, for which a2 and −b2 − 1 are congruent modulo p, that is for which

a2 + b2 + 12 + 02 = np ,

with 0 12 + x22 + x32 + x42 (we have just shown that there is some m (namely n) with this property, so there is a least one). We show by contradiction that m equals 1: supposing it is not the case, we prove the existence of a positive integer r less than m, for which rp is also the sum of four squares (this is in the spirit of the infinite descentHere the argument is a direct proof by contradiction. With the initial assumption that m>2, msome="" (not="" an="" argument="" be="" become="" could="" descent="" fermat. method of Fermat).
 
 For this purpose, we consider for each xi the yi which is in the same residue class modulo m and between (–m + 1)/2 and m/2 (included). It follows that y12 + y22 + y32 + y42 = mr, for some positive integer r less than m.
Finally, another appeal to Euler's four-square identity shows that mpmr = z12 + z22 + z32 + z42, where each zi is divisible by m (indeed, since each xi is congruent to his corresponding yi, z1 is congruent modulo m to y12 + y22 + y32 + y42 = m r; for the same reason the other zi are also divisible by m). It follows that, for wi = zi/m, w12 + w22 + w32 + w42 = rp, and this is in contradiction with the minimality of m.
Proof using the Hurwitz integers
One of the ways to prove the theorem relies on Hurwitz quaternions, which are the analog of integers for quaternions.6 The Hurwitz quaternions consist of all quaternions with integer components and all quaternions with half-integer components. These two sets can be combined into a single formula



where 
 
 
 
  are integers. Thus, the quaternion components 
 
 
 
  are either all integers or all half-integers, depending on whether 
 
 
 
  is even or odd, respectively. The set of Hurwitz quaternions forms a ring; that is to say, the sum or product of any two Hurwitz quaternions is likewise a Hurwitz quaternion.
The (arithmetic, or field) norm

 
  of a rational quaternion 
 
 
 
  is the nonnegative rational number



where 
 
 
 
  is the conjugate of 
 
 
 
 . Note that the norm of a Hurwitz quaternion is always an integer. (If the coefficients are half-integers, then their squares are of the form 
 
 
 
 , and the sum of four such numbers is an integer.)
Since quaternion multiplication is associative, and real numbers commute with other quaternions, the norm of a product of quaternions equals the product of the norms:



For any 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . It follows easily that 
 
 
 
  is a unit in the ring of Hurwitz quaternions if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
The proof of the main theorem begins by reduction to the case of prime numbers. Euler's four-square identity implies that if Langrange's four-square theorem holds for two numbers, it holds for the product of the two numbers. Since any natural number can be factored into powers of primes, it suffices to prove the theorem for prime numbers. It is true for 
 
 
 
 . To show this for an odd prime integer 
 
 
 
 , represent it as a quaternion 
 
 
 
  and assume for now (as we shall show later) that it is not a Hurwitz irreducible; that is, it can be factored into two non-unit Hurwitz quaternions



The norms of 
 
 
 
  are integers such that



and 
 
 
 
 . This shows that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are equal to 
 
 
 
  (since they are integers), and 
 
 
 
  is the sum of four squares



If it happens that the 
 
 
 
  chosen has half-integer coefficients, it can be replaced by another Hurwitz quaternion. Choose 
 
 
 
  in such a way that 
 
 
 
  has even integer coefficients. Then



Since 
 
 
 
  has even integer coefficients, 
 
 
 
  will have integer coefficients and can be used instead of the original 
 
 
 
  to give a representation of 
 
 
 
  as the sum of four squares.
As for showing that 
 
 
 
  is not a Hurwitz irreducible, Lagrange proved that any odd prime 
 
 
 
  divides at least one number of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are integers.7 This can be seen as follows: since 
 
 
 
  is prime, 
 
 
 
  can hold for integers 
 
 
 
 , only when 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the set 
 
 
 
  of squares contains 
 
 
 
  distinct residues modulo 
 
 
 
 . Likewise, 
 
 
 
  contains 
 
 
 
  residues. Since there are only 
 
 
 
  residues in total, and 
 
 
 
 , the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  must intersect.
The number 
 
 
 
  can be factored in Hurwitz quaternions:



The norm on Hurwitz quaternions satisfies a form of the Euclidean property: for any quaternion 
 
 
 
  with rational coefficients we can choose a Hurwitz quaternion 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  by first choosing 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  and then 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Then we obtain



It follows that for any Hurwitz quaternions 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , there exists a Hurwitz quaternion 
 
 
 
  such that



The ring 
 
 
 
  of Hurwitz quaternions is not commutative, hence it is not an actual Euclidean domain, and it does not have unique factorization in the usual sense. Nevertheless, the property above implies that every right ideal is principal. Thus, there is a Hurwitz quaternion 
 
 
 
  such that



In particular, 
 
 
 
  for some Hurwitz quaternion 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  were a unit, 
 
 
 
  would be a multiple of 
 
 
 
 , however this is impossible as 
 
 
 
  is not a Hurwitz quaternion for 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, if 
 
 
 
  were a unit, we would have



so 
 
 
 
  divides 
 
 
 
 , which again contradicts the fact that 
 
 
 
  is not a Hurwitz quaternion. Thus, 
 
 
 
  is not Hurwitz irreducible, as claimed.
Generalizations
Lagrange's four-square theorem is a special case of the Fermat polygonal number theorem and Waring's problem. Another possible generalisation is the following problem: Given natural numbers

 
 , can we solve



for all positive integers 
 
 
 
  in integers 
 
 
 
 ? The case 
 
 
 
  is answered in the positive by Lagrange's four-square theorem. The general solution was given by Ramanujan. He proved that if we assume, without loss of generality, that 
 
 
 
  then there are exactly 54 possible choices for 
 
 
 
  such that the problem is solvable in integers 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . (Ramanujan listed a 55th possibility 
 
 
 
 , but in this case the problem is not solvable if 
 
 
 
 .8)
Algorithms
Michael O. Rabin and Jeffrey Shallit9 have found randomized polynomial-time algorithms for computing a single representation 
 
 
 
  for a given integer 
 
 
 
 , in expected running time 
 
 
 
 .
Number of representations
The number of representations of a natural number n as the sum of four squares is denoted by r4(n). Jacobi's four-square theorem states that this is eight times the sum of the divisors of n if n is odd and 24 times the sum of the odd divisors of n if n is even (see divisor function), i.e.



Equivalently, it is eight times the sum of all its divisors which are not divisible by 4, i.e.



We may also write this as



where the second term is to be taken as zero if n is not divisible by 4. In particular, for a prime number p we have the explicit formula r4(p) = 8(p + 1).10
Some values of r4(n) occurs infinitely often as r4(n) = r4(2mn) whenever n is even. The values of r4(n)/n can be arbitrarily large: indeed, r4(n)/n is infinitely often larger than 8 √ log n.11
Uniqueness
The sequence of positive integers which have only one representation as a sum of four squares (up to order) is:

1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 14, 15, 23, 24, 32, 56, 96, 128, 224, 384, 512, 896 ... .
 

These integers consist of the seven odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 11, 15, 23 and all numbers of the form 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
The sequence of positive integers which cannot be represented as a sum of four non-zero squares is:

1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 17, 24, 29, 32, 41, 56, 96, 128, 224, 384, 512, 896 ... .
 

These integers consist of the eight odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 9, 11, 17, 29, 41 and all numbers of the form 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares
Legendre's three-square theorem
15 and 290 theorems

References
External links

Proof at PlanetMath.org
Another proof
an applet decomposing numbers as sums of four squares

"
Category:Additive number theory Category:Theorems in number theory Category:Articles containing proofs



↩
The Ramanujan Conjecture and some Diophantine Equations, Peter Sarnak, lecture at Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, of the ICTS lecture series. Bangalore, 2013 via youtube.↩
Theorems 166 to 169 in: E. Landau, Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie, New York, Chelsea, 1927. Second edition translated into English by Jacob E. Goodman, Providence RH, Chelsea, 1958.↩
Theorem 369 in: G.H. Hardy and E.M. Wright, An introduction to the theory of numbers, Oxford, Clarendon Press 1938.↩
Paragraph 5.7 in: Ivan Niven and Herbert S. Zuckerman, An introduction to the theory of numbers, John Wiley and Sons 1960.↩
↩

Myung-Hwan Kim REPRESENTATIONS OF BINARY FORMS BY QUINARY QUADRATIC FORMS↩
M. O. Rabin, J. O. Shallit, Randomized Algorithms in Number Theory, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 39 (1986), no. S1, pp. S239–S256. ↩
↩
Williams (2011) p.119↩


