


Parabolic coordinates




Parabolic coordinates

 Parabolic coordinates are a two-dimensional orthogonal coordinate system in which the coordinate lines are confocal parabolas. A three-dimensional version of parabolic coordinates is obtained by rotating the two-dimensional system about the symmetry axis of the parabolas.
Parabolic coordinates have found many applications, e.g., the treatment of the Stark effect and the potential theory of the edges.
Two-dimensional parabolic coordinates
Two-dimensional parabolic coordinates 
 
 
 
  are defined by the equations






The curves of constant 
 
 
 
  form confocal parabolae



that open upwards (i.e., towards 
 
 
 
 ), whereas the curves of constant 
 
 
 
  form confocal parabolae



that open downwards (i.e., towards 
 
 
 
 ). The foci of all these parabolae are located at the origin.
Two-dimensional scale factors
The scale factors for the parabolic coordinates 
 
 
 
  are equal



Hence, the infinitesimal element of area is



and the Laplacian equals



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
Three-dimensional parabolic coordinates
(Figure)
Coordinate surfaces of the three-dimensional parabolic coordinates. The red paraboloid corresponds to τ=2, the blue paraboloid corresponds to σ=1, and the yellow half-plane corresponds to φ=-60°. The three surfaces intersect at the point P (shown as a black sphere) with Cartesian coordinates roughly (1.0, -1.732, 1.5).

The two-dimensional parabolic coordinates form the basis for two sets of three-dimensional orthogonal coordinates. The parabolic cylindrical coordinates are produced by projecting in the 
 
 
 
 -direction. Rotation about the symmetry axis of the parabolae produces a set of confocal paraboloids, forming a coordinate system that is also known as "parabolic coordinates"









where the parabolae are now aligned with the 
 
 
 
 -axis, about which the rotation was carried out. Hence, the azimuthal angle 
 
 
 
  is defined



The surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  form confocal paraboloids



that open upwards (i.e., towards 
 
 
 
 ) whereas the surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  form confocal paraboloids



that open downwards (i.e., towards 
 
 
 
 ). The foci of all these paraboloids are located at the origin.
The Riemannian metric tensor associated with this coordinate system is



Three-dimensional scale factors
The three dimensional scale factors are:









It is seen that The scale factors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the same as in the two-dimensional case. The infinitesimal volume element is then



and the Laplacian is given by



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
See also

Parabolic cylindrical coordinates
Orthogonal coordinate system
Curvilinear coordinates

Bibliography






Same as Morse & Feshbach (1953), substituting uk for ξk.


External links


MathWorld description of parabolic coordinates

"
Category:Coordinate systems


