


Free module




Free module

In mathematics, a free module is a module that has a basis – that is, a generating set consisting of linearly independent elements. Every vector space is a free module,1 but, if the ring of the coefficients is not a field, there exist non-free modules.
Given any set 
 
 
 
 , there is a free module with basis 
 
 
 
 , which is called free module on

 
  or module of formal linear combinations of the elements of 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
A free module is a module with a basis:2 a linearly independent generating set.
For an 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
 , the set 
 
 
 
  is a basis for 
 
 
 
  if:



 
  is a generating set for 
 
 
 
 ; that is to say, every element of 
 
 
 
  is a finite sum of elements of 
 
 
 
  multiplied by coefficients in 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  is linearly independent, that is, 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  distinct elements of 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is the zero element of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the zero element of 
 
 
 
 ).

If 
 
 
 
  has invariant basis number, then by definition any two bases have the same cardinality. The cardinality of any (and therefore every) basis is called the rank of the free module 
 
 
 
 . The free module is said to be free of rank n, or simply free of finite rank if the cardinality is finite.
Note that an immediate corollary of (2) is that the coefficients in (1) are unique for each 
 
 
 
 .
Formal linear combinations
Given a set 
 
 
 
 , we can construct a free 
 
 
 
 -module that has 
 
 
 
  as a basis. This module is called the module of the formal linear combinations of elements of 
 
 
 
 , or the free module over

 
 , and is denoted .
Given a finite subset of 
 
 
 
 , a formal linear linear combination of  is an expression

,
 

where the  belong to 
 
 
 
 .
If some  is zero, the formal linear combination is identified (that is, considered as equal) with the formal linear combination in which the corresponding summand is removed. Similarly, a summand  is simplified as .
With these identifications, it is straightforward to show that all formal linear combinations of elements of 
 
 
 
  form a free module, which has 
 
 
 
  as a basis.
The formal linear combinations of a single element 
 
 
 
  are simply the products 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . They form a module that is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 . It follows that the module  of all linear combinations of the elements of 
 
 
 
  may be considered as the direct sum of 

 copies of 
 
 
 
 .
Another construction
The module  may also be constructed in the following equivalent (that is isomorphic) way.
Let us consider the set 
 
 
 
  of the functions 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all but finitely many 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . This set has a structure of a module if the addition is defined by


 
  and the scalar multiplication by



A basis of 
 
 
 
  consists of the functions 
 
 
 
  that have the value zero for all entries, except one, for which the value is one:


 
  (this is a variant of the Kronecker delta, and a particular case of the indicator function for the set ). This basis is commonly called the canonical basis.
The mapping 
 
 
 
  is a bijection between 
 
 
 
  and this canonical basis. It induces a canonical isomorphism between the module of the formal linear combinations and 
 
 
 
 , which allows us to identify these two free modules.
Universal property
The inclusion mapping 
 
 
 
  defined above is universal in the following sense. Given an arbitrary mapping 
 
 
 
  from a set 
 
 
 
  into a 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
 , there exists a unique module homomorphism

 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
As usual for universal properties, this defines  up to a canonical isomorphism. Also the mapping 
 
 
 
  may naturally be extended into a functor from the category of sets into the category of 
 
 
 
 -modules. This functor is a left adjoint of the forgetful functor that maps a module to its underlying set.
Generalizations
Many statements about free modules, which are wrong for general modules over rings, are still true for certain generalisations of free modules. Projective modules are direct summands of free modules, so one can choose an injection in a free module and use the basis of this one to prove something for the projective module. Even weaker generalisations are flat modules, which still have the property that tensoring with them preserves exact sequences, and torsion-free modules. If the ring has special properties, this hierarchy may collapse, e.g., for any perfect local Dedekind ring, every torsion-free module is flat, projective and free as well.




See local ring, perfect ring and Dedekind ring.
See also

Free object
Projective object

Notes


References




.

External links
"
Category:Module theory Category:Free algebraic structures



↩
↩




