


Decagon




Decagon

In geometry, a decagon is any polygon with ten sides and ten angles.1
A regular decagon has all sides of equal length and each internal angle equal to 144°.2 Its Schläfli symbol is {10} 3 and can also be constructed as a quasiregular truncated pentagon, t{5}, which alternates two types of edges.
Regular decagon
The area of a regular decagon is: (with t = edge length)4



An alternative formula is 
 
 
 
  where d is the distance between parallel sides, or the height when the decagon stands on one side as base, or the diameter of the decagon's inscribed circle. By simple trigonometry,



and it can be written algebraically as



Sides
The side of a regular decagon inscribed in a unit circle is 
 
 
 
 , where ϕ is the golden ratio, 
 
 
 
 .5
Construction
A regular decagon is constructible using compass and straightedge.  6
An alternative (but similar) method is as follows:

Construct a pentagon in a circle by one of the methods shown in constructing a pentagon.
Extend a line from each vertex of the pentagon through the center of the circle to the opposite side of that same circle. Where each line cuts the circle is a vertex of the decagon.
The five corners of the pentagon constitute alternate corners of the decagon. Join these points to the adjacent new points to form the decagon.

Petrie polygons
The regular decagon is the Petrie polygon for many higher-dimensional polytopes, shown in these skew orthogonal projections in various Coxeter planes:7 The number of sides in the Petrie polygon is equal to the Coxeter number, h, for each symmetry family.




H3

 






Dodecahedron


Icosahedron



A9

D6




9-simplex


411



See also

Decagonal number and centered decagonal number, figurate numbers modeled on the decagon
Decagram, a star polygon with the same vertex positions as the regular decagon

References
External links


Definition and properties of a decagon With interactive animation

"
Category:Polygons



.

.
. Note that this source uses a as the edge length and gives the argument of the cotangent as an angle in degrees rather than in radians.

.
Coxeter, Regular polytopes, 12.4 Petrie polygon, pp. 223-226.




