


Weierstrass M-test




Weierstrass M-test

In mathematics, the Weierstrass M-test is a test for showing that an infinite series of functions converges uniformly. It applies to series whose terms are functions with real or complex values, and is analogous to the comparison test for determining the convergence of series of real or complex numbers.
The Weierstrass M-test is a special case of Lebesgue's dominated convergence theorem, where the measure is taken to be the counting measure over an atomic measure space.
Statement

Weierstrass M-test. Suppose that {fn} is a sequence of real- or complex-valued functions defined on a set A, and that there is a sequence of positive numbers {Mn} satisfying





 
  Then the series


 
  converges uniformly on A.

Remark. The result is often used in combination with the uniform limit theorem. Together they say that if, in addition to the above conditions, the set A is a topological space and the functions fn are continuous on A, then the series converges to a continuous function.
Generalization
A more general version of the Weierstrass M-test holds if the codomain of the functions {fn} is any Banach space, in which case the statement


 
  may be replaced by


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the norm on the Banach space. For an example of the use of this test on a Banach space, see the article Fréchet derivative.
Proof
Let M be the limit of the sum 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  the sum 
 
 
 
  is absolutely convergent, call its limit f(x).
By convergence of the M sum, for ε > 0 there exists an integer K such that


 
  We will show that 
 
 
 
  converges uniformly on the set A by showing that


 
  The crucial point here is that K does not depend on x.



Another Proof
By definition the series 
 
 
 
  converge uniformly if the sequence of the partial sums of the series,


 
  converges uniformly. Since the series 
 
 
 
  converge and 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 , then by the Cauchy criterion for every 
 
 

 there exists a natural number 
 
 
 
  such that for every 
 
 
 
  holds


 
  Now for the chosen 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
  and every 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  Thus the sequence of partial sums of the series converges uniformly which implies that the series converge uniformly.
  Inequality (1) follows from the triangle inequality.
See also

Example of Weierstrass M-test

References






"
Category:Functional analysis Category:Mathematical series Category:Convergence tests Category:Articles containing proofs


