


Almost disjoint sets




Almost disjoint sets

In mathematics, two sets are almost disjoint 12 if their intersection is small in some sense; different definitions of "small" will result in different definitions of "almost disjoint".
Definition
The most common choice is to take "small" to mean finite. In this case, two sets are almost disjoint if their intersection is finite, i.e. if



(Here, '|X|' denotes the cardinality of X, and 'i be a set. Then the collection of sets {Ai : i in I} is almost disjoint if for any i and j in I,



For example, the collection of all lines through the origin in R2 is almost disjoint, because any two of them only meet at the origin. If {Ai} is an almost disjoint collection consisting of more than one set, then clearly its intersection is finite:



However, the converse is not true—the intersection of the collection


 
  is empty, but the collection is not almost disjoint; in fact, the intersection of any two distinct sets in this collection is infinite.
Other meanings
Sometimes "almost disjoint" is used in some other sense, or in the sense of measure theory or topological category. Here are some alternative definitions of "almost disjoint" that are sometimes used (similar definitions apply to infinite collections):

Let κ be any cardinal number. Then two sets A and B are almost disjoint if the cardinality of their intersection is less than κ, i.e. if





The case of κ = 1 is simply the definition of disjoint sets; the case of
 





is simply the definition of almost disjoint given above, where the intersection of A and B is finite.
 


Let m be a complete measure on a measure space X. Then two subsets A and B of X are almost disjoint if their intersection is a null-set, i.e. if





Let X be a topological space. Then two subsets A and B of X are almost disjoint if their intersection is meagre in X.

References
"
Category:Set families



Kunen, K. (1980), "Set Theory; an introduction to independence proofs", North Holland, p. 47
Jech, R. (2006) "Set Theory (the third millennium edition, revised and expanded)", Springer, p. 118




