


Dedekind eta function




Dedekind eta function

 In mathematics, the Dedekind eta function, named after Richard Dedekind, is a modular form of weight 1/2 and is a function defined on the upper half-plane of complex numbers, where the imaginary part is positive.
Definition
For any such complex number τ, let q = exp(2πiτ), and define the eta function by,



The notation 
 
 
 
  is now standard in number theory, though many older books use q for the nome

 
 . Its 24th power gives,



where Δ is the modular discriminant. The presence of 24 can be understood by connection with other occurrences, such as in the 24-dimensional Leech lattice.
The eta function is holomorphic on the upper half-plane but cannot be continued analytically beyond it.
 
The eta function satisfies the functional equations1






More generally, suppose a, b, c, d are integers with ad − bc = 1, so that



is a transformation belonging to the modular group. We may assume that either c > 0, or c = 0 and d = 1. Then



where






Here 
 
 
 
  is the Dedekind sum



Because of these functional equations the eta function is a modular form of weight 1/2 and level 1 for a certain character of order 24 of the metaplectic double cover of the modular group, and can be used to define other modular forms. In particular the modular discriminant of Weierstrass can be defined as



and is a modular form of weight 12. (Some authors omit the factor of (2π)12, so that the series expansion has integral coefficients).
The Jacobi triple product implies that the eta is (up to a factor) a Jacobi theta function for special values of the arguments:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirichlet character modulo 12 with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . Explicitly,



The Euler function



related to 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , has a power series by the Euler identity:



Because the eta function is easy to compute numerically from either power series, it is often helpful in computation to express other functions in terms of it when possible, and products and quotients of eta functions, called eta quotients, can be used to express a great variety of modular forms.
The picture on this page shows the modulus of the Euler function: the additional factor of 
 
 
 
  between this and eta makes almost no visual difference whatsoever (it only introduces a tiny pinprick at the origin). Thus, this picture can be taken as a picture of eta as a function of q.
Special values
The above connection with the Euler function together with the special values of the latter, it can be easily deduced that












Eta quotients
Quotients of the Dedekind eta function at imaginary quadratic arguments may be algebraic, while combinations of eta quotients may even be integral. For example, define,









then,









and so on, values which appear in Ramanujan–Sato series.
See also

Chowla–Selberg formula
Ramanujan–Sato series
q-series
Weierstrass's elliptic functions
partition function (number theory)
Kronecker limit formula
superstring theory

References


Further reading

Tom M. Apostol, Modular functions and Dirichlet Series in Number Theory (2 ed), Graduate Texts in Mathematics 41 (1990), Springer-Verlag, ISBN 3-540-97127-0 See chapter 3.
Neal Koblitz, Introduction to Elliptic Curves and Modular Forms (2 ed), Graduate Texts in Mathematics 97 (1993), Springer-Verlag, ISBN 3-540-97966-2

"
Category:Fractals Category:Modular forms Category:Elliptic functions



}\,|journal=Mathematika|year=1954|volume=1|page=4|doi=10.1112/S0025579300000462}}




