


Solid of revolution




Solid of revolution

 In mathematics, engineering, and manufacturing, a solid of revolution is a solid figure obtained by rotating a plane curve around some straight line (the axis) that lies on the same plane.
Assuming that the curve does not cross the axis, the solid's volume is equal to the length of the circle described by the figure's centroid multiplied by the figure's area (Pappus's second centroid Theorem).
A representative disk is a three-dimensional volume element of a solid of revolution. The element is created by rotating a line segment (of length w) around some axis (located r units away), so that a cylindrical volume of  units is enclosed.
Finding the volume
Two common methods for finding the volume of a solid of revolution are the disc method and the shell method of integration. To apply these methods, it is easiest to draw the graph in question; identify the area that is to be revolved about the axis of revolution; determine the volume of either a disc-shaped slice of the solid, with thickness δx, or a cylindrical shell of width δx; and then find the limiting sum of these volumes as δx approaches 0, a value which may be found by evaluating a suitable integral.
Disc method
 
The disc method is used when the slice that was drawn is perpendicular to the axis of revolution; i.e. when integrating parallel to the axis of revolution.
The volume of the solid formed by rotating the area between the curves of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and the lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  about the x-axis is given by


 
  If g(x) = 0 (e.g. revolving an area between curve and x-axis), this reduces to:



The method can be visualized by considering a thin horizontal rectangle at y between 
 
 
 
  on top and 
 
 
 
  on the bottom, and revolving it about the y-axis; it forms a ring (or disc in the case that 
 
 
 
 ), with outer radius f(y) and inner radius g(y). The area of a ring is 
 
 
 
 , where R is the outer radius (in this case f(y)), and r is the inner radius (in this case g(y)). The volume of each infinitesimal disc is therefore 
 
 
 
 . The limit of the Riemann sum of the volumes of the discs between a and b becomes integral (1).
Cylinder method
 
The cylinder method is used when the slice that was drawn is parallel to the axis of revolution; i.e. when integrating perpendicular to the axis of revolution.
The volume of the solid formed by rotating the area between the curves of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and the lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  about the y-axis is given by


 
  If g(x) = 0 (e.g. revolving an area between curve and x-axis), this reduces to:



The method can be visualized by considering a thin vertical rectangle at x with height 
 
 
 
 , and revolving it about the y-axis; it forms a cylindrical shell. The lateral surface area of a cylinder is 
 
 
 
 , where r is the radius (in this case x), and h is the height (in this case 
 
 
 
 ). Summing up all of the surface areas along the interval gives the total volume.
Parametric form
When a curve is defined by its parametric form 
 
 
 
  in some interval 
 
 
 
 , the volumes of the solids generated by revolving the curve around the x-axis or the y-axis are given by1






Under the same circumstances the areas of the surfaces of the solids generated by revolving the curve around the x-axis or the y-axis are given by2






See also

Gabriel's Horn
Guldinus theorem
Pseudosphere
Surface of revolution

Notes
References

CliffsNotes.com. Volumes of Solids of Revolution. 12 Apr 2011 .
Frank Ayres, Elliott Mendelson. Schaum's Outlines: Calculus. McGraw-Hill Professional 2008, ISBN 978-0-07-150861-2. pp. 244–248 ()


"
Category:Integral calculus



, [http://books.google.com/books?id=V_WxjYMKuUAC&pg;;=PA168 Chapter 3, page 168]
, [http://books.google.com/books?id=oQ1y1HCpeowC&pg;;=SA6-PA90 Chapter 6, page 6.90]




