


Primitive element theorem




Primitive element theorem

In field theory, the primitive element theorem or Artin's theorem on primitive elements is a result characterizing the finite degree field extensions that possess a primitive element, or simple extensions. It says that a finite extension is simple if and only if there are only finitely many intermediate fields. In particular, finite separable extensions are simple.
Terminology
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite field extension. An element 
 
 
 
  is said to be a primitive element for 
 
 
 
  when



In this situation, the extension 
 
 
 
  is referred to as a simple extension. Then every element x of E can be written in the form



where 
 
 
 
  for all i, and 
 
 
 
  is fixed. That is, if 
 
 
 
  is separable of degree n, there exists 
 
 
 
  such that the set



is a basis for E as a vector space over F.
For instance, the extensions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are simple extensions with primitive elements 
 
 
 
  and x, respectively (
 
 
 
  denotes the field of rational functions in the indeterminate x over 
 
 
 
 ).
Existence statement
The interpretation of the theorem changed with the formulation of the theory of Emil Artin, around 1930. From the time of Galois, the role of primitive elements had been to represent a splitting field as generated by a single element. This (arbitrary) choice of such an element was bypassed in Artin's treatment.1 At the same time, considerations of construction of such an element receded: the theorem becomes an existence theorem.
The following theorem of Artin then takes the place of the classical primitive element theorem.

Theorem

Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite degree field extension. Then 
 
 
 
  for some element 
 
 
 
  if and only if there exist only finitely many intermediate fields K with 
 
 
 
 .
A corollary to the theorem is then the primitive element theorem in the more traditional sense (where separability was usually tacitly assumed):

Corollary

Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite degree separable extension. Then 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 .
The corollary applies to algebraic number fields, i.e. finite extensions of the rational numbers Q, since Q has characteristic 0 and therefore every extension over Q is separable.
Counterexamples
For non-separable extensions, necessarily in characteristic p with p a prime number, then at least when the degree [L : K] is p, L / K has a primitive element, because there are no intermediate subfields. When [L : K] = p2, there may not be a primitive element (and therefore there are infinitely many intermediate fields). This happens, for example if K is

Fp(T, U),
 

the field of rational functions in two indeterminates T and U over the finite field with p elements, and L is obtained from K by adjoining a p-th root of T, and of U. In fact one can see that for any α in L, the element αp lies in K, but a primitive element must have degree p2 over K.
Constructive results
Generally, the set of all primitive elements for a finite separable extension L / K is the complement of a finite collection of proper K-subspaces of L, namely the intermediate fields. This statement says nothing for the case of finite fields, for which there is a computational theory dedicated to finding a generator of the multiplicative group of the field (a cyclic group), which is a fortiori a primitive element. Where K is infinite, a pigeonhole principle proof technique considers the linear subspace generated by two elements and proves that there are only finitely many linear combinations



with c in K, that fail to generate the subfield containing both elements. This is almost immediate as a way of showing how Artin's result implies the classical result, and a bound for the number of exceptional c in terms of the number of intermediate fields results (this number being something that can be bounded itself by Galois theory and a priori). Therefore in this case trial-and-error is a possible practical method to find primitive elements. See the Example.
Example
It is not, for example, immediately obvious that if one adjoins to the field 
 
 
 
  of rational numbers roots of both polynomials



and



say 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively, to get a field K = 
 
 
 
  of degree 4 over 
 
 
 
 , that the extension is simple and there exists a primitive element γ in K so that K = 
 
 
 
 . One can in fact check that with



the powers γ i for 0 ≤ i ≤ 3 can be written out as linear combinations of 1, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  with integer coefficients. Taking these as a system of linear equations, or by factoring, one can solve for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  (one gets, for instance, 
 
 
 
 ), which implies that this choice of γ is indeed a primitive element in this example. A simpler argument, assuming the knowledge of all the subfields as given by Galois theory, is to note the independence of 1, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  over the rationals; this shows that the subfield generated by γ cannot be that generated by 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , exhausting all the subfields of degree 2. Therefore it must be the whole field.
See also

Primitive element (finite field)
The primitive element theorem at mathreference.com
The primitive element theorem at planetmath.org
The primitive element theorem on Ken Brown's website (pdf file)

References


Notes
"
Category:Field theory Category:Theorems in abstract algebra



Israel Kleiner, A History of Abstract Algebra (2007), p. 64.↩




