


Field norm




Field norm

In mathematics, the (field) norm is a particular mapping defined in field theory, which maps elements of a larger field into a subfield.
Formal definition
Let K be a field and L a finite extension (and hence an algebraic extension) of K. The field L is then a finite dimensional vector space over K. Multiplication by α, an element of L,


 
 , is a K-linear transformation of this vector space into itself. The norm, NL/K(α), is defined as the determinant of this linear transformation.1
For nonzero α in L, let σ
 
 
 
 (α), ..., σ
 
 
 
 (α) be the roots (counted with multiplicity) of the minimal polynomial of α over K (in some extension field of L), then


 
 . If L/K is separable then each root appears only once in the product (the exponent [L:K(α)] may still be greater than 1).
More particularly, if L/K is a Galois extension and α is in L, then the norm of α is the product of all the Galois conjugates of α, i.e.


 
 ,
where Gal(L/K) denotes the Galois group of L/K.2
Example
The field norm from the complex numbers to the real numbers sends




to

,
 

because the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  has two elements, the identity element and complex conjugation, and taking the product yields .
In this example the norm was the square of the usual Euclidean distance norm in 
 
 
 
 . In general, the field norm is very different from the usual distance norm. We will illustrate that with an example where the field norm can be negative. Consider the number field 
 
 
 
 . The Galois group of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  has order  and is generated by the element which sends 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . So the norm of 
 
 
 
  is:



The field norm can also be obtained without the Galois group. Fix a 
 
 
 
 -basis of 
 
 
 
 , say 
 
 
 
 : then multiplication by the number 
 
 
 
  sends 1 to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . So the determinant of "multiplying by 
 
 
 
  is the determinant of the matrix which sends the vector 
 
 
 
  (corresponding to the first basis element, i.e. 1) to 
 
 
 
  and the vector 
 
 
 
  (which represents the second basis element 
 
 
 
 ) to 
 
 
 
 , viz.:



The determinant of this matrix is −1.
Properties of the norm
Several properties of the norm function hold for any finite extension.3
The norm N

 
  : L* → K* is a group homomorphism from the multiplicative group of L to the multiplicative group of K, that is


 
 . Furthermore, if a in K:


 
 .
If a ∈ K then 
 
 

Additionally, norm behaves well in towers of fields: if M is a finite extension of L, then the norm from M to K is just the composition of the norm from M to L with the norm from L to K, i.e.


 
 .
Finite fields
Let L = GF(qn) be a finite extension of a finite field K = GF(q). Since L/K is a Galois extension, if α is in L, then the norm of α is the product of all the Galois conjugates of α, i.e.4


 
 .
In this setting we have the additional properties,5






 
 .

Further properties
The norm of an algebraic integer is again an integer, because it is equal (up to sign) to the constant term of the characteristic polynomial.
In algebraic number theory one defines also norms for ideals. This is done in such a way that if I is an ideal of OK, the ring of integers of the number field K, N(I) is the number of residue classes in 
 
 
 
  – i.e. the cardinality of this finite ring. Hence this norm of an ideal is always a positive integer. When I is a principal ideal αOK then N(I) is equal to the absolute value of the norm to Q of α, for α an algebraic integer.
See also

Field trace
Ideal norm

Notes
References






"
Category:Field theory Category:Algebraic number theory



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




