


J-invariant




J-invariant

(Figure)
Klein's 
 
 
 
 -invariant in the complex plane

In mathematics, Klein's j-invariant, regarded as a function of a complex variable τ, is a modular function of weight zero for 
 
 
 
  defined on the upper half-plane of complex numbers. It is the unique such function which is holomorphic away from a simple pole at the cusp such that



Rational functions of 
 
 
 
  are modular, and in fact give all modular functions. Classically, the 
 
 
 
 -invariant was studied as a parameterization of elliptic curves over 
 
 
 
 , but it also has surprising connections to the symmetries of the Monster group (this connection is referred to as monstrous moonshine).
Definition
 
While the 
 
 
 
 -invariant can be defined purely in terms of certain infinite sums (see  below), these can be motivated by considering isomorphism classes of elliptic curves. Every elliptic curve 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  is a complex torus, and thus can be identified with a rank 2 lattice; i.e., two-dimensional lattice of 
 
 
 
 . This is done by identifying opposite edges of each parallelogram in the lattice. It turns out that multiplying the lattice by complex numbers, which corresponds to rotating and scaling the lattice, preserves the isomorphism class of the elliptic curve, and thus we can consider the lattice generated by 
 
 
 
  and some 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is the Upper half-plane). Conversely, if we define



then this lattice corresponds to the elliptic curve over 
 
 
 
 
  defined by  4x3 − g2x - g3}} via the Weierstrass elliptic functions. Then the 
 
 
 
 -invariant is defined as



where the modular discriminant

 
  is



It can be shown that 
 
 
 
 
  is a modular form of weight twelve, and  one of weight four, so that its third power is also of weight twelve. Thus their quotient, and therefore 
 
 
 
 , is a modular function of weight zero, in particular a meromorphic function 
 
 
 
  invariant under the action of 
 
 
 
 . As explained below, 
 
 
 
  is surjective, which means that it gives a bijection between isomorphism classes of elliptic curves over 
 
 
 
 
  and the complex numbers.
The fundamental region
(Figure)
The fundamental domain of the modular group acting on the upper half plane.

The two transformations 
 
 
 
  and  together generate a group called the modular group, which we may identify with the projective special linear group

 
 . By a suitable choice of transformation belonging to this group,



we may reduce 
 
 
 
  to a value giving the same value for 
 
 
 
 
 , and lying in the fundamental region for 
 
 
 
 , which consists of values for 
 
 
 
  satisfying the conditions



The function 
 
 
 
  when restricted to this region still takes on every value in the complex numbers

 
  exactly once. In other words, for every 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique τ in the fundamental region such that 
 
 
 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
  has the property of mapping the fundamental region to the entire complex plane.
As a Riemann surface, the fundamental region has genus 
 
 
 
 , and every (level one) modular function is a rational function in 
 
 
 
 ; and, conversely, every rational function in 
 
 
 
  is a modular function. In other words the field of modular functions is 
 
 
 
 .
Class field theory and 
 
 

The 
 
 
 
 -invariant has many remarkable properties:

If 
 
 
 
  is any of the singular moduli, that is, any element of an imaginary quadratic field with positive imaginary part (so that 
 
 
 
  is defined) then 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic integer.1


The field extension 
 
 
 
  is abelian, that is, it has an abelian Galois group.


Let 
 
 
 
  be the lattice in 
 
 
 
  generated by  It is easy to see that all of the elements of 
 
 
 
  which fix 
 
 
 
  under multiplication form a ring with units, called an order. The other lattices with generators  associated in like manner to the same order define the algebraic conjugates

 
  of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . Ordered by inclusion, the unique maximal order in 
 
 
 
  is the ring of algebraic integers of 
 
 
 
 , and values of 
 
 
 
  having it as its associated order lead to unramified extensions of 
 
 
 
 .

These classical results are the starting point for the theory of complex multiplication.
Transcendence properties
In 1937 Theodor Schneider proved the aforementioned result that if 
 
 
 
  is a quadratic irrational number in the upper half plane then 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic integer. In addition he proved that if 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic number but not imaginary quadratic then 
 
 
 
  is transcendental.
The 
 
 
 
  function has numerous other transcendental properties. Kurt Mahler conjectured a particular transcendence result that is often referred to as Mahler's conjecture, though it was proved as a corollary of results by Yu. V. Nesterenko and Patrice Phillipon in the 1990s. Mahler's conjecture was that if 
 
 
 
  was in the upper half plane then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  were never both simultaneously algebraic. Stronger results are now known, for example if 
 
 
 
  is algebraic then the following three numbers are algebraically independent, and thus at least two of them transcendental:



The 
 
 
 
 -expansion and moonshine
Several remarkable properties of 
 
 
 
  have to do with its 

 
 -expansion (Fourier series expansion), written as a Laurent series in terms of 
 
 
 
 , which begins:



Note that 
 
 
 
  has a simple pole at the cusp, so its 
 
 
 
 -expansion has no terms below .
All the Fourier coefficients are integers, which results in several almost integers, notably Ramanujan's constant:


 
 .
The asymptotic formula for the coefficient of  is given by


 
 ,
as can be proved by Hardy–Littlewood circle method.23
Moonshine
More remarkably, the Fourier coefficients for the positive exponents of 
 
 
 
  are the dimensions of the graded part of an infinite-dimensional graded algebra representation of the monster group called the moonshine module – specifically, the coefficient of  is the dimension of grade-
 
 
 
  part of the moonshine module, the first example being the Griess algebra, which has dimension 
 
 
 
 , corresponding to the term 
 
 
 
 . This startling observation was the starting point for moonshine theory.
The study of the Moonshine conjecture led J.H. Conway and Simon P. Norton to look at the genus-zero modular functions. If they are normalized to have the form



then Thompson showed that there are only a finite number of such functions (of some finite level), and Cummins later showed that there are exactly 6486 of them, 616 of which have integral coefficients.4
Alternate Expressions
We have



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the modular lambda function



a ratio of Jacobi theta functions

 
 , and is the square of the elliptic modulus

 
 .5 The value of 
 
 
 
  is unchanged when λ is replaced by any of the six values of the cross-ratio:6



The branch points of 
 
 
 
  are at  so that 
 
 
 
  is a Belyi function.7
Expressions in terms of theta functions
Define the nome

 
  and the Jacobi theta function,



from which one can derive the auxiliary theta functions. Let,



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are alternative notations, and 
 
 
 
 . Then,



for Weierstrass invariants g2, g3, and Dedekind eta function η(τ). We can then express j(τ) in a form which can rapidly be computed.



Algebraic definition
So far we have been considering 
 
 
 
  as a function of a complex variable. However, as an invariant for isomorphism classes of elliptic curves, it can be defined purely algebraically. Let



be a plane elliptic curve over any field. Then we may define









and



the latter expression is the discriminant of the curve.
The 
 
 
 
 -invariant for the elliptic curve may now be defined as



In the case that the field over which the curve is defined has characteristic different from 2 or 3, this definition can also be written as



Inverse function
The inverse function of the 
 
 
 
 -invariant can be expressed in terms of the hypergeometric function  (see also the article Picard–Fuchs equation). Explicitly, given a number 
 
 
 
 , to solve the equation 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  can be done in at least four ways.
Method 1: Solving the sextic in 
 
 
 
 ,



where 
 
 
 
  is the modular lambda function. Let 
 
 
 
  and the sextic can be solved as a cubic in 
 
 
 
 . Then,



for any of the six values of 
 
 
 
 .
Method 2: Solving the quartic in 
 
 
 
 ,



then for any of the four roots,



Method 3: Solving the cubic in 
 
 
 
 ,



then for any of the three roots,



Method 4: Solving the quadratic in 
 
 
 
 ,



then,



One root gives 
 
 
 
 , and the other gives 
 
 
 
 , but since 
 
 
 
 , then it doesn't make a difference which 
 
 
 
  is chosen. The latter three methods can be found in Ramanujan's theory of elliptic functions to alternative bases.
The inversion is highly relevant to applications via enabling high-precision calculations of elliptic functions periods even as their ratios become unbounded. A related result is the expressibility via quadratic radicals of the values of 
 
 
 
  at the points of the imaginary axis whose magnitudes are powers of 2 (thus permitting compass and straightedge constructions). The latter result is hardly evident since the modular equation of level 2 is cubic.
Pi formulas
The Chudnovsky brothers found in 1987,8



which uses the fact that 
 
 
 
 . For similar formulas, see the Ramanujan–Sato series.
Special values
The 
 
 
 
 -invariant vanishes at the "corner" of the fundamental domain at



Here are a few more special values (only the first four of which are well known; in what follows, 
 
 
 
  means 
 
 
 
  throughout):



Several special values were calculated in 2014:9



All preceding values are real. A complex conjugate pair might be inferred exploiting the symmetry described in the reference, along with the values for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , given above:



Four more special values are given as two complex conjugate pairs:10



References


. Provides a very readable introduction and various interesting identities.




. Provides a variety of interesting algebraic identities, including the inverse as a hypergeometric series.

Introduces the j-invariant and discusses the related class field theory.

. Includes a list of the 175 genus-zero modular functions.

. Provides a short review in the context of modular forms.

.

"
Category:Modular forms Category:Elliptic functions Category:Moonshine theory







Chandrasekharan (1985) p.108


.






