


Clenshaw algorithm




Clenshaw algorithm

In numerical analysis, the Clenshaw algorithm,1 also called Clenshaw summation,2 is a recursive method to evaluate a linear combination of Chebyshev polynomials. It is a generalization of Horner's method for evaluating a linear combination of monomials.
It generalizes to more than just Chebyshev polynomials; it applies to any class of functions that can be defined by a three-term recurrence relation.3
Clenshaw algorithm
In full generality, the Clenshaw algorithm computes the weighted sum of a finite series of functions 
 
 
 
 :



where 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of functions that satisfy the linear recurrence relation



where the coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are known in advance.
The algorithm is most useful when 
 
 
 
  are complex functions to compute directly, but 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are particularly simple. In the most common applications, 
 
 
 
  does not depend on 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a constant that depends on neither 
 
 
 
  nor 
 
 
 
 .
To perform the summation for given series of coefficients 
 
 
 
 , compute the values 
 
 
 
  by the "reverse" recurrence formula:



Note that this computation makes no direct reference to the functions 
 
 
 
 . After computing 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , the desired sum can be expressed in terms of them and the simplest functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :



See Fox and Parker4 for more information and stability analyses.
Examples
Horner as a special case of Clenshaw
A particularly simple case occurs when evaluating a polynomial of the form


 
 . The functions are simply


 
 
  and are produced by the recurrence coefficients 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
In this case, the recurrence formula to compute the sum is


 
  and, in this case, the sum is simply


 
 , which is exactly the usual Horner's method.
Special case for Chebyshev series
Consider a truncated Chebyshev series



The coefficients in the recursion relation for the Chebyshev polynomials are


 
  with the initial conditions



Thus, the recurrence is


 
  and the final sum is



One way to evaluate this is to continue the recurrence one more step, and compute


 
  (note the doubled a0 coefficient) followed by



Meridian arc length on the ellipsoid
Clenshaw summation is extensively used in geodetic applications.5 A simple application is summing the trigonometric series to compute the meridian arc distance on the surface of an ellipsoid. These have the form



Leaving off the initial 
 
 
 
  term, the remainder is a summation of the appropriate form. There is no leading term because 
 
 
 
 .
The recurrence relation for 
 
 
 is


 
 ,
making the coefficients in the recursion relation



and the evaluation of the series is given by


 
 
  The final step is made particularly simple because 
 
 
 
 , so the end of the recurrence is simply 
 
 
 
 ; the 
 
 
 
  term is added separately:



Note that the algorithm requires only the evaluation of two trigonometric quantities 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Difference in meridian arc lengths
Sometimes it necessary to compute the difference of two meridian arcs in a way that maintains high relative accuracy. This is accomplished by using trigonometric identities to write


 
  Clenshaw summation can be applied in this case6 provided we simultaneously compute 
 
 
 
  and perform a matrix summation,


 
  where


 
 
  The first element of 
 
 
 
  is the average value of 
 
 
 
  and the second element is the average slope. 
 
 
 
  satisfies the recurrence relation


 
  where


 
  takes the place of 
 
 
 
  in the recurrence relation, and 
 
 
 
 . The standard Clenshaw algorithm can now be applied to yield


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are 2×2 matrices. Finally we have


 
  This technique can be used in the limit

 
  and 
 
 
 
  to compute the derivative

 
 , provided that, in evaluating 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , we take 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Horner scheme to evaluate polynomials in monomial form
De Casteljau's algorithm to evaluate polynomials in Bézier form

References


"
Category:Numerical analysis



 Note that this paper is written in terms of the Shifted Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind 
 
 
 
 .↩

↩
↩
↩
↩




