


Subspace topology




Subspace topology

In topology and related areas of mathematics, a subspace of a topological space X is a subset S of X which is equipped with a topology induced from that of X called the subspace topology (or the relative topology, or the induced topology, or the trace topology).
Definition
Given a topological space 
 
 
 
  and a subset

 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the subspace topology on 
 
 
 
  is defined by


 
  That is, a subset of 
 
 
 
  is open in the subspace topology if and only if it is the intersection of 
 
 
 
  with an open set in 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is equipped with the subspace topology then it is a topological space in its own right, and is called a subspace of 
 
 
 
 . Subsets of topological spaces are usually assumed to be equipped with the subspace topology unless otherwise stated.
Alternatively we can define the subspace topology for a subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  as the coarsest topology for which the inclusion map


 
  is continuous.
More generally, suppose 
 
 
 
  is an injection from a set 
 
 
 
  to a topological space 
 
 
 
 . Then the subspace topology on 
 
 
 
  is defined as the coarsest topology for which 
 
 
 
  is continuous. The open sets in this topology are precisely the ones of the form 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  open in 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is then homeomorphic to its image in 
 
 
 
  (also with the subspace topology) and 
 
 
 
  is called a topological embedding.
A subspace 
 
 
 
  is called an open subspace if the injection 
 
 
 
  is an open map, i.e., if the forward image of an open set of 
 
 
 
  is open in 
 
 
 
 . Likewise it is called a closed subspace if the injection 
 
 
 
  is a closed map.
A Note About Terminology
The distinction between a set and a topological space is often blurred notationally, for convenience, which can be a source of confusion when one first encounters these definitions. Thus, whenever 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a topological space, then the unadorned symbols "
 
 
 
 " and "
 
 
 
 " can often be used to refer both to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  considered as two subsets of 
 
 
 
 , and also to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as the topological spaces, related as discussed above. So phrases such as "
 
 
 
  an open subspace of 
 
 
 
 " are used to mean that 
 
 
 
  is an open subspace of 
 
 
 
 , in the sense used below -- that is that: (i) 
 
 
 
 ; and (ii) 
 
 
 
  is considered to be endowed with the subspace topology.
Examples
In the following, 
 
 
 
  represents the real numbers with their usual topology.

The subspace topology of the natural numbers, as a subspace of 
 
 
 
 , is the discrete topology.
The rational numbers

 
  considered as a subspace of 
 
 
 
  do not have the discrete topology (the point 0 for example is not an open set in 
 
 
 
 ). If a and b are rational, then the intervals (a, b) and [a, b] are respectively open and closed, but if a and b are irrational, then the set of all x with a < x < b is both open and closed.
The set [0,1] as a subspace of 
 
 
 
  is both open and closed, whereas as a subset of 
 
 
 
  it is only closed.
As a subspace of 
 
 
 
 , [0, 1] ∪ [2, 3] is composed of two disjoint open subsets (which happen also to be closed), and is therefore a disconnected space.
Let S = [0, 1) be a subspace of the real line 
 
 
 
 . Then [0, 1/2) is open in S but not in 
 
 
 
 . Likewise [½, 1) is closed in S but not in 
 
 
 
 . S is both open and closed as a subset of itself but not as a subset of 
 
 
 
 .

Properties
The subspace topology has the following characteristic property. Let 
 
 
 
  be a subspace of 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the inclusion map. Then for any topological space 
 
 
 
  a map 
 
 
 
  is continuous if and only if the composite map 
 
 
 
  is continuous.  This property is characteristic in the sense that it can be used to define the subspace topology on 
 
 
 
 .
We list some further properties of the subspace topology. In the following let 
 
 
 
  be a subspace of 
 
 
 
 .

If 
 
 
 
  is continuous the restriction to 
 
 
 
  is continuous.
If 
 
 
 
  is continuous then 
 
 
 
  is continuous.
The closed sets in 
 
 
 
  are precisely the intersections of 
 
 
 
  with closed sets in 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a subspace of 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is also a subspace of 
 
 
 
  with the same topology. In other words the subspace topology that 
 
 
 
  inherits from 
 
 
 
  is the same as the one it inherits from 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is an open subspace of 
 
 
 
  (so 
 
 
 
 ). Then a subset of 
 
 
 
  is open in 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is open in 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a closed subspace of 
 
 
 
  (so 
 
 
 
 ). Then a subset of 
 
 
 
  is closed in 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is closed in 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a basis for 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is a basis for 
 
 
 
 .
The topology induced on a subset of a metric space by restricting the metric to this subset coincides with subspace topology for this subset.

Preservation of topological properties
If a topological space having some topological property implies its subspaces have that property, then we say the property is hereditary. If only closed subspaces must share the property we call it weakly hereditary.

Every open and every closed subspace of a completely metrizable space is completely metrizable.
Every open subspace of a Baire space is a Baire space.
Every closed subspace of a compact space is compact.
Being a Hausdorff space is hereditary.
Being a normal space is weakly hereditary.
Total boundedness is hereditary.
Being totally disconnected is hereditary.
First countability and second countability are hereditary.

See also

the dual notion quotient space
product topology
direct sum topology

References

Bourbaki, Nicolas, Elements of Mathematics: General Topology, Addison-Wesley (1966)

Willard, Stephen. General Topology, Dover Publications (2004) ISBN 0-486-43479-6

"
Category:Topology Category:General topology


