


Smith–Volterra–Cantor set




Smith–Volterra–Cantor set

 In mathematics, the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set (SVC), fat Cantor set, or ε-Cantor set1 is an example of a set of points on the real line ℝ that is nowhere dense (in particular it contains no intervals), yet has positive measure. The Smith–Volterra–Cantor set is named after the mathematicians Henry Smith, Vito Volterra and Georg Cantor. The Smith-Volterra-Cantor set is topologically equivalent to the middle-thirds Cantor set.
Construction
Similar to the construction of the Cantor set, the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set is constructed by removing certain intervals from the unit interval [0, 1].
The process begins by removing the middle 1/4 from the interval [0, 1] (the same as removing 1/8 on either side of the middle point at 1/2) so the remaining set is



The following steps consist of removing subintervals of width 1/22n from the middle of each of the 2n−1 remaining intervals. So for the second step the intervals (5/32, 7/32) and (25/32, 27/32) are removed, leaving



Continuing indefinitely with this removal, the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set is then the set of points that are never removed. The image below shows the initial set and five iterations of this process.
(Figure)
Smith-Volterra-Cantor set.svg

Each subsequent iterate in the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set's construction removes proportionally less from the remaining intervals. This stands in contrast to the Cantor set, where the proportion removed from each interval remains constant. Thus, the former has positive measure, while the latter zero measure.
Properties
By construction, the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set contains no intervals and therefore has empty interior. It is also the intersection of a sequence of closed sets, which means that it is closed. During the process, intervals of total length



are removed from [0, 1], showing that the set of the remaining points has a positive measure of 1/2. This makes the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set an example of a closed set whose boundary has positive Lebesgue measure.
Other fat Cantor sets
In general, one can remove rn from each remaining subinterval at the n-th step of the algorithm, and end up with a Cantor-like set. The resulting set will have positive measure if and only if the sum of the sequence is less than the measure of the initial interval.
See also

The SVC is used in the construction of Volterra's function (see external link).
The SVC is an example of a compact set that is not Jordan measurable, see Jordan measure#Extension to more complicated sets.
The indicator function of the SVC is an example of a bounded function that is not Riemann integrable on (0,1) and moreover, is not equal almost everywhere to a Riemann integrable function, see Riemann integral#Examples.

References
External links

''Wrestling with the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus: Volterra's function, talk by David Marius Bressoud

"
Category:Sets of real numbers Category:Measure theory Category:Topological spaces Category:Fractals



Aliprantis and Burkinshaw (1981), Principles of Real Analysis↩




