


Hyperfocal distance




Hyperfocal distance

In optics and photography, hyperfocal distance is a distance beyond which all objects can be brought into an "acceptable" focus. There are two commonly used definitions of hyperfocal distance, leading to values that differ only slightly:
Definition 1: The hyperfocal distance is the closest distance at which a lens can be focused while keeping objects at infinity acceptably sharp. When the lens is focused at this distance, all objects at distances from half of the hyperfocal distance out to infinity will be acceptably sharp.
Definition 2: The hyperfocal distance is the distance beyond which all objects are acceptably sharp, for a lens focused at infinity.
The distinction between the two meanings is rarely made, since they have almost identical values. The value computed according to the first definition exceeds that from the second by just one focal length.
As the hyperfocal distance is the focus distance giving the maximum depth of field, it is the most desirable distance to set the focus of a fixed-focus camera.1
Acceptable sharpness
The hyperfocal distance is entirely dependent upon what level of sharpness is considered to be acceptable. The criterion for the desired acceptable sharpness is specified through the circle of confusion (CoC) diameter limit. This criterion is the largest acceptable spot size diameter that an infinitesimal point is allowed to spread out to on the imaging medium (film, digital sensor, etc.).
Formulae
For the first definition,



where


 
  is hyperfocal distance


 
  is focal length


 
  is f-number (
 
 
 
  for aperture diameter 
 
 
 
 )


 
  is the circle of confusion limit
For any practical f-number, the added focal length is insignificant in comparison with the first term, so that



This formula is exact for the second definition, if 
 
 
 
  is measured from a thin lens, or from the front principal plane of a complex lens; it is also exact for the first definition if 
 
 
 
  is measured from a point that is one focal length in front of the front principal plane. For practical purposes, there is little difference between the first and second definitions.
Derivation using geometric optics
 The following derivations refer to the accompanying figures. For clarity, half the aperture and circle of confusion are indicated.2
Definition 1
An object at distance H forms a sharp image at distance x  (blue line). Here, objects at infinity have images with a circle of confusion indicated by the brown ellipse where the upper red ray through the focal point intersects the blue line.
First using similar triangles hatched in green,


 
  Then using similar triangles dotted in purple,


 
  as found above.
Definition 2
Objects at infinity form sharp images at the focal length f  (blue line). Here, an object at H forms an image with a circle of confusion indicated by the brown ellipse where the lower red ray converging to its sharp image intersects the blue line.
Using similar triangles shaded in yellow,



Example
As an example, for a 50 mm lens at 
 
 
 
  using a circle of confusion of 0.03 mm, which is a value typically used in 35 mm photography, the hyperfocal distance according to Definition 1 is



If the lens is focused at a distance of 10.5 m, then everything from half that distance (5.2 m) to infinity will be acceptably sharp in our photograph. With the formula for the Definition 2, the result is 10417 mm, a difference of 0.5%.
Mathematical phenomenon
The hyperfocal distance has a curious property: while a lens focused at H will hold a depth of field from H/2 to infinity, if the lens is focused to H/2, the depth of field will extend from H/3 to H; if the lens is then focused to H/3, the depth of field will extend from H/4 to H/2. This continues on through all successive 1/x values of the hyperfocal distance.
Piper (1901) calls this phenomenon "consecutive depths of field" and shows how to test the idea easily. This is also among the earliest of publications to use the word hyperfocal.
The figure on the right illustrates this phenomenon.
History
(Figure)
This early use of the term hyperfocal distance, Derr 1906, is by no means the earliest explanation of the concept.

The concepts of the two definitions of hyperfocal distance have a long history, tied up with the terminology for depth of field, depth of focus, circle of confusion, etc. Here are some selected early quotations and interpretations on the topic.
Sutton and Dawson 1867
Thomas Sutton and George Dawson define focal range for what we now call hyperfocal distance:3
Their focal range is about 1000 times their aperture diameter, so it makes sense as a hyperfocal distance with CoC value of f/1000, or image format diagonal times 1/1000 assuming the lens is a “normal” lens. What is not clear, however, is whether the focal range they cite was computed, or empirical.
Abney 1881
Sir William de Wivelesley Abney says:4
That is, a is the reciprocal of what we now call the f-number, and the answer is evidently in meters. His 0.41 should obviously be 0.40. Based on his formulae, and on the notion that the aperture ratio should be kept fixed in comparisons across formats, Abney says:
Taylor 1892
John Traill Taylor recalls this word formula for a sort of hyperfocal distance:5 
This formula implies a stricter CoC criterion than we typically use today.
Hodges 1895
John Hodges discusses depth of field without formulas but with some of these relationships:6 
This "mathematically" observed relationship implies that he had a formula at hand, and a parameterization with the f-number or “intensity ratio” in it. To get an inverse-square relation to focal length, you have to assume that the CoC limit is fixed and the aperture diameter scales with the focal length, giving a constant f-number.
Piper 1901
C. Welborne Piper may be the first to have published a clear distinction between Depth of Field in the modern sense and Depth of Definition in the focal plane, and implies that Depth of Focus and Depth of Distance are sometimes used for the former (in modern usage, Depth of Focus is usually reserved for the latter).7 He uses the term Depth Constant for H, and measures it from the front principal focus (i. e., he counts one focal length less than the distance from the lens to get the simpler formula), and even introduces the modern term:
It is unclear what distinction he means. Adjacent to Table I in his appendix, he further notes:
At this point we do not have evidence of the term hyperfocal before Piper, nor the hyphenated hyper-focal which he also used, but he obviously did not claim to coin this descriptor himself.
Derr 1906
Louis Derr may be the first to clearly specify the first definition,8 which is considered to be the strictly correct one in modern times, and to derive the formula corresponding to it. Using 
 
 
 
  for hyperfocal distance, 
 
 
 
  for aperture diameter, 
 
 
 
  for the diameter that a circle of confusion shall not exceed, and 
 
 
 
  for focal length, he derives:


 
  [http://books.google.com/books?id=AN6d4zTjquwC&pg;;=PA78]
As the aperture diameter, 
 
 
 
  is the ratio of the focal length, 
 
 
 
  to the numerical aperture, 
 
 
 
 ; and the diameter of the circle of confusion, 
 
 
 
 , this gives the equation for the first definition above.



Johnson 1909
George Lindsay Johnson uses the term Depth of Field for what Abney called Depth of Focus, and Depth of Focus in the modern sense (possibly for the first time),9 as the allowable distance error in the focal plane. His definitions include hyperfocal distance:
His drawing makes it clear that his e is the radius of the circle of confusion. He has clearly anticipated the need to tie it to format size or enlargement, but has not given a general scheme for choosing it.
Johnson's use of former and latter seem to be swapped; perhaps former was here meant to refer to the immediately preceding section title Depth of Focus, and latter to the current section title Depth of Field. Except for an obvious factor-of-2 error in using the ratio of stop diameter to CoC radius, this definition is the same as Abney's hyperfocal distance.
Others, early twentieth century
The term hyperfocal distance also appears in Cassell's Cyclopaedia of 1911, The Sinclair Handbook of Photography of 1913, and Bayley's The Complete Photographer of 1914.
Kingslake 1951
Rudolf Kingslake is explicit about the two meanings:10 
Kingslake uses the simplest formulae for DOF near and far distances, which has the effect of making the two different definitions of hyperfocal distance give identical values.
See also

Circle of confusion
Deep focus
Depssi, depth of field sunrise/sunset indicator
Depth of field

References


External links

http://www.dofmaster.com/dofjs.html to calculate hyperfocal distance and depth of field

"
Category:Optics Category:Length Category:Science of photography



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩





