


Interaction picture




Interaction picture

 In quantum mechanics, the interaction picture (also known as the Dirac picture) is an intermediate representation between the Schrödinger picture and the Heisenberg picture. Whereas in the other two pictures either the state vector or the operators carry time dependence, in the interaction picture both carry part of the time dependence of observables.1 The interaction picture is useful in dealing with changes to the wave functions and observable due to interactions. Most field theoretical calculations2 use the interaction representation because they construct the solution to the many body Schrödinger equation as the solution to the free particle problem plus some unknown interaction parts.
Equations that include operators acting at different times, which hold in the interaction picture, don't necessarily hold in the Schrödinger or the Heisenberg picture. This is because time-dependent unitary transformations relate operators in one picture to the analogous operators in the others.
Definition
Operators and state vectors in the interaction picture are related by a change of basis (unitary transformation) to those same operators and state vectors in the Schrödinger picture.
To switch into the interaction picture, we divide the Schrödinger picture Hamiltonian into two parts,  Any possible choice of parts will yield a valid interaction picture; but in order for the interaction picture to be useful in simplifying the analysis of a problem, the parts will typically be chosen so that H0,S is well understood and exactly solvable, while H1,S contains some harder-to-analyze perturbation to this system.
If the Hamiltonian has explicit time-dependence (for example, if the quantum system interacts with an applied external electric field that varies in time), it will usually be advantageous to include the explicitly time-dependent terms with H1,S, leaving H0,S time-independent. We proceed assuming that this is the case. If there is a context in which it makes sense to have H0,S be time-dependent, then one can proceed by replacing 
 
 
 
  by the corresponding time-evolution operator in the definitions below.
State vectors
A state vector in the interaction picture is defined as3  where |ψS(t)〉is the state vector in the Schrödinger picture.
Operators
An operator in the interaction picture is defined as  Note that AS(t) will typically not depend on 
 
 
 
 , and can be rewritten as just AS. It only depends on 
 
 
 
  if the operator has "explicit time dependence", for example due to its dependence on an applied, external, time-varying electric field.
Hamiltonian operator
For the operator H0 itself, the interaction picture and Schrödinger picture coincide,


 
  This is easily seen through the fact that operators commute with differentiable functions of themselves. This particular operator then can be called H0 without ambiguity.
For the perturbation Hamiltonian H1,I, however,


 
  where the interaction picture perturbation Hamiltonian becomes a time-dependent Hamiltonian—unless [H1,S, H0,S] = 0 .
It is possible to obtain the interaction picture for a time-dependent Hamiltonian H0,S(t) as well, but the exponentials need to be replaced by the unitary propagator for the evolution generated by H0,S(t), or more explicitly with a time-ordered exponential integral.
Density matrix
The density matrix can be shown to transform to the interaction picture in the same way as any other operator. In particular, let  and  be the density matrix in the interaction picture and the Schrödinger picture, respectively. If there is probability  to be in the physical state |ψn〉, then








Evolution

colspan="3" Picture



of:

Heisenberg



Ket state

constant



Observable







Density matrix

constant






Time-evolution equations in the interaction picture
Time-evolution of states
Transforming the Schrödinger equation into the interaction picture gives:



This equation is referred to as the Schwinger–Tomonaga equation.
Time-evolution of operators
If the operator AS is time independent (i.e., does not have "explicit time dependence"; see above), then the corresponding time evolution for AI(t) is given by



In the interaction picture the operators evolve in time like the operators in the Heisenberg picture with the Hamiltonian H0}}.
Time-evolution of the density matrix
Transforming the Schwinger–Tomonaga equation into the language of the density matrix (or equivalently, transforming the von Neumann equation into the interaction picture) gives:



Use of interaction picture
The purpose of the interaction picture is to shunt all the time dependence due to H0 onto the operators, thus allowing them to evolve freely, and leaving only H1,I to control the time-evolution of the state vectors.
The interaction picture is convenient when considering the effect of a small interaction term, H1,S, being added to the Hamiltonian of a solved system, H0,S. By utilizing the interaction picture, one can use time-dependent perturbation theory to find the effect of H1,I, e.g., in the derivation of Fermi's golden rule, or the Dyson series, in quantum field theory: In 1947, Tomonaga and Schwinger appreciated that covariant perturbation theory could be formulated elegantly in the interaction picture, since field operators can evolve in time as free fields, even in the presence of interactions, now treated perturbatively in such a Dyson series.
References


Online copy




See also

Bra–ket notation
Schrödinger equation
Haag's theorem

es:Imagen de evolución temporal"
Category:Quantum mechanics



Albert Messiah (1966). Quantum Mechanics, North Holland, John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0486409244 ; J. J. Sakurai (1994). Modern Quantum Mechanics (Addison-Wesley) ISBN 9780201539295 .↩
J. W. Negele, H. Orland (1988), Quantum Many-particle Systems, ISBN 0738200522↩
The Interaction Picture, lecture notes from New York University↩




