


Sard's theorem




Sard's theorem

Sard's theorem, also known as Sard's lemma or the Morse–Sard theorem, is a result in mathematical analysis which asserts that the set of critical values (that is, the image of the set of critical points) of a smooth function f from one Euclidean space or manifold to another is a null set, i.e., it has Lebesgue measure 0. This makes the set of critical values "small" in the sense of a generic property. The theorem is named for Anthony Morse and Arthur Sard.
Statement
More explicitly (; ), let



be 
 
 
 
 , (that is, 
 
 
 
  times continuously differentiable), where 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the critical set of 
 
 
 
  which is the set of points 
 
 
 
  at which the Jacobian matrix of 
 
 
 
  has rank 
Intuitively speaking, this means that although 
 
 
 
  may be large, its image must be small in the sense of Lebesgue measure: while 
 
 
 
  may have many critical points in the domain 
 
 
 
 , it must have few critical values in the image 
 
 
 
 .
More generally, the result also holds for mappings between second countable differentiable manifolds

 
  and 
 
 
 
  of dimensions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. The critical set 
 
 
 
  of a 
 
 
 
  function


 
  consists of those points at which the differential


 
  has rank less than 
 
 
 
  as a linear transformation. If 
 
 
 
 , then Sard's theorem asserts that the image of 
 
 
 
  has measure zero as a subset of 
 
 
 
 . This formulation of the result follows from the version for Euclidean spaces by taking a countable set of coordinate patches. The conclusion of the theorem is a local statement, since a countable union of sets of measure zero is a set of measure zero, and the property of a subset of a coordinate patch having zero measure is invariant under diffeomorphism.
Variants
There are many variants of this lemma, which plays a basic role in singularity theory among other fields. The case 
 
 
 
  was proven by Anthony P. Morse in 1939 , and the general case by Arthur Sard in 1942 .
A version for infinite-dimensional Banach manifolds was proven by Stephen Smale .
The statement is quite powerful, and the proof is involved analysis. In topology it is often quoted — as in the Brouwer fixed point theorem and some applications in Morse theory — in order to use the weaker corollary that “a non-constant smooth map has a regular value”.
In 1965 Sard further generalized his theorem to state that if 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and if 
 
 
 
  is the set of points 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  has rank strictly less than 
 
 
 
 , then the r-dimensional Hausdorff measure of 
 
 
 
  is zero. In particular the Hausdorff dimension of 
 
 
 
  is at most r. Caveat: The Hausdorff dimension of 
 
 
 
  can be arbitrarly close to r.1
See also

Generic property

References


.

.

.

and also .

.

"
Category:Lemmas Category:Smooth functions Category:Multivariable calculus Category:Singularity theory Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Theorems in differential geometry Category:Theorems in measure theory



http://math.stackexchange.com/a/446049/62443↩




