


Supermodular function




Supermodular function

In mathematics, a function


 
  is supermodular if


 
  for all x, y

Rk, where x

y denotes the componentwise maximum and x

y the componentwise minimum of x and y.
If −f is supermodular then f is called submodular, and if the inequality is changed to an equality the function is modular.
If f is twice continuously differentiable, then supermodularity is equivalent to the condition1



Supermodularity in economics and game theory
The concept of supermodularity is used in the social sciences to analyze how one agent's decision affects the incentives of others.
Consider a symmetric game with a smooth payoff function 
 
 
 
  defined over actions 
 
 
 
  of two or more players 
 
 
 
 . Suppose the action space is continuous; for simplicity, suppose each action is chosen from an interval
 
 
 
 . In this context, supermodularity of 
 
 
 
  implies that an increase in player 
 
 
 
 's choice 
 
 
 
  increases the marginal payoff 
 
 
 
  of action 
 
 
 
  for all other players 
 
 
 
 . That is, if any player 
 
 
 
  chooses a higher 
 
 
 
 , all other players 
 
 
 
  have an incentive to raise their choices 
 
 
 
  too. Following the terminology of Bulow, Geanakoplos, and Klemperer (1985), economists call this situation strategic complementarity, because players' strategies are complements to each other.2 This is the basic property underlying examples of multiple equilibria in coordination games.3
The opposite case of submodularity of 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the situation of strategic substitutability. An increase in 
 
 
 
  lowers the marginal payoff to all other player's choices 
 
 
 
 , so strategies are substitutes. That is, if 
 
 
 
  chooses a higher 
 
 
 
 , other players have an incentive to pick a lower

 
 .
For example, Bulow et al. consider the interactions of many imperfectly competitive firms. When an increase in output by one firm raises the marginal revenues of the other firms, production decisions are strategic complements. When an increase in output by one firm lowers the marginal revenues of the other firms, production decisions are strategic substitutes.
A standard reference on the subject is by Topkis.4
Supermodular functions of subsets
Supermodularity and submodularity are also defined for functions defined over subsets of a larger set. Intuitively, a submodular function over the subsets demonstrates "diminishing returns". There are specialized techniques for optimizing submodular functions.
Let S be a finite set. A function 
 
 
 
  is supermodular if for any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . For submodularity, the inequality is reversed.
The definition of supermodularity can equivalently be formulated as


 
  for all subsets A and B of S.
See also

Pseudo-Boolean function
Topkis's theorem
Submodular set function
Superadditive
Utility functions on indivisible goods

Notes and references


External links
"
Category:Order theory Category:Optimization of ordered sets Category:Generalized convexity Category:Supermodular functions



The equivalence between the definition of supermodularity and its calculus formulation is sometimes called Topkis' Characterization Theorem. See Paul Milgrom and John Roberts (1990), 'Rationalizability, Learning, and Equilibrium in Games with Strategic Complementarities', Econometrica 58 (6), page 1261.
Jeremy I. Bulow, John D. Geanakoplos, and Paul D. Klemperer (1985), 'Multimarket oligopoly: strategic substitutes and strategic complements'. Journal of Political Economy 93, pp. 488–511.
Russell Cooper and Andrew John (1988), 'Coordinating coordination failures in Keynesian models.' Quarterly Journal of Economics 103 (3), pp. 441–63.
Donald M. Topkis (1998), Supermodularity and Complementarity, Princeton University Press.




