


Normal extension




Normal extension

In abstract algebra, an algebraic field extension L/K is said to be normal if L is the splitting field of a family of polynomials in K[X]. Bourbaki calls such an extension a quasi-Galois extension.
Equivalent properties and examples
The normality of L/K is equivalent to either of the following properties. Let Ka be an algebraic closure of K containing L.

Every embedding σ of L in Ka that restricts to the identity on K, satisfies σ(L) = L. In other words, σ is an automorphism of L over K.
Every irreducible polynomial in K[X] that has one root in L, has all of its roots in L, that is, it decomposes into linear factors in L[X]. (One says that the polynomial splits in L.)

If L is a finite extension of K that is separable (for example, this is automatically satisfied if K is finite or has characteristic zero) then the following property is also equivalent:

There exists an irreducible polynomial whose roots, together with the elements of K, generate L. (One says that L is the splitting field for the polynomial.)

For example, 
 
 
 
  is a normal extension of 
 
 
 
 , since it is a splitting field of x2 − 2. On the other hand, 
 
 
 
  is not a normal extension of 
 
 
 
  since the irreducible polynomial x3 − 2 has one root in it (namely, 
 
 
 
 ), but not all of them (it does not have the non-real cubic roots of 2).
The fact that 
 
 
 
  is not a normal extension of 
 
 
 
  can also be seen using the first of the three properties above. The field 
 
 
 
  of algebraic numbers is an algebraic closure of 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand


 
  and, if ω is one of the two non-real cubic roots of 2, then the map


 
  is an embedding of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  whose restriction to 
 
 
 
  is the identity. However, σ is not an automorphism of 
 
 
 
 .
For any prime p, the extension 
 
 
 
  is normal of degree p(p − 1). It is a splitting field of xp − 2. Here 
 
 
 
  denotes any pth primitive root of unity. The field 
 
 
 
  is the normal closure (see below) of 
 
 
 
 .
Other properties
Let L be an extension of a field K. Then:

If L is a normal extension of K and if E is an intermediate extension (i.e., L ⊃ E ⊃ K), then L is a normal extension of E.


If E and F are normal extensions of K contained in L, then the compositum EF and E ∩ F are also normal extensions of K.

Normal closure
If K is a field and L is an algebraic extension of K, then there is some algebraic extension M of L such that M is a normal extension of K. Furthermore, up to isomorphism there is only one such extension which is minimal, i.e. such that the only subfield of M which contains L and which is a normal extension of K is M itself. This extension is called the normal closure of the extension L of K.
If L is a finite extension of K, then its normal closure is also a finite extension.
See also

Galois extension
Normal basis

References




"
Category:Field extensions


