


Sub-Riemannian manifold




Sub-Riemannian manifold

In mathematics, a sub-Riemannian manifold is a certain type of generalization of a Riemannian manifold. Roughly speaking, to measure distances in a sub-Riemannian manifold, you are allowed to go only along curves tangent to so-called horizontal subspaces.
Sub-Riemannian manifolds (and so, a fortiori, Riemannian manifolds) carry a natural intrinsic metric called the metric of Carnot–Carathéodory. The Hausdorff dimension of such metric spaces is always an integer and larger than its topological dimension (unless it is actually a Riemannian manifold).
Sub-Riemannian manifolds often occur in the study of constrained systems in classical mechanics, such as the motion of vehicles on a surface, the motion of robot arms, and the orbital dynamics of satellites. Geometric quantities such as the Berry phase may be understood in the language of sub-Riemannian geometry. The Heisenberg group, important to quantum mechanics, carries a natural sub-Riemannian structure.
Definitions
By a distribution on 
 
 
 
  we mean a subbundle of the tangent bundle of 
 
 
 
 .
Given a distribution 
 
 
 
  a vector field in 
 
 
 
  is called horizontal. A curve 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is called horizontal if 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .
A distribution on 
 
 
 
  is called completely non-integrable if for any 
 
 
 
  we have that any tangent vector can be presented as a linear combination of vectors of the following types 
 
 
 
  where all vector fields 
 
 
 
  are horizontal.
A sub-Riemannian manifold is a triple 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a differentiable manifold, 
 
 
 
  is a completely non-integrable "horizontal" distribution and 
 
 
 
  is a smooth section of positive-definite quadratic forms on 
 
 
 
 .
Any sub-Riemannian manifold carries the natural intrinsic metric, called the metric of Carnot–Carathéodory, defined as


 
  where infimum is taken along all horizontal curves

 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
A position of a car on the plane is determined by three parameters: two coordinates 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for the location and an angle 
 
 
 
  which describes the orientation of the car. Therefore, the position of the car can be described by a point in a manifold



One can ask, what is the minimal distance one should drive to get from one position to another? This defines a Carnot–Carathéodory metric on the manifold



A closely related example of a sub-Riemannian metric can be constructed on a Heisenberg group: Take two elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the corresponding Lie algebra such that



spans the entire algebra. The horizontal distribution 
 
 
 
  spanned by left shifts of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is completely non-integrable. Then choosing any smooth positive quadratic form on 
 
 
 
  gives a sub-Riemannian metric on the group.
Properties
For every sub-Riemannian manifold, there exists a Hamiltonian, called the sub-Riemannian Hamiltonian, constructed out of the metric for the manifold. Conversely, every such quadratic Hamiltonian induces a sub-Riemannian manifold. The existence of geodesics of the corresponding Hamilton–Jacobi equations for the sub-Riemannian Hamiltonian is given by the Chow–Rashevskii theorem.
See also

Carnot group, a class of Lie groups that form sub-Riemannian manifolds

References




Richard Montgomery, A Tour of Subriemannian Geometries, Their Geodesics and Applications (Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, Volume 91), (2002) American Mathematical Society, ISBN 0-8218-1391-9.

"
Category:Metric geometry Category:Riemannian manifolds


