


Tsirelson's bound




Tsirelson's bound

A Tsirelson bound is an upper limit to quantum mechanical correlations between distant events. Given that quantum mechanics is non-local, i.e., that quantum mechanical correlations violate Bell inequalities, a natural question to ask is "how non-local can quantum mechanics be?", or, more precisely, by how much can the Bell inequality be violated. The answer is precisely the Tsirelson bound for the particular Bell inequality in question. In general this bound is lower than what would be algebraically possible, and much research has been dedicated to the question of why this is the case.
The Tsirelson bounds are named after B. S. Tsirelson, (or Boris Cirel'son, in a different transliteration) the author of the paper1 in which the first one was derived.
Tsirelson bound for the CHSH inequality
The first Tsirelson bound was derived as an upper bound on the correlations measured in the CHSH inequality. It states that if we have four (Hermitian) dichotomic observables 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  (i.e., two observables for Alice and two for Bob) with outcomes 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , then



For comparison, in the classical (or local realistic case) the upper bound is 2, whereas if any arbitrary assignment of 
 
 
 
 
  is allowed it is 4. The Tsirelson bound is attained already if Alice and Bob each makes measurements on a qubit, the simplest non-trivial quantum system.
Lots of proofs have been developed for this bound, but perhaps the most enlightening one is based on the Khalfin-Tsirelson-Landau identity. If we define an observable



and 
 
 
 
 , i.e., if the outcomes of the observables are associated to projective measurements, then



If 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 
 , which can be regarded as the classical case, it already follows that 
 
 
 
 . In the quantum case, we need only notice that 
 
 
 
  and the Tsirelson bound 
 
 
 
  follows.
Tsirelson bounds for other Bell inequalities
Obtaining a Tsirelson bound for a given Bell inequality is in general a hard problem that has to be solved in a case-by-case basis, although there are numerical algorithms that can upperbound it. The exact values are known for a few more Bell inequalities:
For the Braunstein-Caves inequalities we have that



For the WWŻB inequalities the Tsirelson bound is



Finding the Tsirelson bound for the 
 
 
 
  inequality is a notorious open problem in quantum information theory.
Tsirelson bounds from physical principles
Lots of research have been dedicated to find a physical principle that explains why quantum correlations go only up to the Tsirelson bound and nothing more. Two such principles have been found, the non-triviality of communication complexity and information causality. Another relevant principle2 is the absence of 3rd-order interference. 3 4 R. D. Sorkin, Quantum Mechanics as Quantum Measure Theory,
Mod. Phys. Lett. A, 09, 3119 (1994).
5
See also

Bell's theorem
EPR paradox
CHSH inequality
Quantum pseudo-telepathy

References


"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum measurement



B. S. Cirel'son, Quantum Generalizations of Bell's Inequality, Lett. Math. Phys. 4, 93 (1980). 1
Gerd Niestegge, Three-Slit Experiments and Quantum Nonlocality - The Absence of 3rd-order Interference Implies Tsirelson's Bound, arXiv:1104.0091v2.
Urbasi Sinha, Christophe Couteau, Thomas Jennewein, Raymond Laflamme, Gregor Weihs, Ruling Out Multi-Order Interference in Quantum Mechanics, Science 329 no. 5990 pp. 418-421 (2010).
Craig, D., Dowker, F., Henson, J., Major, S., Rideout, D., & Sorkin, R. D., A Bell Inequality Analog in Quantum Measure Theory, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 40(3), 501 (2007).
Gerd Niestegge, Conditional Probability, Three-Slit Experiments, and the Jordan Algebra Structure of Quantum Mechanics. Advances in Mathematical Physics Volume 2012 Article ID 156573, 20 pages (2012).




