


Integer square root




Integer square root

In number theory, the integer square root (isqrt) of a positive integer n is the positive integer m which is the greatest integer less than or equal to the square root of n,



For example, 
 
 
 
  because 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Algorithm
One way of calculating 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is to use Newton's method to find a solution for the equation 
 
 
 
 , giving the iterative formula



The sequence

converges quadratically to 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . It can be proven that if 
 
 
 
  is chosen as the initial guess, one can stop as soon as


 
  to ensure that 
 
 

Using only integer division
For computing 
 
 
 
  for very large integers n, one can use the quotient of Euclidean division for both of the division operations. This has the advantage of only using integers for each intermediate value, thus making the use of floating point representations of large numbers unnecessary. It is equivalent to using the iterative formula



By using the fact that



one can show that this will reach 
 
 
 
  within a finite number of iterations.
However, 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily a fixed point of the above iterative formula. Indeed, it can be shown that 
 
 
 
  is a fixed point if and only if 
 
 
 
  is not a perfect square. If 
 
 
 
  is a perfect square, the sequence ends up in a period-two cycle between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  instead of converging.
Domain of computation
Although 
 
 
 
  is irrational for many 
 
 
 
 , the sequence 
 
 
 
  contains only rational terms when 
 
 
 
  is rational. Thus, with this method it is unnecessary to exit the field of rational numbers in order to calculate 
 
 
 
 , a fact which has some theoretical advantages.
Stopping criterion
One can prove that 
 
 
 
  is the largest possible number for which the stopping criterion


 
  ensures 
 
 
 
  in the algorithm above.
In implementations which use number formats that cannot represent all rational numbers exactly (for example, floating point), a stopping constant less than one should be used to protect against roundoff errors.
See also

Methods of computing square roots

External links

A geometric view of the square root algorithm

"
Category:Number theoretic algorithms Category:Number theory Category:Root-finding algorithms


