


True anomaly




True anomaly

(Figure)
The true anomaly of point P is the angle f. The center of the ellipse is point C, and the focus is point F.

In celestial mechanics, true anomaly is an angular parameter that defines the position of a body moving along a Keplerian orbit. It is the angle between the direction of periapsis and the current position of the body, as seen from the main focus of the ellipse (the point around which the object orbits).
The true anomaly is usually denoted by the Greek letters

 
  or 
 
 
 
 , or the Latin letter

 
 .
The true anomaly is one of three angular parameters ("anomalies") that define a position along an orbit, the other two being the eccentric anomaly and the mean anomaly.
Formulas
From state vectors
For elliptic orbits true anomaly

 
  can be calculated from orbital state vectors as:


 
    (if 
 
 
 
  then replace 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 )
where:



 
  is orbital velocity vector of the orbiting body,


 
  is eccentricity vector,


 
  is orbital position vector (segment fp) of the orbiting body.

Circular orbit
For circular orbits the true anomaly is undefined because circular orbits do not have a uniquely determined periapsis. Instead one uses the argument of latitude

 
 :


 
    (if 
 
 
 
  then replace 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 )
where:



 
  is vector pointing towards the ascending node (i.e. the z-component of 
 
 
 
  is zero).





Circular orbit with zero inclination
For circular orbits with zero inclination the argument of latitude is also undefined, because there is no uniquely determined line of nodes. One uses the true longitude instead:


 
    (if 
 
 
 
  then replace 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 )
where:



 
  is x-component of orbital position vector

 
 ,


 
  is x-component of orbital velocity vector

 
 .

From the eccentric anomaly
The relation between the true anomaly 
 
 
 
  and the eccentric anomaly E is:



or using sin1 and tan






or equivalently



Therefore



where 
 
 
 
  is the polar argument of the vector 
 
 
 
  (available in many programming languages as the library function atan2(y, x) in Fortran and MATLAB, or as ArcTan(x, y) in Wolfram Mathematica).
Radius from true anomaly
The radius (distance from the focus of attraction and the orbiting body) is related to the true anomaly by the formula



where a is the orbit's semi-major axis (segment cz).
Notes
See also

Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Eccentric anomaly
Mean anomaly
Ellipse
Hyperbola

References

Murray, C. D. & Dermott, S. F. 1999, Solar System Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-57597-4
Plummer, H.C., 1960, An Introductory treatise on Dynamical Astronomy, Dover Publications, New York.  (Reprint of the 1918 Cambridge University Press edition.)

"
Category:Orbits



Fundamentals of Astrodynamics and Applications by David A. Vallado↩




