


Spirograph




Spirograph

Spirograph is a geometric drawing toy that produces mathematical roulette curves of the variety technically known as hypotrochoids and epitrochoids. It was developed by British engineer Denys Fisher and first sold in 1965.
The name has been a registered trademark of Hasbro, Inc., since 1998 following purchase of the company that had acquired the Denys Fisher company. The Spirograph brand was relaunched with original product configurations in the USA in 2013 by Kahootz Toys and in Europe by Goldfish and Bison.
History
The mathematician Bruno Abakanowicz invented the Spirograph between 1881 and 1900. It was used for calculating an area delimited by curves.1 Drawing toys based on gears have been around since at least 1908, when The Marvelous Wondergraph was advertised in the Sears catalog.23 An article describing how to make a Wondergraph drawing machine appeared in the Boys Mechanic publication in 1913.4 The Spirograph itself was developed by the British engineer Denys Fisher, who exhibited at the 1965 Nuremberg International Toy Fair. It was subsequently produced by his company. US distribution rights were acquired by Kenner, Inc., which introduced it to the United States market in 1966 and promoted it as a creative children's toy.
In 2013 the Spirograph brand was re-launched in the USA by Kahootz Toys and in Europe by Goldfish and Bison with products that returned to the use of the original gears and wheels. The modern products use removable putty in place of pins or are held down by hand to keep the stationary pieces in place on the paper. The Spirograph was a 2014 Toy of the Year finalist in 2 categories, almost 50 years after the toy was named Toy of the Year in 1967.
Operation
 The original US-released Spirograph consisted of two different-sized plastic rings, with gear teeth on both the inside and outside of their circumferences. They were pinned to a cardboard backing with pins, and any of several provided gearwheels, which had holes provided for a ballpoint pen to extend through them to an underlying paper writing surface. It could be spun around to make geometric shapes on the underlying paper medium. Later, the Super-Spirograph consisted of a set of plastic gears and other interlocking shape-segments such as rings, triangles, or straight bars. It has several sizes of gears and shapes, and all edges have teeth to engage any other piece. For instance, smaller gears fit inside the larger rings, but also can engage the outside of the rings in such a fashion that they rotate around the inside or along the outside edge of the rings.
To use it, a sheet of paper is placed on a heavy cardboard backing, and one of the plastic pieces—known as a stator—is secured via pins or reusable adhesive to the paper and cardboard. Another plastic piece—called the rotor—is placed so that its teeth engage with those of the pinned piece. For example, a ring may be pinned to the paper and a small gear placed inside the ring. The number of arrangements possible by combining different gears is very large. The point of a pen is placed in one of the holes of the rotor. As the rotor is moved, the pen traces out a curve. The pen is used both to draw and to provide locomotive force; some practice is required before the Spirograph can be operated without disengaging the stator and rotor, particularly when using the holes close to the edge of the larger rotors. More intricate and unusual-shaped patterns may be made through the use of both hands, one to draw and one to guide the pieces. It is possible to move several pieces in relation to each other (say, the triangle around the ring, with a circle "climbing" from the ring onto the triangle), but this requires concentration or even additional assistance from other artists.
Mathematical basis
 Consider a fixed outer circle 
 
 
 
  of radius 
 
 
 
  centered at the origin. A smaller inner circle 
 
 
 
  of radius 
 
 
 
  and is continuously tangent to it. 
 
 
 
  will be assumed never to slip on 
 
 
 
  (in a real Spirograph, teeth on both circles prevent such slippage). Now assume that a point 
 
 
 
  lying somewhere inside 
 
 
 
  is located a distance 
 
 
 
 's center. This point 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the pen-hole in the inner disk of a real Spirograph. Without loss of generality it can be assumed that at the initial moment the point 
 
 
 
  was on the 
 
 
 
 -axis. In order to find the trajectory created by a Spirograph, follow point 
 
 
 
  as the inner circle is set in motion.
Now mark two points 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . The point 
 
 
 
  always indicates the location where the two circles are tangent. Point 
 
 
 
  however will travel on 
 
 
 
  and its initial location coincides with 
 
 
 
 . After setting 
 
 
 
  in motion counterclockwise around 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  has a clockwise rotation with respect to its center. The distance that point 
 
 
 
  traverses on 
 
 
 
  is the same as that traversed by the tangent point 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , due to the absence of slipping.
Now define the new (relative) system of coordinates 
 
 
 
  with its origin at the center of 
 
 
 
  and its axes parallel to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Let the parameter 
 
 
 
  be the angle by which the tangent point 
 
 
 
  rotates on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the angle by which 
 
 
 
  rotates (i.e. by which 
 
 
 
  travels) in the relative system of coordinates. Because there is no slipping, the distances traveled by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  along their respective circles must be the same, therefore



or equivalently



It is common to assume that a counterclockwise motion corresponds to a positive change of angle and a clockwise one to a negative change of angle. A minus sign in the above formula (
 
 
 
 ) accommodates this convention.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the coordinates of the center of 
 
 
 
  in the absolute system of coordinates. Then 
 
 
 
  represents the radius of the trajectory of the center of 
 
 
 
 , which (again in the absolute system) undergoes circular motion thus:



As defined above, 
 
 
 
  is the angle of rotation in the new relative system. Because point 
 
 
 
  obeys the usual law of circular motion, its coordinates in the new relative coordinate system 
 
 
 
  obey:



In order to obtain the trajectory of 
 
 
 
  in the absolute (old) system of coordinates, add these two motions:



where 
 
 
 
  is defined above.
Now, use the relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as derived above to obtain equations describing the trajectory of point 
 
 
 
  in terms of a single parameter 
 
 
 
 :



(using the fact that function 
 
 
 
  is odd).
It is convenient to represent the equation above in terms of the radius 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and dimensionless parameters describing the structure of the Spirograph. Namely, let



and



The parameter 
 
 
 
  represents how far the point 
 
 
 
  is located from the center of 
 
 
 
 . At the same time, 
 
 
 
  represents how big the inner circle 
 
 
 
 
  is with respect to the outer one 
 
 
 
 .
It is now observed that



and therefore the trajectory equations take the form



Parameter 
 
 
 
  is a scaling parameter and does not affect the structure of the Spirograph. Different values of 
 
 
 
  would yield similar Spirograph drawings.
It is interesting to note that the two extreme cases 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  result in degenerate trajectories of the Spirograph. In the first extreme case when 
 
 
 
  we have a simple circle of radius 
 
 
 
 , corresponding to the case where 
 
 
 
  has been shrunk into a point. (Division by 
 
 
 
  in the formula is not a problem since both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are bounded functions).
The other extreme case 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the inner circle 
 
 
 
 's radius 
 
 
 
  matching the radius 
 
 
 
  of the outer circle 
 
 
 
 , ie 
 
 
 
 . In this case the trajectory is a single point. Intuitively, 
 
 
 
  is too large to roll inside the same-sized 
 
 
 
  without slipping.
If 
 
 
 
  then the point $A$ is on the circumference of $C_i$. In this case the trajectories are called hypocycloids and the equations above reduce to those for a hypocycloid.
See also

Cyclograph
Guilloché
Harmonograph
Hypotrochoid
List of periodic functions
Pantograph
Spirograph Nebula, a planetary nebula that displays delicate, spirograph-like filigree.

References
External links

Official Website
Inspirograph: A web-based, interactive Spirograph replica
HTML5 Interactive Spirograph Creator
HTML5 online Spirograph app
Kahootz Toys
super spirograph manual in French, German, 1979

"
Category:Art and craft toys Category:Curves Category:Products introduced in 1965 Category:Hasbro products Category:1970s toys











