


Lambda-CDM model




Lambda-CDM model

The ΛCDM (Lambda cold dark matter) or Lambda-CDM model is a parametrization of the Big Bang cosmological model in which the universe contains a cosmological constant, denoted by Lambda (Greek Λ), associated with dark energy, and cold dark matter (abbreviated CDM). It is frequently referred to as the standard model of Big Bang cosmology, because it is the simplest model that provides a reasonably good account of the following properties of the cosmos:

the existence and structure of the cosmic microwave background
the large-scale structure in the distribution of galaxies
the abundances of hydrogen (including deuterium), helium, and lithium
the accelerating expansion of the universe observed in the light from distant galaxies and supernovae

The model assumes that general relativity is the correct theory of gravity on cosmological scales. It emerged in the late 1990s as a concordance cosmology, after a period of time when disparate observed properties of the universe appeared mutually inconsistent, and there was no consensus on the makeup of the energy density of the universe.
The ΛCDM model can be extended by adding cosmological inflation, quintessence and other elements that are current areas of speculation and research in cosmology.
Some alternative models challenge the assumptions of the ΛCDM model. Examples of these are modified Newtonian dynamics, modified gravity and theories of large-scale variations in the matter density of the universe.1
Overview
(Figure)
Lambda-CDM, accelerated expansion of the universe. The time-line in this schematic diagram extends from the big bang/inflation era 13.7 Gyr ago to the present cosmological time.

Most modern cosmological models are based on the cosmological principle, which states that our observational location in the universe is not unusual or special; on a large-enough scale, the universe looks the same in all directions (isotropy) and from every location (homogeneity).2
The model includes an expansion of metric space that is well documented both as the red shift of prominent spectral absorption or emission lines in the light from distant galaxies and as the time dilation in the light decay of supernova luminosity curves. Both effects are attributed to a Doppler shift in electromagnetic radiation as it travels across expanding space. Although this expansion increases the distance between objects that are not under shared gravitational influence, it does not increase the size of the objects (e.g. galaxies) in space. It also allows for distant galaxies to recede from each other at speeds greater than the speed of light; local expansion is less than the speed of light, but expansion summed across great distances can collectively exceed the speed of light.
The letter Λ (lambda) stands for the cosmological constant, which is currently associated with a vacuum energy or dark energy in empty space that is used to explain the contemporary accelerating expansion of space against the attractive effects of gravity. A cosmological constant has negative pressure, 
 
 
 
 , which contributes to the stress-energy tensor that, according to the general theory of relativity, causes accelerating expansion. The fraction of the total energy density of our (flat or almost flat) universe that is dark energy, 
 
 
 
 , is currently [2015] estimated to be 69.2 ± 1.2% based on Planck satellite data.3
Cold dark matter is a form of matter introduced in order to account for gravitational effects observed in very large-scale structures (the "flat" rotation curves of galaxies; the gravitational lensing of light by galaxy clusters; and enhanced clustering of galaxies) that cannot be accounted for by the quantity of observed matter. Dark matter is described as being cold (i.e. its velocity is far less than the speed of light at the epoch of radiation-matter equality); non-baryonic (i.e. consisting of matter other than protons and neutrons); dissipationless (i.e. cannot cool by radiating photons); and collisionless (i.e. the dark matter particles interact with each other and other particles only through gravity and possibly the weak force). The dark matter component is currently [2013] estimated to constitute about 26.8% of the mass-energy density of the universe.
The remaining 4.9% [2013] comprises all ordinary matter observed as atoms, chemical elements, gas and plasma, the stuff of which visible planets, stars and galaxies are made.
Also, the energy density includes a very small fraction (~ 0.01%) in cosmic microwave background radiation, and not more than 0.5% in relic neutrinos. Although very small today, these were much more important in the distant past, dominating the matter at redshift > 3200.
The model includes a single originating event, the "Big Bang" or initial singularity, which was not an explosion but the abrupt appearance of expanding space-time containing radiation at temperatures of around 1015 K. This was immediately (within 10−29 seconds) followed by an exponential expansion of space by a scale multiplier of 1027 or more, known as cosmic inflation. The early universe remained hot (above 10,000 K) for several hundred thousand years, a state that is detectable as a residual cosmic microwave background, or CMB, a very low energy radiation emanating from all parts of the sky. The "Big Bang" scenario, with cosmic inflation and standard particle physics, is the only current cosmological model consistent with the observed continuing expansion of space, the observed distribution of lighter elements in the universe (hydrogen, helium, and lithium), and the spatial texture of minute irregularities (anisotropies) in the CMB radiation. Cosmic inflation also addresses the "horizon problem" in the CMB; indeed, it seems likely that the universe is larger than the observable particle horizon.
The model uses the FLRW metric, the Friedmann equations and the cosmological equations of state to describe the observable universe from right after the inflationary epoch to present and future.
Cosmic expansion history
The expansion of the universe is parametrized by a scale factor

 
  which is defined relative to the present day, so 
 
 
 
 
 ; the usual convention in cosmology is that subscript 0 denotes present-day values. In general relativity, 
 
 
 
  is related to the observed redshift:4 by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the age of the universe at the time the photons were emitted. The time-dependent Hubble parameter, 
 
 
 
  is defined as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the time-derivative of the scale factor. The first of two Friedmann equations gives the expansion rate in terms of the the matter+radiation density 
 
 
 
 , the curvature, 
 
 
 
 , and the cosmological constant, 
 
 
 
 :5


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the usual gravitational constant. From the Friedmann equations it follows that there is a critical mass-energy density 
 
 
 
  giving zero curvature; historically, if dark energy were zero, this would also be the dividing line between eventual recollapse of the universe to a Big Crunch, or unlimited expansion. In the Lambda-CDM model the universe is predicted to expand forever regardless of whether the total density is slightly above or below the critical density, though this may not apply if dark energy is actually time-dependent.
The critical density is given by


 
  where the reduced Hubble constant, h, is defined as 
 
 
 
 ; it is standard to define the present-day density parameter

 
 
  for various species as the dimensionless ratio


 
  where the subscript x is one of c for cold dark matter, b for baryons, rad for radiation (photons plus relativistic neutrinos), and DE or 
 
 
 
  for dark energy.
Since the densities of various species scale as different powers of 
 
 
 
 , e.g. 
 
 
 
  for matter etc, the Friedmann equation can be conveniently rewritten in terms of the various density parameters as


 
  where w is the equation of state of dark energy, and assuming negligible neutrino mass (significant neutrino mass requires a more complex equation). The various 
 
 
 
  parameters add up to 1 by construction. In the general case this is integrated by computer to give the expansion history a(t) and also observable distance-redshift relations for any chosen values of the cosmological parameters, which can then be compared with observations such as supernovae and baryon acoustic oscillations.
In the minimal 6-parameter LambdaCDM model, it is assumed that curvature 
 
 
 
  is zero and 
 
 
 
 , so this simplifies to



Observations show that the radiation density is very small today, 
 
 
 
 
 ; if this term is neglected the above has an analytic solution6


 
  where 
 
 
 
  this is fairly accurate for a > 0.01 or t > 10 Myr. Solving for 
 
 
 
  gives the present age of the universe 
 
 
 
  in terms of the other parameters.
It follows that the transition from decelerating to accelerating expansion (the second derivative 
 
 
 
 
  crossing zero) occurred when


 
  which evaluates to a ~ 0.6 or z ~ 0.66 for the Planck best-fit parameters.
Historical development
The discovery of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) in 1965 confirmed a key prediction of the Big Bang cosmology. From that point on, it was generally accepted that the universe started in a hot, dense state and has been expanding over time. The rate of expansion depends on the types of matter and energy present in the universe, and in particular, whether the total density is above or below the so-called critical density. During the 1970s, most attention focused on pure-baryonic models, but there were serious challenges explaining the formation of galaxies, given the small anisotropies in the CMB (upper limits at that time). In the early 1980s, it was realized that this could be resolved if cold dark matter dominated over the baryons, and the theory of cosmic inflation motivated models with critical density. During the 1980s, most research focused on cold dark matter with critical density in matter, around 95% CDM and 5% baryons: these showed success at forming galaxies and clusters of galaxies, but problems remained; notably, the model required a Hubble constant lower than preferred by observations, and observations around 1988-1990 showed more large-scale galaxy clustering than predicted. These difficulties sharpened with the discovery of CMB anisotropy by COBE in 1992, and several modified CDM models, including ΛCDM and mixed cold+hot dark matter, came under active consideration through the mid-1990s. The ΛCDM model then became the leading model following the observations of accelerating expansion in 1998, and was quickly supported by other observations: in 2000, the BOOMERanG microwave background experiment measured the total (matter+energy) density to be close to 100% of critical, whereas in 2001 the 2dFGRS galaxy redshift survey measured the matter density to be near 25%; the large difference between these values supports a positive Λ or dark energy. Much more precise measurements of the microwave background from WMAP in 2003 – 2010 and Planck in 2013 - 2015 have continued to support the model and pin down the parameters, now mostly constrained below 1 percent uncertainty.
There is currently active research into many aspects of the ΛCDM model, both to refine the parameters and possibly detect deviations. In addition, ΛCDM has no explicit physical theory for the origin or physical nature of dark matter or dark energy; the nearly scale-invariant spectrum of the CMB perturbations, and their image across the celestial sphere, are believed to result from very small thermal and acoustic irregularities at the point of recombination. A large majority of astronomers and astrophysicists support the ΛCDM model or close relatives of it, but Milgrom, McGaugh, and Kroupa are leading critics, attacking the dark matter portions of the theory from the perspective of galaxy formation models and supporting the alternative MOND theory, which requires a modification of the Einstein field equations and the Friedmann equations as seen in proposals such as MOG theory or TeVeS theory. Other proposals by theoretical astrophysicists of cosmological alternatives to Einstein's general relativity that attempt to account for dark energy or dark matter include f(R) gravity, scalar–tensor theories such as galileon theories, brane cosmologies, the DGP model, and massive gravity and its extensions such as bimetric gravity.
Successes
In addition to explaining pre-2000 observations, the model has made a number of successful predictions: notably the existence of the baryon acoustic oscillation feature, discovered in 2005 in the predicted location; and the statistics of weak gravitational lensing, first observed in 2000 by several teams. The polarization of the CMB, discovered in 2002 by DASI 7 is now a dramatic success: in the 2015 Planck data release,8 there are seven observed peaks in the temperature (TT) power spectrum, six peaks in the temperature-polarization (TE) cross spectrum, and five peaks in the polarization (EE) spectrum, and all agree with the predictions of LambdaCDM.
Challenges
Extensive searches for dark matter particles have so far shown no well-agreed detection; the dark energy may be almost impossible to detect in a laboratory, and its value is unnaturally small compared to naive theoretical predictions.
Comparison of the model with observations is very successful on large scales (larger than galaxies, up to the observable horizon), but may have some problems on sub-galaxy scales, possibly predicting too many dwarf galaxies and too much dark matter in the innermost regions of galaxies. These small scales are harder to resolve in computer simulations, so it is not yet clear whether the problem is the simulations, non-standard properties of dark matter, or a more radical error in the model.
Parameters
The simple ΛCDM model is based on six parameters: physical baryon density; physical dark matter density; the age of the universe; scalar spectral index; curvature fluctuation amplitude; and reionization optical depth.9 In accordance with Occam's razor, six is the smallest number of parameters needed to give an acceptable fit to current observations; other possible parameters are fixed at "natural" values, e.g. total density = 1.00, dark energy equation of state = −1, neutrino masses are small enough to be negligible. (See below for extended models that allow these to vary.)
The values of these six parameters are mostly not predicted by current theory (though, ideally, they may be related by a future "Theory of Everything"), except that most versions of cosmic inflation predict the scalar spectral index should be slightly smaller than 1, consistent with the estimated value 0.96. The parameter values, and uncertainties, are estimated using large computer searches to locate the region of parameter space providing an acceptable match to cosmological observations. From these six parameters, the other model values, such as the Hubble constant and the dark energy density, can be readily calculated.
Commonly, the set of observations fitted includes the cosmic microwave background anisotropy, the brightness/redshift relation for supernovae, and large-scale galaxy clustering including the baryon acoustic oscillation feature. Other observations, such as the Hubble constant, the abundance of galaxy clusters, weak gravitational lensing and globular cluster ages, are generally consistent with these, providing a check of the model, but are less accurately measured at present.
Parameter values listed below are from the Planck Collaboration Cosmological parameters 68% confidence limits for the base ΛCDM model from Planck CMB power spectra, in combination with lensing reconstruction and external data (BAO+JLA+H0).10 See also Planck (spacecraft).





Planck Collaboration Cosmological parameters11


Description

Symbol

Value



Independent
 parameters

Physical baryon density100  (km/s)/Mpc.12 Likewise for the difference between "physical dark matter density" and "dark matter density". The baryon density gives the fraction of the critical density made up of baryons. The critical density is the total density of matter/energy needed for the universe to be spatially flat, with measurements indicating that the actual total density Ωtot is very close if not equal to this value, see below.|group=note|name=density}}

Ωb

2




Physical dark matter density13

Ωc

2




Age of the universe



0

× 10
 
 
 
 
  years



Scalar spectral index



s




Curvature fluctuation amplitude

ΔR2

× 10
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
0 = 0.002 Mpc−1



Reionization optical depth








Fixed
 parameters

Total density

Ωtot

1



Equation of state of dark energy





−1



Sum of three neutrino masses

∑ 
 
 
ν

negligible



Calculated
 values

Hubble constant



0

km s−1 Mpc−1



Matter density

Ωm




Dark energy density

ΩΛ




Fluctuation amplitude at 8
 
 
−1 Mpc



8




Redshift at decoupling



∗




Age at decoupling



∗

years14



Redshift of reionization



re







Extended models
Possible extensions of the simplest ΛCDM model are to allow quintessence rather than a cosmological constant. In this case, the equation of state of dark energy is allowed to differ from −1. Cosmic inflation predicts tensor fluctuations (gravitational waves). Their amplitude is parameterized by the tensor-to-scalar ratio (denoted 
 
 
 
 ), which is determined by the energy scale of inflation. Other modifications allow for spatial curvature (Ωtot may be different from 1), hot dark matter in the form of neutrinos, or a running spectral index, which are generally viewed as inconsistent with cosmic inflation.
Allowing these parameters will generally increase the uncertainties in the parameters quoted above, and may also shift the observed values somewhat.





Extended model parameters

Description

Symbol

Value



Total density

Ωtot




Equation of state of dark energy








Tensor-to-scalar ratio





$k$0 = 0.002 Mpc−1 (2
 
 
 
 )



Running of the spectral index

d
 
 
s / d ln 
 
 


, 
 
 
0 = 0.002 Mpc−1



Physical neutrino density

Ων

2

< 0.0062



Sum of three neutrino masses

∑ 
 
 
ν

$σ$)






Some researchers have suggested that there is a running spectral index, but no statistically significant study has revealed one. Theoretical expectations suggest that the tensor-to-scalar ratio 
 
 
 
  should be between 0 and 0.3, and the latest results are now within those limits.
See also
References
Further reading





External links

Bolshoi Simulation
Cosmology tutorial/NedWright
Millennium Simulation
WMAP estimated cosmological parameters/Latest Summary

"

Category:Physical cosmology Category:Universe



P. Kroupa, B. Famaey, K.S. de Boer, J. Dabringhausen, M. Pawlowski, C.M. Boily, H. Jerjen, D. Forbes, G. Hensler, M. Metz, "Local-Group tests of dark-matter concordance cosmology. Towards a new paradigm for structure formation" [http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010A%26A...523A..32K A&A; 523, 32 (2010).]↩
Andrew Liddle. An Introduction to Modern Cosmology (2nd ed.). London: Wiley, 2003.↩
Camille M. Carlisle, Planck Upholds Standard Cosmology, Sky & Telescope, February 10, 2015↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Table 4 on p. 31 of ↩

p. 7 of Findings of the Joint Dark Energy Mission Figure of Merit Science Working Group↩

Table 8 on p. 39 of  (from NASA's WMAP Documents page)↩




