


Double coset




Double coset

In mathematics, given a group G and two subgroups H and K, not necessarily distinct, a double coset (or more precisely an (H,K) double coset) is a set HgK for some fixed element g in G. Equivalently, an (H,K) double coset in G is an equivalence class for the equivalence relation defined on G by

x ~ y if there are h in H and k in K with hxk = y.
 

The basic properties of double cosets follow immediately from the fact that they are equivalence classes; namely, two double cosets HxK and HyK are either disjoint or identical1 and G is partitioned into its (H,K) double cosets.2
Furthermore, each double coset HgK is a union of ordinary right cosets Hy of H in G and left cosets zK of K in G. In particular, the number of right cosets of H in HgK is the index [K:K ∩ g-1Hg] and the number of left cosets of K in HgK is the index [g-1Hg:K ∩ g-1Hg].3
Double cosets are in fact orbits for the group action of H×K on G with H acting by left multiplication and K by inverse right multiplication. The set of double cosets is often denoted by



Algebraic structure
It is possible to define a product operation of double cosets in an associated ring.
Given two double cosets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we decompose each into right cosets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . If we write 
 
 
 
 , then we can define the product of 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  as the formal sum 
 
 
 
 .
An important case is when H = K = L, which allows us to define an algebra structure on the associated ring spanned by linear combinations of double cosets.
Applications
Double cosets are important in connection with representation theory, when a representation of H is used to construct an induced representation of G, which is then restricted to K. The corresponding double coset structure carries information about how the resulting representation decomposes.
They are also important in functional analysis, where in some important cases functions left-invariant and right-invariant by a subgroup K can form a commutative ring under convolution: see Gelfand pair.
In geometry, a Clifford–Klein form is a double coset space Γ\G/H, where G is a reductive Lie group, H is a closed subgroup, and Γ is a discrete subgroup (of G) that acts properly discontinuously on the homogeneous space G/H.
In number theory, the Hecke algebra corresponding to a congruence subgroup Γ of the modular group is spanned by elements of the double coset space 
 
 
 
 ; the algebra structure is that acquired from the multiplication of double cosets described above. Of particular importance are the Hecke operators 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the double cosets 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  (these have different properties depending on whether m and N are coprime or not), and the diamond operators 
 
 
 
  given by the double cosets 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and we require 
 
 
 
  (the choice of a, b, c does not affect the answer).
References
"
Category:Group theory










