


Cooperative game




Cooperative game


This article is about a part of game theory. For video gaming, see Cooperative gameplay. For the similar feature in some board games, see cooperative board game


In game theory, a cooperative game is a game where groups of players ("coalitions") may enforce cooperative behaviour, hence the game is a competition between coalitions of players, rather than between individual players. An example is a coordination game, when players choose the strategies by a consensus decision-making process.
Recreational games are rarely cooperative, because they usually lack mechanisms by which coalitions may enforce coordinated behaviour on the members of the coalition. Such mechanisms, however, are abundant in real life situations (e.g. contract law).
Mathematical definition
A cooperative game is given by specifying a value for every coalition. Formally, the game (coalitional game) consists of a finite set of players 
 
 
 
 , called the grand coalition, and a characteristic function

1 from the set of all possible coalitions of players to a set of payments that satisfies 
 
 
 
 . The function describes how much collective payoff a set of players can gain by forming a coalition, and the game is sometimes called a value game or a profit game. The players are assumed to choose which coalitions to form, according to their estimate of the way the payment will be divided among coalition members.
Conversely, a cooperative game can also be defined with a characteristic cost function 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . In this setting, players must accomplish some task, and the characteristic function 
 
 
 
  represents the cost of a set of players accomplishing the task together. A game of this kind is known as a cost game. Although most cooperative game theory deals with profit games, all concepts can easily be translated to the cost setting.
Duality
Let 
 
 
 
  be a profit game. The dual game of 
 
 
 
  is the cost game 
 
 
 
  defined as



Intuitively, the dual game represents the opportunity cost for a coalition 
 
 
 
  of not joining the grand coalition 
 
 
 
 . A dual profit game 
 
 
 
  can be defined identically for a cost game 
 
 
 
 . A cooperative game and its dual are in some sense equivalent, and they share many properties. For example, the core of a game and its dual are equal. For more details on cooperative game duality, see for instance .
Subgames
Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-empty coalition of players. The subgame

 
  on 
 
 
 
  is naturally defined as



In other words, we simply restrict our attention to coalitions contained in 
 
 
 
 . Subgames are useful because they allow us to apply solution concepts defined for the grand coalition on smaller coalitions.
Properties for characterization
Superadditivity
Characteristic functions are often assumed to be superadditive . This means that the value of a union of disjoint coalitions is no less than the sum of the coalitions' separate values:


 
  whenever 
 
 
 
  satisfy 
 
 
 
 .
Monotonicity
Larger coalitions gain more
 
 
 
 . This follows from superadditivity if payoffs are normalized so singleton coalitions have value zero.
Properties for simple games
A coalitional game 
 
 
 
  is simple if payoffs are either 1 or 0, i.e., coalitions are either "winning" or "losing". Equivalently, a simple game can be defined as a collection 
 
 
 
  of coalitions, where the members of 
 
 
 
  are called winning coalitions, and the others losing coalitions. It is sometimes assumed that a simple game is nonempty or that it does not contain an empty set. In other areas of mathematics, simple games are also called hypergraphs or Boolean functions (logic functions).

A simple game 
 
 
 
  is monotonic if any coalition containing a winning coalition is also winning, that is, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  imply 
 
 
 
 .


A simple game 
 
 
 
  is proper if the complement (opposition) of any winning coalition is losing, that is, if 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 .


A simple game 
 
 
 
  is strong if the complement of any losing coalition is winning, that is, if 
 
 
 
  imples
 
 
 
 .
 
If a simple game 
 
 
 
  is proper and strong, then a coalition is winning if and only if its complement is losing, that is, 
 
 
 
  iff 
 
 
 
 . (If 
 
 
 
  is a colitional simple game that is proper and strong, 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .)



A veto player (vetoer) in a simple game is a player that belongs to all winning coalitions. Supposing there is a veto player, any coalition not containing a veto player is losing. A simple game 
 
 
 
  is weak (collegial) if it has a veto player, that is, if the intersection 
 
 
 
  of all winning coalitions is nonempty.
 
A dictator in a simple game is a veto player such that any coalition containing this player is winning. The dictator does not belong to any losing coalition. (Dictator games in experimental economics are unrelated to this.)



A carrier of a simple game 
 
 
 
  is a set 
 
 
 
  such that for any coalition 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
  iff 
 
 
 
 . When a simple game has a carrier, any player not belonging to it is ignored. A simple game is sometimes called finite if it has a finite carrier (even if 
 
 
 
  is infinite).


The Nakamura number of a simple game is the minimal number of winning coalitions with empty intersection. According to Nakamura's theorem, the number measures the degree of rationality; it is an indicator of the extent to which an aggregation rule can yield well-defined choices.

A few relations among the above axioms have widely been recognized, such as the following (e.g., Peleg, 2002, Section 2.12):

If a simple game is weak, it is proper.
A simple game is dictatorial if and only if it is strong and weak.

More generally, a complete investigation of the relation among the four conventional axioms (monotonicity, properness, strongness, and non-weakness), finiteness, and algorithmic computability3 has been made (Kumabe and Mihara, 20114), whose results are summarized in the Table "Existence of Simple Games" below.




Existence of Simple Games5



Type



1111



1110



1101



1100



1011



1010



1001



1000



0111



0110



0101



0100



0011



0010



0001



0000



The restrictions that various axioms for simple games impose on their Nakamura number are also studied extensively.6 In particular, a computable simple game without a veto player has a Nakamura number greater than 3 only if it is proper and non-strong.
Relation with non-cooperative theory
Let G be a strategic (non-cooperative) game. Then, assuming that coalitions have the ability to enforce coordinated behaviour, there are several cooperative games associated with G. These games are often referred to as representations of G. The two standard representations are:7

The α-effective game associates with each coalition the sum of gains its members can 'guarantee' by joining forces. By 'guaranteeing', it is meant that the value is the max-min, e.g. the maximal value of the minimum taken over the opposition's strategies.
The β-effective game associates with each coalition the sum of gains its members can 'strategically guarantee' by joining forces. By 'strategically guaranteeing', it is meant that the value is the min-max, e.g. the minimal value of the maximum taken over the opposition's strategies.

Solution concepts
The main assumption in cooperative game theory is that the grand coalition 
 
 
 
  will form. The challenge is then to allocate the payoff 
 
 
 
  among the players in some fair way. (This assumption is not restrictive, because even if players split off and form smaller coalitions, we can apply solution concepts to the subgames defined by whatever coalitions actually form.) A solution concept is a vector 
 
 
 
  that represents the allocation to each player. Researchers have proposed different solution concepts based on different notions of fairness. Some properties to look for in a solution concept include:

Efficiency: The payoff vector exactly splits the total value
 
 
 
 .
Individual rationality: No player receives less than what he could get on his own
 
 
 
 .
Existence: The solution concept exists for any game 
 
 
 
 .
Uniqueness: The solution concept is unique for any game 
 
 
 
 .
Computational ease: The solution concept can be calculated efficiently (i.e. in polynomial time with respect to the number of players 
 
 
 
 .)
Symmetry: The solution concept 
 
 
 
  allocates equal payments 
 
 
 
  to symmetric players 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . Two players 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are symmetric if 
 
 
 
 ; that is, we can exchange one player for the other in any coalition that contains only one of the players and not change the payoff.
Additivity: The allocation to a player in a sum of two games is the sum of the allocations to the player in each individual game. Mathematically, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are games, the game 
 
 
 
  simply assigns to any coalition the sum of the payoffs the coalition would get in the two individual games. An additive solution concept assigns to every player in 
 
 
 
  the sum of what he would receive in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Zero Allocation to Null Players: The allocation to a null player is zero. A null player

 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
 . In economic terms, a null player's marginal value to any coalition that does not contain him is zero.

An efficient payoff vector is called a pre-imputation, and an individually rational pre-imputation is called an imputation. Most solution concepts are imputations.
The stable set
The stable set of a game (also known as the von Neumann-Morgenstern solution ) was the first solution proposed for games with more than 2 players. Let 
 
 
 
  be a game and let 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  be two imputations of 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
dominates

 
  if some coalition 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In other words, players in 
 
 
 
  prefer the payoffs from 
 
 
 
  to those from 
 
 
 
 , and they can threaten to leave the grand coalition if 
 
 
 
  is used because the payoff they obtain on their own is at least as large as the allocation they receive under 
 
 
 
 .
A stable set is a set of imputations that satisfies two properties:

Internal stability: No payoff vector in the stable set is dominated by another vector in the set.
External stability: All payoff vectors outside the set are dominated by at least one vector in the set.

Von Neumann and Morgenstern saw the stable set as the collection of acceptable behaviours in a society: None is clearly preferred to any other, but for each unacceptable behaviour there is a preferred alternative. The definition is very general allowing the concept to be used in a wide variety of game formats.
Properties

A stable set may or may not exist , and if it exists it is typically not unique . Stable sets are usually difficult to find. This and other difficulties have led to the development of many other solution concepts.
A positive fraction of cooperative games have unique stable sets consisting of the core .
A positive fraction of cooperative games have stable sets which discriminate 
 
 
 
  players. In such sets at least 
 
 
 
  of the discriminated players are excluded .

The core
Let 
 
 
 
  be a game. The core of 
 
 
 
  is the set of payoff vectors



In words, the core is the set of imputations under which no coalition has a value greater than the sum of its members' payoffs. Therefore, no coalition has incentive to leave the grand coalition and receive a larger payoff.
Properties

The core of a game may be empty (see the Bondareva–Shapley theorem). Games with non-empty cores are called balanced.
If it is non-empty, the core does not necessarily contain a unique vector.
The core is contained in any stable set, and if the core is stable it is the unique stable set (see  for a proof.)

The core of a simple game with respect to preferences
For simple games, there is another notion of the core, when each player is assumed to have preferences on a set 
 
 
 
  of alternatives. A profile is a list 
 
 
 
  of individual preferences 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  means that individual 
 
 
 
  prefers alternative 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  at profile 
 
 
 
 . Given a simple game 
 
 
 
  and a profile 
 
 
 
 , a dominance relation 
 
 
 
  is defined on 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  if and only if there is a winning coalition 
 
 
 
  (i.e., 
 
 
 
 ) satisfying 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . The core

 
  of the simple game 
 
 
 
  with respect to the profile 
 
 
 
  of preferences is the set of alternatives undominated by 
 
 
 
  (the set of maximal elements of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
 ):


 
  if and only if there is no 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
The Nakamura number of a simple game is the minimal number of winning coalitions with empty intersection. Nakamura's theorem states that the core 
 
 
 
  is nonempty for all profiles 
 
 
 
  of acyclic (alternatively, transitive) preferences if and only if 
 
 
 
  is finite and the cardinal number (the number of elements) of 
 
 
 
  is less than the Nakamura number of 
 
 
 
 . A variant by Kumabe and Mihara states that the core 
 
 
 
  is nonempty for all profiles 
 
 
 
  of preferences that have a maximal element if and only if the cardinal number of 
 
 
 
  is less than the Nakamura number of 
 
 
 
 . (See Nakamura number for details.)
The strong epsilon-core
Because the core may be empty, a generalization was introduced in . The strong 
 
 
 
 -core for some number 
 
 
 
  is the set of payoff vectors



In economic terms, the strong 
 
 
 
 -core is the set of pre-imputations where no coalition can improve its payoff by leaving the grand coalition, if it must pay a penalty of 
 
 
 
  for leaving. Note that 
 
 
 
  may be negative, in which case it represents a bonus for leaving the grand coalition. Clearly, regardless of whether the core is empty, the strong 
 
 
 
 -core will be non-empty for a large enough value of 
 
 
 
  and empty for a small enough (possibly negative) value of 
 
 
 
 . Following this line of reasoning, the least-core, introduced in , is the intersection of all non-empty strong 
 
 
 
 -cores. It can also be viewed as the strong 
 
 
 
 -core for the smallest value of 
 
 
 
  that makes the set non-empty .
The Shapley value
The Shapley value is the unique payoff vector that is efficient, symmetric, additive, and assigns zero payoffs to dummy players. It was introduced by Lloyd Shapley . The Shapley value of a superadditive game is individually rational, but this is not true in general. 
The kernel
Let 
 
 
 
  be a game, and let 
 
 
 
  be an efficient payoff vector. The maximum surplus of player i over player j with respect to x is



the maximal amount player i can gain without the cooperation of player j by withdrawing from the grand coalition N under payoff vector x, assuming that the other players in i's withdrawing coalition are satisfied with their payoffs under x. The maximum surplus is a way to measure one player's bargaining power over another. The kernel of 
 
 
 
  is the set of imputations x that satisfy



 
 , and




for every pair of players i and j. Intuitively, player i has more bargaining power than player j with respect to imputation x if 
 
 
 
 , but player j is immune to player i's threats if 
 
 
 
 , because he can obtain this payoff on his own. The kernel contains all imputations where no player has this bargaining power over another. This solution concept was first introduced in .
The nucleolus
Let 
 
 
 
  be a game, and let 
 
 
 
  be a payoff vector. The excess of 
 
 
 
  for a coalition 
 
 
 
  is the quantity 
 
 
 
 ; that is, the gain that players in coalition 
 
 
 
  can obtain if they withdraw from the grand coalition 
 
 
 
  under payoff 
 
 
 
  and instead take the payoff 
 
 
 
 .
Now let 
 
 
 
  be the vector of excesses of 
 
 
 
 , arranged in non-increasing order. In other words, 
 
 
 
 . Notice that 
 
 
 
  is in the core of 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is a pre-imputation and 
 
 
 
 . To define the nucleolus, we consider the lexicographic ordering of vectors in 
 
 
 
 : For two payoff vectors 
 
 
 
 , we say 
 
 
 
  is lexicographically smaller than 
 
 
 
  if for some index 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . (The ordering is called lexicographic because it mimics alphabetical ordering used to arrange words in a dictionary.) The nucleolus of 
 
 
 
  is the lexicographically minimal imputation, based on this ordering. This solution concept was first introduced in .
Although the definition of the nucleolus seems abstract,  gave a more intuitive description: Starting with the least-core, record the coalitions for which the right-hand side of the inequality in the definition of 
 
 
 
  cannot be further reduced without making the set empty. Continue decreasing the right-hand side for the remaining coalitions, until it cannot be reduced without making the set empty. Record the new set of coalitions for which the inequalities hold at equality; continue decreasing the right-hand side of remaining coalitions and repeat this process as many times as necessary until all coalitions have been recorded. The resulting payoff vector is the nucleolus.
Properties

Although the definition does not explicitly state it, the nucleolus is always unique. (See Section II.7 of  for a proof.)
If the core is non-empty, the nucleolus is in the core.
The nucleolus is always in the kernel, and since the kernel is contained in the bargaining set, it is always in the bargaining set (see  for details.)

Convex cooperative games
Introduced by Shapley in , convex cooperative games capture3 the intuitive property some games have of "snowballing". Specifically, a game is convex if its characteristic function 
 
 
 
  is supermodular:



It can be shown (see, e.g., Section V.1 of ) that the supermodularity of 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to



that is, "the incentives for joining a coalition increase as the coalition grows" , leading to the aforementioned snowball effect. For cost games, the inequalities are reversed, so that we say the cost game is convex if the characteristic function is submodular.
Properties
Convex cooperative games have many nice properties:

Supermodularity trivially implies superadditivity.
Convex games are totally balanced: The core of a convex game is non-empty, and since any subgame of a convex game is convex, the core of any subgame is also non-empty.
A convex game has a unique stable set that coincides with its core.
The Shapley value of a convex game is the center of gravity of its core.
An extreme point (vertex) of the core can be found in polynomial time using the greedy algorithm: Let 
 
 
 
  be a permutation of the players, and let 
 
 
 
  be the set of players ordered 
 
 
 
  through 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , for any 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 . Then the payoff 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
  is a vertex of the core of 
 
 
 
 . Any vertex of the core can be constructed in this way by choosing an appropriate permutation

 
 .

Similarities and differences with combinatorial optimization
Submodular and supermodular set functions are also studied in combinatorial optimization. Many of the results in  have analogues in , where submodular functions were first presented as generalizations of matroids. In this context, the core of a convex cost game is called the base polyhedron, because its elements generalize base properties of matroids.
However, the optimization community generally considers submodular functions to be the discrete analogues of convex functions , because the minimization of both types of functions is computationally tractable. Unfortunately, this conflicts directly with Shapley's original definition of supermodular functions as "convex".
See also

Consensus decision-making
Coordination game
Intra-household bargaining

References


Further reading







. An 88-page mathematical introduction; see Chapter 8. Free online at many universities.


Luce, R.D. and Raiffa, H. (1957) Games and Decisions: An Introduction and Critical Survey, Wiley & Sons. (see Chapter 8).

Osborne, M.J. and Rubinstein, A. (1994) A Course in Game Theory, MIT Press (see Chapters 13,14,15)







. A comprehensive reference from a computational perspective; see Chapter 12. Downloadable free online.

Yeung, David W.K. and Leon A. Petrosyan. Cooperative Stochastic Differential Games (Springer Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering), Springer, 2006. Softcover-ISBN 978-1441920942.
Yeung, David W.K. and Leon A. Petrosyan. Subgame Consistent Economic Optimization: An Advanced Cooperative Dynamic Game Analysis (Static & Dynamic Game Theory: Foundations & Applications), Birkhäuser Boston; 2012. ISBN 978-0817682613

External links



"
  Category:Game theory





 
  denotes the power set of 
 
 
 
 .

See a section for Rice's theorem for the definition of a computable simple game. In particular, all finite games are computable.

Modified from Table 1 in Kumabe and Mihara (2011). The sixteen Types are defined by the four conventional axioms (monotonicity, properness, strongness, and non-weakness). For example, type 1110 indicates monotonic (1), proper (1), strong (1), weak (0, because not nonweak) games. Among type 1110 games, there exist no finite non-computable ones, there exist finite computable ones, there exist no infinite non-computable ones, and there exist no infinite computable ones. Observe that except for type 1110, the last three columns are identical.

Aumann, Robert J. "The core of a cooperative game without side payments." Transactions of the American Mathematical Society (1961): 539-552.




