


Ideal quotient




Ideal quotient

In abstract algebra, if I and J are ideals of a commutative ring R, their ideal quotient (I : J) is the set



Then (I : J) is itself an ideal in R. The ideal quotient is viewed as a quotient because 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 . The ideal quotient is useful for calculating primary decompositions. It also arises in the description of the set difference in algebraic geometry (see below).
(I : J) is sometimes referred to as a colon ideal because of the notation. In the context of fractional ideals, there is a related notion of the inverse of a fractional ideal.
Properties
The ideal quotient satisfies the following properties:



 
  as 
 
 
 
 -modules, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the annihilator of 
 
 
 
  as an 
 
 
 
 -module.














 
  (as long as R is an integral domain)

Calculating the quotient
The above properties can be used to calculate the quotient of ideals in a polynomial ring given their generators. For example, if I = (f1, f2, f3) and J = (g1, g2) are ideals in k[x1, ..., xn], then



Then elimination theory can be used to calculate the intersection of I with (g1) and (g2):



Calculate a Gröbner basis for tI + (1-t)(g1) with respect to lexicographic order. Then the basis functions which have no t in them generate 
 
 
 
 .
Geometric interpretation
The ideal quotient corresponds to set difference in algebraic geometry.1 More precisely,

If W is an affine variety and V is a subset of the affine space (not necessarily a variety), then



 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the taking of the ideal associated to a subset.

If I and J are ideals in k[x1, ..., xn], with k algebraically closed and I radical then




where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Zariski closure, and 
 
 
 
  denotes the taking of the variety defined by an ideal. If I is not radical, then the same property holds if we saturate the ideal J:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 .
References
Viviana Ene, Jürgen Herzog: 'Gröbner Bases in Commutative Algebra', AMS Graduate Studies in Mathematics, Vol 130 (AMS 2012)
M.F.Atiyah, I.G.MacDonald: 'Introduction to Commutative Algebra', Addison-Wesley 1969.
"
Category:Ideals



, p.195




