


Monomial basis




Monomial basis

In mathematics the monomial basis of a polynomial ring is its basis (as vector space or free module over the field or ring of coefficients) that consists in the set of all monomials. The monomials form a basis because every polynomial may be uniquely written as a finite linear combination of monomials (this is an immediate consequence of the definition of a polynomial).
One indeterminate
The polynomial ring

 
  of the univariate polynomial over a field 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -vector space, which has


 
  as an (infinite) basis. More generally, if 
 
 
 
  is a ring, 
 
 
 
  is a free module, which has the same basis.
The polynomials of degree at most 
 
 
 
  form also a vector space (or a free module in the case of a ring of coefficients), which has



as a basis
The canonical form of a polynomial is its expression on this basis:



or, using the shorter sigma notation:



The monomial basis in naturally totally ordered, either by increasing degrees



Several indeterminates
In the case of several indeterminates 
 
 
 
  a monomial is a product


 
  where the 
 
 
 
  are non-negative integers. Note that, as 
 
 
 
  an exponent equal to zero means that the corresponding indeterminate does not appear in the monomial; in particular 
 
 
 
  is a monomial.
Similarly to the case of univariate polynomials, the polynomials in 
 
 
 
  form a vector space (if the coefficients belong to a field) or a free module (if the coefficients belong to a ring), which has the set of all monomials as a basis, called the monomial basis
The homogeneous polynomials of degree 
 
 
 
  form a subspace which has the monomials of degree 
 
 
 
  as a basis. The dimension of this subspace is the number of monomials of degree 
 
 
 
 , which is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes a binomial coefficient.
The polynomials of degree at most 
 
 
 
  form also a subspace, which has the monomials of degree at most 
 
 
 
  as a basis. The number of these monomials is the dimension of this subspace, equal to



Despite the univariate case, there is no natural total order of the monomial basis. For problem which require to choose a total order, such Gröbner basis computation, one generally chooses an admissible monomial order that is a total order on the set of monomials such that


 
  for every monomials 
 
 

Notes
A polynomial can always be converted into monomial form by calculating its Taylor expansion around 0.
Examples
A polynomial in $\Pi_4$
$$1+x+3x^4$$
See also

Horner's method
Polynomial sequence
Newton polynomial
Lagrange polynomial
Legendre polynomial
Bernstein form
Chebyshev form

"
Category:Algebra Category:Polynomials


