


Principal branch




Principal branch

In mathematics, a principal branch is a function which selects one branch ("slice") of a multi-valued function. Most often, this applies to functions defined on the complex plane.
Examples
(Figure)
Principal branch of arg(z)

Trigonometric inverses
Principal branches are used in the definition of many inverse trigonometric functions, such as the selection either to define that  or that .
Exponentiation to fractional powers
A more familiar principal branch function, limited to real numbers, is that of a positive real number raised to the power of 
 
 
 
 .
For example, take the relation  x1/2}}, where 
 
 
 
  is any positive real number.
This relation can be satisfied by any value of 
 
 
 
  equal to a square root of 
 
 
 
  (either positive or negative). By convention, 
 
 
 
  is used to denote the positive square root of 
 
 
 
 .
In this instance, the positive square root function is taken as the principal branch of the multi-valued relation .
Complex logarithms
One way to view a principal branch is to look specifically at the exponential function, and the logarithm, as it is defined in complex analysis.
The exponential function is single-valued, where  is defined as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 .
However, the periodic nature of the trigonometric functions involved makes it clear that the logarithm is not so uniquely determined. One way to see this is to look at the following:



and


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is any integer and 
 
 
 
  is arctangent with the appropriate sign correction.
Any number 
 
 
 
  defined by such criteria has the property that  z}}.
In this manner log function is a multi-valued function (often referred to as a "multifunction" in the context of complex analysis). A branch cut, usually along the negative real axis, can limit the imaginary part so it lies between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . These are the chosen principal values.
This is the principal branch of the log function. Often it is defined using a capital letter, 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Branch point
Branch cut
Complex logarithm
Riemann surface

External links


Branches of Complex Functions Module by John H. Mathews 

"
Category:Complex analysis


