


Rectangle method




Rectangle method

In mathematics, specifically in integral calculus, the rectangle method (also called the midpoint or mid-ordinate rule) computes an approximation to a definite integral, made by finding the area of a collection of rectangles whose heights are determined by the values of the function.
Specifically, the interval 
 
 
 
  over which the function is to be integrated is divided into 
 
 
 
  equal subintervals of length 
 
 
 
 . The rectangles are then drawn so that either their left or right corners, or the middle of their top line lies on the graph of the function, with bases running along the 
 
 
 
 
 -axis. The approximation to the integral is then calculated by adding up the areas (base multiplied by height) of the 
 
 
 
  rectangles, giving the formula: 



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The formula for 
 
 
 
 
  above gives 
 
 
 
  for the Top-left corner approximation.
As N gets larger, this approximation gets more accurate. In fact, this computation is the spirit of the definition of the Riemann integral and the limit of this approximation as 
 
 
 
  is defined and equal to the integral of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  if this Riemann integral is defined. Note that this is true regardless of which 
 
 
 
 
  is used, however the midpoint approximation tends to be more accurate for finite 
 
 
 
 .
Error
For a function 
 
 
 
  which is twice differentiable, the approximation error in each section 
 
 
 
  of the midpoint rule decays as the cube of the width of the rectangle. (For a derivation based on a Taylor approximation, see Midpoint method)


 
  for some 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Summing this, the approximation error for 
 
 
 
  intervals with width 
 
 
 
  is less than or equal to


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the number of nodes


 
  in terms of the total interval, we know that 
 
 
 
  so we can rewrite the expression:


 
  for some 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Midpoint method for solving ordinary differential equations
Trapezoidal rule
Simpson's rule

"
Category:Integral calculus Category:Numerical integration (quadrature)


