


Distance (graph theory)




Distance (graph theory)

In the mathematical field of graph theory, the distance between two vertices in a graph is the number of edges in a shortest path (also called a graph geodesic) connecting them. This is also known as the geodesic distance.1 Notice that there may be more than one shortest path between two vertices.2 If there is no path connecting the two vertices, i.e., if they belong to different connected components, then conventionally the distance is defined as infinite.
In the case of a directed graph the distance 
 
 
 
  between two vertices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is defined as the length of a shortest path from 
 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  consisting of arcs, provided at least one such path exists.3 Notice that, in contrast with the case of undirected graphs, 
 
 
 
  does not necessarily coincide with 
 
 
 
 , and it might be the case that one is defined while the other is not.
Related concepts
A metric space defined over a set of points in terms of distances in a graph defined over the set is called a graph metric. The vertex set (of an undirected graph) and the distance function form a metric space, if and only if the graph is connected.
The eccentricity

 
  of a vertex 
 
 
 
 
  is the greatest geodesic distance between 
 
 
 
  and any other vertex. It can be thought of as how far a node is from the node most distant from it in the graph.
The radius

 
  of a graph is the minimum eccentricity of any vertex or, in symbols, 
 
 
 
 .
The diameter

 
  of a graph is the maximum eccentricity of any vertex in the graph. That is, 
 
 
 
 
  it is the greatest distance between any pair of vertices or, alternatively, 
 
 
 
 . To find the diameter of a graph, first find the shortest path between each pair of vertices. The greatest length of any of these paths is the diameter of the graph.
A central vertex in a graph of radius 
 
 
 
  is one whose eccentricity is 
 
 
 
 —that is, a vertex that achieves the radius or, equivalently, a vertex 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
 .
A peripheral vertex in a graph of diameter 
 
 
 
  is one that is distance 
 
 
 
  from some other vertex—that is, a vertex that achieves the diameter. Formally, 
 
 
 
  is peripheral if 
 
 
 
 .
A pseudo-peripheral vertex

 
 
  has the property that for any vertex 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  is as far away from 
 
 
 
  as possible, then 
 
 
 
  is as far away from 
 
 
 
 
  as possible. Formally, a vertex u is pseudo-peripheral, if for each vertex v with 
 
 
 
  holds 
 
 
 
 .
The partition of a graphs vertices into subsets by their distances from a given starting vertex is called the level structure of the graph.
A graph such that for every pair of vertices there is a unique shortest path connecting them is called a geodetic graph. For example, all trees are geodetic.4
Algorithm for finding pseudo-peripheral vertices
Often peripheral sparse matrix algorithms need a starting vertex with a high eccentricity. A peripheral vertex would be perfect, but is often hard to calculate. In most circumstances a pseudo-peripheral vertex can be used. A pseudo-peripheral vertex can easily be found with the following algorithm:

Choose a vertex 
 
 
 
 .
Among all the vertices that are as far from 
 
 
 
  as possible, let 
 
 
 
 
  be one with minimal degree.
If 
 
 
 
  then set 
 
 
 
  and repeat with step 2, else 
 
 
 
  is a pseudo-peripheral vertex.

See also

Distance matrix
Resistance distance
Betweenness
Centrality
Closeness
Degree diameter problem for graphs and digraphs
Metric graph

Notes
"
Category:Graph theory



↩
↩
F. Harary, Graph Theory, Addison-Wesley, 1969, p.199.↩
Øystein Ore, Theory of graphs [3rd ed., 1967], Colloquium Publications, American Mathematical Society, p. 104↩




