


Specific relative angular momentum




Specific relative angular momentum


See also: Classical central-force problem


In celestial mechanics, the specific relative angular momentum (h) of two orbiting bodies is the vector product of the relative position and the relative velocity. Equivalently, it is the total angular momentum divided by the reduced mass.1 Specific relative angular momentum plays a pivotal role in the analysis of the two-body problem.
Definition
Specific relative angular momentum, represented by the symbol 
 
 
 
 , is defined as the cross product of the relative position vector

 
  and the relative velocity vector

 
 .


 
  where:



 
  is the relative orbital position vector


 
  is the relative orbital velocity vector


 
  is the total angular momentum of the system (i.e. the sum of the angular momenta of each body)


 
  is the reduced mass

The units of 
 
 
 
 
  are m2s−1.
The 
 
 
 
  vector is always perpendicular to the instantaneous osculating orbital plane, which coincides with the instantaneous perturbed orbit. It would not necessarily be perpendicular to an average plane which accounted for many years of perturbations.
As usual in physics, the magnitude of the vector quantity 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
 :



Elliptical orbit
In an elliptical orbit, the specific relative angular momentum is twice the area per unit time swept out by a chord from the primary to the secondary: this area is referred to by Kepler's second law of planetary motion.
Since the area of the entire orbital ellipse is swept out in one orbital period, 
 
 
 
 
  is equal to twice the area of the ellipse divided by the orbital period, as represented by the equation


 
 .
where



 
  is the semi-major axis


 
  is the semi-minor axis


 
  is the semi-latus rectum


 
 
  is the gravitational constant


 
 , 
 
 
 
  are the two masses.

See also

Areal velocity
Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Kepler orbit
Specific energy

References
"
Category:Orbits








