   Areostationary orbit      Areostationary orbit   An areostationary orbit (abbreviated ASO ) is a circular areo­synchronous orbit in the Martian  equatorial plane about  above the surface, any point on which revolves about Mars in the same direction and with the same period as the Martian surface. Areo­stationary orbit is a concept similar to Earth's geo­stationary orbit . The prefix areo- derives from Ares , the ancient Greek god of war and counterpart to the Roman god Mars, with whom the planet was identified. The modern Greek word for Mars is Άρης (Áris).  To date, no artificial satellites have been placed in this orbit, but it is of interest to some scientists foreseeing a future tele­communications network for the exploration of Mars . 1 The proposed Mars One mission includes a communications system featuring amongst others things an areostationary satellite. 2 An asteroid or station placed in areostationary orbit could also be used to construct a Martian space elevator for use in transfers between the surface of Mars and orbit.  Formula  Orbital speed (how fast a satellite is moving through space) is calculated by multiplying the angular speed of the satellite by the orbital radius:      v  =   ω  r  .       v    ω  r  .     v=\omega r\text{.}     By this formula we can find the geostationary-type orbit of an object in relation to Mars (this type of orbit above is referred to as an areostationary orbit if it is above Mars). The areogeocentric gravitational constant GM (which is μ) for Mars has the value of 42,828 km 3 s −2 , and the known rotational period ( T ) of Mars is 88,642.66 seconds. Since ω = 2π/ T , using the formula above, the value of ω is found to be approx 7.088218×10 −5 s −1 . Thus, r 3 = 8.5243×10 12 km 3 , whose cube root is 20,427 km; subtracting the equatorial radius of Mars (3396.2 km) we have 17,031 km.  Stationkeeping  Any satellites in areostationary orbit will likely suffer from increased orbital station keeping costs, due to the fact that the Clarke belt of Mars lies between the orbits of the planet's two natural satellites . Phobos has a semi-major axis of 9,376 km, and Deimos has a semi-major axis of 23,463 km. The close proximity to Phobos in particular (the larger of the two moons) will cause unwanted orbital resonance effects that will gradually shift the orbit of areostationary satellites.  See also   Geostationary orbit  Areosynchronous orbit  List of orbits   References  External links   Mars Network - Marsats - NASA site devoted to future communications infrastructure for Mars exploration  Bandwidth available from an areostationary satellite   "  Category:Mars orbits     ↩  ↩     