


Universal coefficient theorem




Universal coefficient theorem

In algebraic topology, universal coefficient theorems establish relationships between homology and cohomology theories. For instance, the integral homology theory of a topological space

 
 , and its homology with coefficients in any abelian group

 
  are related as follows: the integral homology groups




completely determine the groups




Here  might be the simplicial homology or more general singular homology theory: the result itself is a pure piece of homological algebra about chain complexes of free abelian groups. The form of the result is that other coefficients 
 
 
 
  may be used, at the cost of using a Tor functor.
For example it is common to take 
 
 
 
  to be 
 
 
 
 , so that coefficients are modulo 2. This becomes straightforward in the absence of 2-torsion in the homology. Quite generally, the result indicates the relationship that holds between the Betti numbers  of 
 
 
 
  and the Betti numbers  with coefficients in a field

 
 . These can differ, but only when the characteristic of 
 
 
 
  is a prime number

 
  for which there is some 
 
 
 
 -torsion in the homology.
Statement of the homology case
Consider the tensor product of modules . The theorem states there is a short exact sequence



Furthermore, this sequence splits, though not naturally. Here 
 
 
 
  is a map induced by the bilinear map .
If the coefficient ring 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , this is a special case of the Bockstein spectral sequence.
Universal coefficient theorem for cohomology
Let 
 
 
 
  be a module over a principal ideal domain 
 
 
 
  (e.g., 
 
 
 
  or a field.)
There is also a universal coefficient theorem for cohomology involving the Ext functor, which asserts that there is a natural short exact sequence



As in the homology case, the sequence splits, though not naturally.
In fact, suppose



and define:



Then 
 
 
 
  above is the canonical map:



An alternative point-of-view can be based on representing cohomology via Eilenberg-MacLane space where the map 
 
 
 
  takes a homotopy class of maps from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  to the corresponding homomorphism induced in homology. Thus, the Eilenberg-MacLane space is a weak right adjoint to the homology functor. 1
Example: mod 2 cohomology of the real projective space
Let  Pn(R)}}, the real projective space. We compute the singular cohomology of 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 .
Knowing that the integer homology is given by:



In fact the total cohomology ring structure is



Corollaries
A special case of the theorem is computing integral cohomology. For a finite CW complex 
 
 
 
 ,  is finitely generated, and so we have the following decomposition.



where  are the betti numbers of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the torsion part of 
 
 
 
 . One may check that



and



This gives the following statement for integral cohomology:



For 
 
 
 
  an orientable, closed, and connected $n$-manifold, this corollary coupled with Poincaré duality gives that  βn−i(X)}}.
Notes
References

Allen Hatcher, Algebraic Topology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. ISBN 0-521-79540-0. A modern, geometrically flavored introduction to algebraic topology. The book is available free in PDF and PostScript formats on the author's homepage.




External links

http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/767864/universal-coefficient-theorem-with-ring-coefficients/768481#768481

"
Category:Homological algebra Category:Theorems in algebraic topology








