


Convex conjugate




Convex conjugate

In mathematics, convex conjugation is a generalization of the Legendre transformation. It is also known as Legendre–Fenchel transformation or Fenchel transformation (after Adrien-Marie Legendre and Werner Fenchel).
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a real normed vector space, and let 
 
 
 
  be the dual space to 
 
 
 
 . Denote the dual pairing by



For a functional



taking values on the extended real number line, the convex conjugate



is defined in terms of the supremum by



or, equivalently, in terms of the infimum by



This definition can be interpreted as an encoding of the convex hull of the function's epigraph in terms of its supporting hyperplanes.1 2
Examples
The convex conjugate of an affine function


 
  is



The convex conjugate of a power function



The convex conjugate of the absolute value function


 
  is



The convex conjugate of the exponential function

 
  is


 
  Convex conjugate and Legendre transform of the exponential function agree except that the domain of the convex conjugate is strictly larger as the Legendre transform is only defined for positive real numbers.
Connection with expected shortfall (average value at risk)
Let F denote a cumulative distribution function of a random variable X. Then (integrating by parts),


 
  has the convex conjugate



Ordering
A particular interpretation has the transform



as this is a nondecreasing rearrangement of the initial function f; in particular, 
 
 
 
  for ƒ nondecreasing.
Properties
The convex conjugate of a closed convex function is again a closed convex function. The convex conjugate of a polyhedral convex function (a convex function with polyhedral epigraph) is again a polyhedral convex function.
Order reversing
Convex-conjugation is order-reversing: if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 . Here



For a family of functions 
 
 
 
  it follows from the fact that supremums may be interchanged that



and from the max–min inequality that



Biconjugate
The convex conjugate of a function is always lower semi-continuous. The biconjugate

 
  (the convex conjugate of the convex conjugate) is also the closed convex hull, i.e. the largest lower semi-continuous convex function with 
 
 
 
 . For proper functions f,


if and only if f is convex and lower semi-continuous by Fenchel–Moreau theorem.
Fenchel's inequality
For any function 
 
 
 
  and its convex conjugate 
 
 
 
 , Fenchel's inequality (also known as the Fenchel–Young inequality) holds for every 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  :



Convexity
For two functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and a number 
 
 
 
  the convexity relation


 
  holds. The 
 
 
 
  operation is a convex mapping itself.
Infimal convolution
The infimal convolution (or epi-sum) of two functions f and g is defined as



Let f1, …, fm be proper, convex and lsc functions on Rn. Then the infimal convolution is convex and lsc (but not necessarily proper),3 and satisfies



The infimal convolution of two functions has a geometric interpretation: The (strict) epigraph of the infimal convolution of two functions is the Minkowski sum of the (strict) epigraphs of those functions.4
Maximizing argument
If the function 
 
 
 
  is differentiable, then its derivative is the maximizing argument in the computation of the convex conjugate:


 
  and



whence






and moreover






Scaling properties
If, for some 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  In case of an additional parameter (α, say) moreover


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is chosen to be the maximizing argument.
Behavior under linear transformations
Let A be a bounded linear operator from X to Y. For any convex function f on X, one has



where



is the preimage of f w.r.t. A and A* is the adjoint operator of A.5
A closed convex function f is symmetric with respect to a given set G of orthogonal linear transformations,



if and only if its convex conjugate f* is symmetric with respect to G.
Table of selected convex conjugates
The following table provides Legendre transforms for many common functions as well as a few useful properties.6


























 
  (where 
 
 
 
 )



































 
  (where 
 
 
 
 )



































 
  (where 
 
 
 
 )







 
  (where 
 
 
 
 )









 
  (where 
 
 
 
 )







 
  (where 
 
 
 
 )



























































































$\mathbb{R}_+$



See also

Dual problem
Fenchel's duality theorem
Legendre transformation
Young's inequality

References






External links










"
Category:Convex analysis Category:Duality theories Category:Transforms







Ioffe, A.D. and Tichomirov, V.M. (1979), Theorie der Extremalaufgaben. Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften. Satz 3.4.3





