


Lévy process




Lévy process

In probability theory, a Lévy process, named after the French mathematician Paul Lévy, is a stochastic process with independent, stationary increments: it represents the motion of a point whose successive displacements are random and independent, and statistically identical over different time intervals of the same length. A Lévy process may thus be viewed as the continuous-time analog of a random walk.
The most well known examples of Lévy processes are Brownian motion and the Poisson process. Aside from Brownian motion with drift, all other Lévy processes, except the deterministic case, have discontinuous paths.
Mathematical definition
A stochastic process

 
  is said to be a Lévy process if it satisfies the following properties:



almost surely
Independence of increments: For any 
 
 
 
  are independent
Stationary increments: For any 
 
 
 
  is equal in distribution to 
 
 

Continuity in probability: For any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  it holds that 
 
 


If 
 
 
 
  is a Lévy process then one may construct a version of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is almost surely right continuous with left limits.
Properties
Independent increments
A continuous-time stochastic process assigns a random variable Xt to each point t ≥ 0 in time. In effect it is a random function of t. The increments of such a process are the differences Xs − Xt between its values at different times t s − Xt and Xu − Xv are independent random variables whenever the two time intervals do not overlap and, more generally, any finite number of increments assigned to pairwise non-overlapping time intervals are mutually (not just pairwise) independent.
Stationary increments
To call the increments stationary means that the probability distribution of any increment Xt − Xs depends only on the length t − s of the time interval; increments on equally long time intervals are identically distributed.
If 
 
 
 
  is a Wiener process, the probability distribution of Xt − Xs is normal with expected value 0 and variance t − s.
If 
 
 
 
  is the Poisson process, the probability distribution of Xt − Xs is a Poisson distribution with expected value λ(t − s), where λ > 0 is the "intensity" or "rate" of the process.
Infinite divisibility
The distribution of a Lévy process has the property of infinite divisibility: given any integer "n", the law of a Lévy process at time t can be represented as the law of n independent random variables, which are precisely the increments of the Lévy process over time intervals of length t/n, which are independent and identically distributed by assumption. Conversely, for each infinitely divisible probability distribution 
 
 
 
 , there is a Lévy process 
 
 
 
  such that the law of 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 .
Moments
In any Lévy process with finite moments, the nth moment 
 
 
 
 , is a polynomial function of t; these functions satisfy a binomial identity:



Lévy–Khintchine representation
The distribution of a Lévy process is characterized by its characteristic function, which is given by the Lévy–Khintchine formula: If 
 
 
 
  is a Lévy process, then its characteristic function 
 
 
 
  is given by



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function and 
 
 
 
  is a sigma-finite measure called the Lévy measure of 
 
 
 
 , satisfying the property



A Lévy process can be seen as having three independent components: a linear drift, a Brownian motion and a superposition of independent (centered) Poisson processes with different jump sizes; 
 
 
 
  represents the rate of arrival (intensity) of the Poisson process with jump of size 
 
 
 
 . These three components, and thus the Lévy–Khintchine representation, are fully determined by the Lévy–Khintchine triplet 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the only (nondeterministic) continuous Lévy process is a Brownian motion with drift.
Lévy–Itō decomposition
Any Lévy process may be decomposed into the sum of a Brownian motion, a linear drift and a pure jump process which captures all jumps of the original Lévy process. The latter can be thought of as a superposition of centered compound Poisson processes.This result is known as the Lévy–Itō decomposition.
Given a Lévy triplet 
 
 
 
  there exist three independent Lévy processes, which lie in the same probability space, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  such that:



 
  is a Brownian motion with drift, corresponding to the absolutely continuous part of a measure and capturing the drift a and diffusion 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  is a compound Poisson process, corresponding to the pure point part of the singular measure W;


 
  is a square integrable pure jump martingale that almost surely has a countable number of jumps on a finite interval, corresponding to the singular continuous part of the singular measure W.

The process defined by 
 
 
 
  is then a Lévy process with triplet 
 
 
 
 .
The process $X^{(3)}$ can be further decomposed as a sum of two independent processes the first pure jump zero mean martingale of jumps less than $1$ In absolute value and the second a compound Poisson process describing the jumps bigger than one in absolute value.
See also

Independent and identically distributed random variables
Brownian motion
Poisson process
Markov process
Lévy flight

References



.

.

"
Category:Stochastic processes


