


Marcinkiewicz interpolation theorem




Marcinkiewicz interpolation theorem

In mathematics, the Marcinkiewicz interpolation theorem, discovered by , is a result bounding the norms of non-linear operators acting on Lp spaces.
Marcinkiewicz' theorem is similar to the Riesz–Thorin theorem about linear operators, but also applies to non-linear operators.
Preliminaries
Let f be a measurable function with real or complex values, defined on a measure space (X, F, ω). The distribution function of f is defined by



Then f is called weak 
 
 
 if there exists a constant C such that the distribution of f satisfies the following inequality for all t > 0:



The smallest constant C in the inequality above is called the weak 
 
 
 
 
  norm and is usually denoted by ||f||1,w or ||f||1,∞. Similarly the space is usually denoted by L1,w or L1,∞.
(Note: This terminology is a bit misleading since the weak norm does not satisfy the triangle inequality as one can see by considering the sum of the functions on 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , which has norm 4 not 2.)
Any 
 
 
 
  function belongs to L1,w and in addition one has the inequality



This is nothing but Markov's inequality (aka Chebyshev's Inequality). The converse is not true. For example, the function 1/x belongs to L1,w but not to L1.
Similarly, one may define the weak 
 
 
 
  space as the space of all functions f such that 
 
 
 
  belong to L1,w, and the weak 
 
 
 
  norm using



More directly, the Lp,w norm is defined as the best constant C in the inequality



for all t > 0.
Formulation
Informally, Marcinkiewicz's theorem is
Theorem: Let T be a bounded linear operator from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and at the same time from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Then T is also a bounded operator from 
 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  for any r between p and q.
In other words, even if you only require weak boundedness on the extremes p and q, you still get regular boundedness inside. To make this more formal, one has to explain that T is bounded only on a dense subset and can be completed. See Riesz-Thorin theorem for these details.
Where Marcinkiewicz's theorem is weaker than the Riesz-Thorin theorem is in the estimates of the norm. The theorem gives bounds for the 
 
 
 
  norm of T but this bound increases to infinity as r converges to either p or q. Specifically , suppose that





 
  so that the operator norm of T from Lp to Lp,w is at most Np, and the operator norm of T from Lq to Lq,w is at most Nq. Then the following interpolation inequality holds for all r between p and q and all f ∈ Lr:


 
  where


 
  and


 
  The constants δ and γ can also be given for q = ∞ by passing to the limit.
A version of the theorem also holds more generally if T is only assumed to be a quasilinear operator. That is, there exists a constant C > 0 such that T satisfies


 
  for almost every x. The theorem holds precisely as stated, except with γ replaced by



An operator T (possibly quasilinear) satisfying an estimate of the form


 
  is said to be of weak type (p,q). An operator is simply of type (p,q) if T is a bounded transformation from Lp to Lq:


 
  A more general formulation of the interpolation theorem is as follows:

If T is a quasilinear operator of weak type (p0, q0) and of weak type (p1, q1) where q0 ≠ q1, then for each θ ∈ (0,1), T is of type (p,q), for p and q with p ≤ q of the form



 
  The latter formulation follows from the former through an application of Hölder's inequality and a duality argument.
Applications and examples
A famous application example is the Hilbert transform. Viewed as a multiplier, the Hilbert transform of a function f can be computed by first taking the Fourier transform of f, then multiplying by the sign function, and finally applying the inverse Fourier transform.
Hence Parseval's theorem easily shows that the Hilbert transform is bounded from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . A much less obvious fact is that it is bounded from 
 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Hence Marcinkiewicz's theorem shows that it is bounded from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  for any 1 L^p to 
 
 
 
  bounds can be derived immediately from the 
 
 
 
 
  to weak 
 
 
 
  estimate by a clever change of variables, Marcinkiewicz interpolation is a more intuitive approach. Since the Hardy–Littlewood Maximal Function is trivially bounded from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , strong boundedness for all 
 
 
 
  follows immediately from the weak (1,1) estimate and interpolation. The weak (1,1) estimate can be obtained from the Vitali covering lemma.
History
The theorem was first announced by , who showed this result to Antoni Zygmund shortly before he died in World War II. The theorem was almost forgotten by Zygmund, and was absent from his original works on the theory of singular integral operators. Later  realized that Marcinkiewicz's result could greatly simplify his work, at which time he published his former student's theorem together with a generalization of his own.
See also

Interpolation space

References


.

.


.


"
Category:Fourier analysis Category:Theorems in functional analysis


