


Solar zenith angle




Solar zenith angle

The solar zenith angle is the angle measured from directly overhead to the geometric centre of the sun's disc, as described using a horizontal coordinate system. The solar elevation angle is the altitude of the sun, the angle between the horizon and the centre of the sun's disc. If we write θs for the solar zenith angle, then the solar elevation angle αs = 90° – θs.1
Formulas
Solar zenith angle
The solar zenith angle, θs is estimated using results from spherical trigonometry by23


 
  where

θs is the solar zenith angle
h is the hour angle, in the local solar time.
δ is the current declination of the Sun
φ is the local latitude.

Solar elevation angle
The solar elevation angle is the altitude of the sun, the angle between the horizon and the centre of the sun's disc. The approximate value can be calculated with the following formula:


 
  where

αs is the solar elevation angle, αs = 90° – θs
h is the hour angle, in the local solar time.
δ is the current declination of the Sun
φ is the local latitude.

Caveats
The values calculated above are approximations due to the distinction between common/geodetic latitude and geocentric latitude. However, the two values differ by less than 12 minutes of arc.
The formulas neglect the effect of atmospheric refraction.
The formula for solar elevation angle was derived using the trigonometric addition formulas from the solar zenith angle formula4
Applications
Sunrise/Sunset
The approximate times of sunset and sunrise occur when the zenith angle is 90°, where the hour angle h0 satisfies5








Precise times of sunset and sunrise occur when the upper limb of the Sun appears, as refracted by the atmosphere, to be on the horizon.
Albedo
A weighted daily average zenith angle, used in computing the local albedo of the Earth, is given by








where Q is the instantaneous insolation.6
Summary of special angles
For example, the solar elevation angle is :

90° if you are on the equator, a day of equinox, at a solar hour of twelve
near 0° at the sunset or at the sunrise
between -90° and 0° during the night

An exact calculation is given in position of the Sun. Other approximations exist elsewhere.7
See also

Altitude (astronomy)
Horizontal coordinate system
Solar azimuth angle
Sun
Sun path
Position of the Sun
Sunrise
Sunset

References
"
Category:Horizontal coordinate system Category:Sun Category:Solar energy



↩
↩
↩
↩


↩




