


Spectrum (topology)




Spectrum (topology)

In algebraic topology, a branch of mathematics, a spectrum is an object representing a generalized cohomology theory. There are several different constructions of categories of spectra, any of which gives a context for the same stable homotopy theory.
The definition of a spectrum
There are many variations of the definition: in general, a "spectrum" is any sequence 
 
 
 
  of pointed topological spaces or pointed simplicial sets together with the structure maps 
 
 
 
 .
The treatment here is due to Adams (1974): a spectrum (a CW-spectrum) is a sequence 
 
 
 
  of CW-complexes together with inclusions 
 
 
 
  of the suspension

 
  as a subcomplex of 
 
 
 
 .
For other definitions, see symmetric spectrum and simplicial spectrum.
Examples
Consider singular cohomology

 
  with coefficients in an abelian group A. By Brown representability

 
  is the set of homotopy classes of maps from X to K(A,n), the Eilenberg-MacLane space with homotopy concentrated in degree n. Then the corresponding spectrum HA has n'th space K(A,n); it is called the Eilenberg–MacLane spectrum.
As a second important example, consider topological K-theory. At least for X compact, 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the Grothendieck group of the monoid of complex vector bundles on X. Also, 
 
 
 
  is the group corresponding to vector bundles on the suspension of X. Topological K-theory is a generalized cohomology theory, so it gives a spectrum. The zeroth space is 
 
 
 
  while the first space is 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  is the infinite unitary group and 
 
 
 
  is its classifying space. By Bott periodicity we get 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all n, so all the spaces in the topological K-theory spectrum are given by either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . There is a corresponding construction using real vector bundles instead of complex vector bundles, which gives an 8-periodic spectrum.
For many more examples, see the list of cohomology theories.

A spectrum may be constructed out of a space. The suspension spectrum of a space X is a spectrum 
 
 
 
  (the structure maps are the identity.) For example, the suspension spectrum of a 0-sphere is called the sphere spectrum and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
An Ω-spectrum is a spectrum such that the adjoint of the structure map; that is, 
 
 
 
  is a weak equivalence. The K-theory spectrum of a ring is an example of an Ω-spectrum.
A ring spectrum is a spectrum X such that the diagrams that describe ring axioms in terms of smash products commute "up to homotopy" (
 
 
 
  corresponds to the identity.) For example, the spectrum of a topological K-theory is a ring spectrum. A module spectrum may be defined analogously.

Invariants

The homotopy group of a spectrum 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 . Thus, for example, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  sphere spectrum, is the k-th stable homotopy group of a sphere. A spectrum is said to be connective if its 
 
 
 
  are zero for negative k.

Functions, maps, and homotopies of spectra
There are three natural categories whose objects are spectra, whose morphisms are the functions, or maps, or homotopy classes defined below.
A function between two spectra E and F is a sequence of maps from En to Fn that commute with the maps ΣEn → En+1 and ΣFn → Fn+1.
Given a spectrum 
 
 
 
 , a subspectrum 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of subcomplexes that is also a spectrum. As each i-cell in 
 
 
 
  suspends to an (i + 1)-cell in 
 
 
 
 , a cofinal subspectrum is a subspectrum for which each cell of the parent spectrum is eventually contained in the subspectrum after a finite number of suspensions. Spectra can then be turned into a category by defining a map of spectra 
 
 
 
  to be a function from a cofinal subspectrum 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , where two such functions represent the same map if they coincide on some cofinal subspectrum. Intuitively such a map of spectra does not need to be everywhere defined, just eventually become defined, and two maps that coincide on a cofinal subspectrum are said to be equivalent. This gives the category of spectra (and maps), which is a major tool. There is a natural embedding of the category of pointed CW complexes into this category: it takes 
 
 
 
  to the suspension spectrum in which the nth complex is 
 
 
 
 .
The smash product of a spectrum 
 
 
 
  and a pointed complex 
 
 
 
  is a spectrum given by 
 
 
 
  (associativity of the smash product yields immediately that this is indeed a spectrum). A homotopy of maps between spectra corresponds to a map 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the disjoint union 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  taken to be the basepoint.
The stable homotopy category, or homotopy category of (CW) spectra is defined to be the category whose objects are spectra and whose morphisms are homotopy classes of maps between spectra. Many other definitions of spectrum, some appearing very different, lead to equivalent stable homotopy categories.
Finally, we can define the suspension of a spectrum by 
 
 
 
 . This translation suspension is invertible, as we can desuspend too, by setting 
 
 
 
 .
The triangulated homotopy category of spectra
The stable homotopy category is additive: maps can be added by using a variant of the track addition used to define homotopy groups. Thus homotopy classes from one spectrum to another form an abelian group. Furthermore the stable homotopy category is  triangulated (Vogt (1970)), the shift being given by suspension and the distinguished triangles by the mapping cone sequences of spectra


 
 .
Smash products of spectra
The smash product of spectra extends the smash product of CW complexes. It makes the stable homotopy category into a monoidal category; in other words it behaves like the (derived) tensor product of abelian groups. A major problem with the smash product is that obvious ways of defining it make it associative and commutative only up to homotopy. Some more recent definitions of spectra, such as symmetric spectra, eliminate this problem, and give a symmetric monoidal structure at the level of maps, before passing to homotopy classes.
The smash product is compatible with the triangulated category structure. In particular the smash product of a distinguished triangle with a spectrum is a distinguished triangle.
Generalized homology and cohomology of spectra
We can define the (stable) homotopy groups of a spectrum to be those given by


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of spheres and 
 
 
 
  is the set of homotopy classes of maps from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . We define the generalized homology theory of a spectrum E by


 
  and define its generalized cohomology theory by


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  can be a spectrum or (by using its suspension spectrum) a space.
History
A version of the concept of a spectrum was introduced in the 1958 doctoral dissertation of Elon Lages Lima. His advisor Edwin Spanier wrote further on the subject in 1959. Spectra were adopted by Michael Atiyah and George W. Whitehead in their work on generalized homology theories in the early 1960s. The 1964 doctoral thesis of J. Michael Boardman gave a workable definition of a category of spectra and of maps (not just homotopy classes) between them, as useful in stable homotopy theory as the category of CW complexes is in the unstable case. (This is essentially the category described above, and it is still used for many purposes: for other accounts, see Adams (1974) or Vogt (1970).) Important further theoretical advances have however been made since 1990, improving vastly the formal properties of spectra. Consequently, much recent literature uses modified definitions of spectrum: see Mandell et al. (2001) for a unified treatment of these new approaches.
See also

Ring spectrum
Symmetric spectrum
G-spectrum
Mapping spectrum
Suspension (topology)

References

Adams, J. F.(1974), "Stable homotopy and generalised homology". University of Chicago Press
Atiyah, M. F.(1961), "Bordism and cobordism", Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 57: 200–208















External links

Are spectra really the same as cohomology theories?

"
Category:Homotopy theory


