


Pyrgeometer




Pyrgeometer

(Figure)
Example of a pyrgeometer

A pyrgeometer is a device that measures the atmospheric infra-red radiation spectrum that extends approximately from 4.5 µm to 100 µm.
Pyrgeometer components
(Figure)
Example of a pyrgeometer showing the principal components

A pyrgeometer consists of the following major components:

A thermopile sensor which is sensitive to radiation in a broad range from 200 nm to 100 µm


A silicon dome or window with a solar blind filter coating. It has a transmittance between 4.5 µm and 50 µm that eliminates solar shortwave radiation.


A temperature sensor to measure the body temperature of the instrument.


A sun shield to minimize heating of the instrument due to solar radiation.

(Figure)
Typical combined window and solar blind filter transmittance for CGR 4 model pyrgeometer

Measurement of long wave downward radiation
The atmosphere and the pyrgeometer (in effect its sensor surface) exchange long wave IR radiation. This results in a net radiation balance according to:



Where:

 
  - net radiation at sensor surface [W/m²]

 
  - Long-wave radiation received from the atmosphere [W/m²]

 
  - Long-wave radiation emitted by the sensor surface [W/m²]
The pyrgeometer's thermopile detects the net radiation balance between the incoming and outgoing long wave radiation flux and converts it to a voltage according to the equation below.


Where:

 
  - net radiation at sensor surface [W/m²]

 
  - thermopile output voltage [V]

 
  - sensitivity/calibration factor of instrument [V/W/m²]
The value for 
 
 
 
  is determined during calibration of the instrument. The calibration is performed at the production factory with a reference instrument traceable to a regional calibration center.1
To derive the absolute downward long wave flux, the temperature of the pyrgeometer has to be taken into account. It is measured using a temperature sensor inside the instrument, near the cold junctions of the thermopile. The pyrgeometer is considered to approximate a black body. Due to this it emits long wave radiation according to:


 Where:

 
  - Long-wave radiation emitted by the earth surface [W/m²]

 
  - Stefan-Boltzmann constant [W/(m²·K4)]

 
  - Absolute temperature of pyrgeometer detector [kelvins]
From the calculations above the incoming long wave radiation can be derived. This is usually done by rearranging the equations above to yield the so-called pyrgeometer equation by Albrecht and Cox.



Where all the variables have the same meaning as before.
As a result, the detected voltage and instrument temperature yield the total global long wave downward radiation.
Usage
Pyrgeometers are frequently used in meteorology, climatology studies. The atmospheric long-wave downward radiation is of interest for research into long term climate changes.
The signals are generally detected using a data logging system, capable of taking high resolution samples in the millivolt range.
References
See also

pyranometer
radiometer

"
Category:Electromagnetic radiation meters Category:Radiometry



↩




