


Cauchy–Euler equation




Cauchy–Euler equation

In mathematics, a Cauchy–Euler equation (also known as the Euler–Cauchy equation, or simply Euler's equation) is a linear homogeneous ordinary differential equation with variable coefficients. It is sometimes referred to as an equidimensional equation. Because of the particularly simple equidimensional structure the equation can be replaced with an equivalent equation with constant coefficients which can then be solved explicitly.
The equation
Let y(n)(x) be the nth derivative of the unknown function y(x). Then a Cauchy–Euler equation of order n has the form



The substitution 
 
 
 
  reduces this equation to a linear differential equation with constant coefficients. Alternatively a trial solution 
 
 
 
  may be used to solve for the basis solutions.1
Second order – solving through trial solution
   The most common Cauchy–Euler equation is the second-order equation, appearing in a number of physics and engineering applications, such as when solving Laplace's equation in polar coordinates. It is given by the equation:2



We assume a trial solution given by3



Differentiating, we have:



and



Substituting into the original equation, we have:



Or rearranging gives:



We then can solve for m. There are three particular cases of interest:

Case #1: Two distinct roots, m1 and m2
Case #2: One real repeated root, m
Case #3: Complex roots, α ± βi

In case #1, the solution is given by:



In case #2, the solution is given by



To get to this solution, the method of reduction of order must be applied after having found one solution y = xm.
In case #3, the solution is given by:









For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the real plane
This form of the solution is derived by setting x = et and using Euler's formula
Second order – solution through change of variables



We operate the variable substitution defined by





 
  Differentiating:






Substituting 
 
 
 
 , we have



This equation in 
 
 
 
  can be easily solved using its characteristic polynomial



Now, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the roots of this polynomial, we analyze the two main cases: distinct roots and double roots:
If the roots are distinct, the general solution is given by


 
 , where the exponentials may be complex.
If the roots are equal, the general solution is given by



In both cases, the solution 
 
 
 
  may be found by setting 
 
 
 
 , hence 
 
 
 
 .
Hence, in the first case,


 
 ,
and in the second case,



Example
Given



we substitute the simple solution xα:



For xα to be a solution, either x = 0, which gives the trivial solution, or the coefficient of xα is zero. Solving the quadratic equation, we get α = 1, 3. The general solution is therefore



Difference equation analogue
There is a difference equation analogue to the Cauchy–Euler equation. For a fixed m > 0, define the sequence ƒm(n) as



Applying the difference operator to 
 
 
 
 , we find that



If we do this k times, we will find that



where the superscript (k) denotes applying the difference operator k times. Comparing this to the fact that the k-th derivative of xm equals



suggests that we can solve the N-th order difference equation



in a similar manner to the differential equation case. Indeed, substituting the trial solution



brings us to the same situation as the differential equation case,



One may now proceed as in the differential equation case, since the general solution of an N-th order linear difference equation is also the linear combination of N linearly independent solutions. Applying reduction of order in case of a multiple root m1 will yield expressions involving a discrete version of ln,



(Compare with
 
 
 
 )
In cases where fractions become involved, one may use



instead (or simply use it in all cases), which coincides with the definition before for integer m.
See also

Hypergeometric differential equation
Cauchy–Euler operator

References


Bibliography



"
Category:Ordinary differential equations



↩






