


Median (geometry)




Median (geometry)

 In geometry, a median of a triangle is a line segment joining a vertex to the midpoint of the opposing side. Every triangle has exactly three medians, one from each vertex, and they all intersect each other at the triangle's centroid. In the case of isosceles and equilateral triangles, a median bisects any angle at a vertex whose two adjacent sides are equal in length.
The concept of a median extends to tetrahedra.
Relation to center of mass
Each median of a triangle passes through the triangle's centroid, which is the center of mass of an object of uniform density in the shape of the triangle.1 Thus the object would balance on the intersection point of the medians.
Equal-area division
 Each median divides the area of the triangle in half; hence the name, and hence a triangular object of uniform density would balance on any median. (Any other lines which divide the area of the triangle into two equal parts do not pass through the centroid.)23 The three medians divide the triangle into six smaller triangles of equal area.
Proof of equal-area property
Consider a triangle ABC. Let D be the midpoint of 
 
 
 
 , E be the midpoint of 
 
 
 
 , F be the midpoint of 
 
 
 
 , and O be the centroid (most commonly denoted G).
By definition, 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  represents the area of triangle 
 
 
 
  ; these hold because in each case the two triangles have bases of equal length and share a common altitude from the (extended) base, and a triangle's area equals one-half its base times its height.
We have:






Thus, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Since 
 
 
 
 , therefore, 
 
 
 
 . Using the same method, one can show that 
 
 
 
 .
Formulas involving the medians' lengths
The lengths of the medians can be obtained from Apollonius' theorem as:









where a, b and c are the sides of the triangle with respective medians ma, mb, and mc from their midpoints.
Thus we have the relationships:4









Other properties
The centroid divides each median into parts in the ratio 2:1, with the centroid being twice as close to the midpoint of a side as it is to the opposite vertex.
For any triangle,Posamentier, Alfred S., and Salkind, Charles T., Challenging Problems in Geometry, Dover, 1996: pp. 86–87.


 
 (perimeter) a, b, c and medians 
 
 
 
 ,



The medians from sides of lengths a and b are perpendicular if and only if 
 
 
5
The medians of a right triangle with hypotenuse c satisfy 
 
 

Any triangle's area T can be expressed in terms of its medians 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  as follows. Denoting their semi-sum  as σ, we have6



Tetrahedron
A tetrahedron is a three-dimensional object having four triangular faces. A line segment joining a vertex of a tetrahedron with the centroid of the opposite face is called a median of the tetrahedron. There are four medians, and they are all concurrent at the centroid of the tetrahedron.7
See also

Angle bisector
Altitude (triangle)

References
External links

Medians and Area Bisectors of a Triangle
The Medians at cut-the-knot
Area of Median Triangle at cut-the-knot
Medians of a triangle With interactive animation
Constructing a median of a triangle with compass and straightedge animated demonstration


"
Category:Elementary geometry Category:Triangles Category:Articles containing proofs



↩
↩
Dunn, J. A., and Pretty, J. E., "Halving a triangle," Mathematical Gazette 56, May 1972, 105-108.↩
↩
Boskoff, Homentcovschi, and Suceava (2009), Mathematical Gazette, Note 93.15.↩
Benyi, Arpad, "A Heron-type formula for the triangle", Mathematical Gazette 87, July 2003, 324–326.↩
Leung, Kam-tim; and Suen, Suk-nam; "Vectors, matrices and geometry", Hong Kong University Press, 1994, pp. 53–54↩




