


Szemerédi–Trotter theorem




Szemerédi–Trotter theorem

The Szemerédi–Trotter theorem is a mathematical result in the field of combinatorial geometry. It asserts that given 
 
 
 
  points and 
 
 
 
  lines in the plane, the number of incidences (i.e. the number of point-line pairs, such that the point lies on the line) is



this bound cannot be improved, except in terms of the implicit constants.
An equivalent formulation of the theorem is the following. Given 
 
 
 
 
  points and an integer 
 
 
 
 , the number of lines which pass through at least 
 
 
 
  of the points is



The original proof of Szemerédi and Trotter1 was somewhat complicated, using a combinatorial technique known as cell decomposition. Later, Székely discovered a much simpler proof using the crossing number inequality for graphs.2 (See below.)
The Szemerédi–Trotter theorem has a number of consequences, including Beck's theorem in incidence geometry.
Proof of the first formulation
We may discard the lines which contain two or fewer of the points, as they can contribute at most 
 
 
 
  incidences to the total number. Thus we may assume that every line contains at least three of the points.
If a line contains 
 
 
 
 
  points, then it will contain 
 
 
 
  line segments which connect two of the 
 
 
 
  points. In particular it will contain at least k/2 such line segments, since we have assumed 
 
 
 
 . Adding this up over all of the 
 
 
 
  lines, we see that the number of line segments obtained in this manner is at least half of the total number of incidences. Thus if we let 
 
 
 
 
  be the number of such line segments, it will suffice to show that



Now consider the graph formed by using the 
 
 
 
  points as vertices, and the e line segments as edges. Since all of the line segments lie on one of 
 
 
 
  lines, and any two lines intersect in at most one point, the crossing number of this graph is at most . Applying the crossing number inequality we thus conclude that either 
 
 
 
 , or that . In either case  and we obtain the desired bound



Proof of the second formulation
Since every pair of points can be connected by at most one line, there can be at most 
 
 
 
  lines which can connect at 
 
 
 
  or more points, since 
 
 
 
 . This bound will prove the theorem when 
 
 
 
  is small (e.g. if 
 
 
 
 
  for some absolute constant 
 
 
 
 ). Thus, we need only consider the case when 
 
 
 
  is large, say 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose that there are m lines that each contain at least 
 
 
 
  points. These lines generate at least 
 
 
 
 
  incidences, and so by the first formulation of the Szemerédi–Trotter theorem, we have



and so at least one of the statements 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
  is true. The third possibility is ruled out since 
 
 
 
  was assumed to be large, so we are left with the first two. But in either of these two cases, some elementary algebra will give the bound 
 
 
 
 
  as desired.
Optimality
Except for its constant, the Szemerédi–Trotter incidence bound cannot be improved. To see this, consider for any positive integer  a set of points on the integer lattice



and a set of lines



Clearly, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since each line is incident to 
 
 
 
 
  points (i.e., once for each 
 
 
 
 ), the number of incidences is 
 
 
 
  which matches the upper bound.3
Generalization to 
One generalization of this result to arbitrary dimension, , was found by Agarwal and Aronov.4 Given a set of 
 
 
 
  points, 
 
 
 
 , and the set of 
 
 
 
 
  hyperplanes, 
 
 
 
 , which are each spanned by 
 
 
 
 , the number of incidences between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is bounded above by



Equivalently, the number of hyperplanes in 
 
 
 
  containing 
 
 
 
  or more points is bounded above by



A construction due to Edelsbrunner shows this bound to be asymptotically optimal.5
Solymosi and Tao obtained near sharp upper bounds for the number of incidences between points and algebraic varieties in higher dimensions. Their proof uses the Polynomial Ham Sandwich Theorem.6
References
"
Category:Euclidean plane geometry Category:Theorems in discrete geometry Category:Theorems in combinatorics Category:Articles containing proofs













