


Clebsch–Gordan coefficients




Clebsch–Gordan coefficients

In physics, the Clebsch–Gordan (CG) coefficients are numbers that arise in angular momentum coupling in quantum mechanics. They appear as the expansion coefficients of total angular momentum eigenstates in an uncoupled tensor product basis.
In more mathematical terms, the CG coefficients are used in representation theory, particularly of compact Lie groups, to perform the explicit direct sum decomposition of the tensor product of two irreducible representations into irreducible representations, in cases where the numbers and types of irreducible components are already known abstractly. The name derives from the German mathematicians Alfred Clebsch and Paul Gordan, who encountered an equivalent problem in invariant theory.
From a vector calculus perspective, the CG coefficients associated with the SO(3) group can be defined simply as integrals of spherical harmonics. The addition of spins in quantum-mechanical terms can be read directly from this approach. The formulas below use Dirac's bra–ket notation.
From the formal definition of angular momentum, recursion relations for the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients can be found. To find numerical values for the coefficients a phase convention must be adopted. In this article, the Condon–Shortley phase convention is chosen.
Angular momentum operators
Angular momentum operators are self-adjoint operators , , and  that satisfy the commutation relations


 
 
  where  is the Levi-Civita symbol. Together the three operators define a vector operator (also known as a spherical vector):



By developing this concept further, one can define another operator  as the inner product of 
 
 
 
 
  with itself:


 
 . This is an example of a Casimir operator.
One can also define raising () and lowering () operators (the so-called ladder operators):


 
 .
Angular momentum states
It can be shown from the above definitions that  commutes with , , and :



When two Hermitian operators commute, a common set of eigenfunctions exists. Conventionally  and  are chosen. From the commutation relations the possible eigenvalues can be found. These states are denoted 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the angular momentum quantum number and 
 
 
 
  is the angular momentum projection onto the z-axis. They satisfy the following eigenvalue equations:


 
 
  The raising and lowering operators can be used to alter the value of 
 
 
 
 :


 
  where the ladder coefficient is given by:  In principle, one may also introduce a (possibly complex) phase factor in the definition of 
 
 
 
 . The choice made in this article is in agreement with the Condon–Shortley phase convention. The angular momentum states are orthogonal (because their eigenvalues with respect to a Hermitian operator are distinct) and are assumed to be normalized:



Note that an italicized 
 
 
 
  denotes an integer or a half-integer that labels the angular momentum of the system (e.g. 
 
 
 
  for an electron and 
 
 
 
 
  for a photon). On the other hand, the roman , , , , , and  denote operators.
Tensor product space
Let  be the -dimensional vector space spanned by the states


 
 
 , and  the -dimensional vector space spanned by the states


 
 
 . The tensor product of these spaces, , has a -dimensional uncoupled basis


 
 . Angular momentum operators are defined to act on states in  in the following manner:


 
  and


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the identity operator.
The total1 angular momentum operators are defined by


 
  The total angular momentum operators can be shown to satisfy the same kind of commutation relations:


 
 , where }. Hence, a set of coupled eigenstates exist for the total angular momentum operator as well:


 
 
  for }. Note that it is common to omit the  part.
One can derive the triangular condition that the total angular momentum quantum number 
 
 
 
  must satisfy:


 
 . The total number of total angular momentum eigenstates is necessarily equal to the dimension of :


 
 . The total angular momentum states form an orthonormal basis of :


 
 .
Formal definition of Clebsch–Gordan coefficients
The coupled states can be expanded via the completeness relation (resolution of identity) in the uncoupled basis  The expansion coefficients


 
  are the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients. Note that some authors write them in a different order such as J M⟩}}.
Applying the operator


 
  to both sides of the defining equation shows that the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients can only be nonzero when


 
 .
Recursion relations
The recursion relations were discovered by physicist Giulio Racah from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1941.
Applying the total angular momentum raising and lowering operators


 
  to the left hand side of the defining equation gives


 
 
  Applying the same operators to the right hand side gives


 
 
  where  was defined in . Combining these results gives recursion relations for the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients:


 
 . Taking the upper sign with the condition that 
 
 
 
  gives initial recursion relation:


 
 . In the Condon–Shortley phase convention, one adds the constraint that


 
  (and is therefore also real).
The Clebsch–Gordan coefficients  J J⟩}} can then be found from these recursion relations. The normalization is fixed by the requirement that the sum of the squares, which equivalent to the requirement that the norm of the state [j1 j2] J J⟩}} must be one.
The lower sign in the recursion relation can be used to find all the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients with 
 
 
 
 . Repeated use of that equation gives all coefficients.
This procedure to find the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients shows that they are all real in the Condon–Shortley phase convention.
Explicit expression
For an explicit expression of the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients and tables with numerical values, see table of Clebsch–Gordan coefficients.
Orthogonality relations
These are most clearly written down by introducing the alternative notation



The first orthogonality relation is


 
  (derived from the fact that x⟩ ⟨x{{!}}}}) and the second one is


 
 .
Special cases
For 
 
 
 
  the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients are given by


 
 .
For  j1 + j2}} and 
 
 
 
  we have


 
 .
For  j2 {{=}} J / 2}} and  −m2}} we have


 
 .
For  j2 {{=}} m1 {{=}} −m2}} we have



For  1}},  0}} we have



Symmetry properties



A convenient way to derive these relations is by converting the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients to Wigner 3-j symbols using . The symmetry properties of Wigner 3-j symbols are much simpler. Care is needed when simplifying phase factors, because the quantum numbers can be integer or half integer, e.g.,  is equal to 1 for integer 
 
 
 
  and equal to −1 for half-integer 
 
 
 
 . The following relations, however, are valid in either case:


 
  and for , , and 
 
 
 
  appearing in the same Clebsch–Gordan coefficient:


 
 .
 Relation to Wigner 3-j symbols
Clebsch–Gordan coefficients are related to Wigner 3-j symbols which have more convenient symmetry relations.
Relation to Wigner D-matrices



Relation to spherical harmonics
In the case where integers are involved, the coefficients can be related to integrals of spherical harmonics:



It follows from this and orthonormality of the spherical harmonics that CG coefficients are in fact the expansion coefficients of a product of two spherical harmonics in terms a single spherical harmonic:



Other Properties



SU(N) Clebsch–Gordan coefficients
For arbitrary groups and their representations, Clebsch–Gordan coefficients are not known in general. However, algorithms to produce Clebsch–Gordan coefficients for the special unitary group are known.2 3 In particular, SU(3) Clebsch-Gordan coefficients have been computed and tabulated because of their utility in characterizing hadronic decays, where a flavor-SU(3) symmetry exists that relates the up, down, and strange quarks.45 A web interface for tabulating SU(N) Clebsch–Gordan coefficients is readily available.
See also

3-jm symbol
Racah W-coefficient
6-j symbol
9-j symbol
Spherical harmonics
Spherical basis
Associated Legendre polynomials
Angular momentum
Angular momentum coupling
Total angular momentum quantum number
Azimuthal quantum number
Table of Clebsch–Gordan coefficients
Wigner D-matrix
Angular momentum diagrams (quantum mechanics)
Clebsch–Gordan coefficient for SU(3)

References


External links

PDF Table of Clebsch–Gordan Coefficients, Spherical Harmonics, and d-Functions
Clebsch–Gordan, 3-j and 6-j Coefficient Web Calculator
Downloadable Clebsch–Gordan Coefficient Calculator for Mac and Windows
Web interface for tabulating SU(N) Clebsch–Gordan coefficients

Further reading

Quantum mechanics, E. Zaarur, Y. Peleg, R. Pnini, Schaum's Easy Oulines Crash Course, McGraw Hill (USA), 2006, ISBN (10-)007-145533-7 ISBN (13-)978-007-145533-6
Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei, and Particles (2nd Edition), R. Eisberg, R. Resnick, John Wiley & Sons, 1985, ISBN 978-0-471-87373-0
Quantum Mechanics, E. Abers, Pearson Ed., Addison Wesley, Prentice Hall Inc, 2004, ISBN 978-0-13-146100-0
Physics of Atoms and Molecules, B. H. Bransden, C. J. Joachain, Longman, 1983, ISBN 0-582-44401-2
The Cambridge Handbook of Physics Formulas, G. Woan, Cambridge University Press, 2010, ISBN 978-0-521-57507-2.
Encyclopaedia of Physics (2nd Edition), R. G. Lerner, G. L. Trigg, VHC publishers, 1991, ISBN (Verlagsgesellschaft) 3-527-26954-1, ISBN (VHC Inc.) 0-89573-752-3
McGraw Hill Encyclopaedia of Physics (2nd Edition), C. B. Parker, 1994, ISBN 0-07-051400-3







"
Category:Rotation in three dimensions Category:Rotational symmetry Category:Representation theory of Lie groups Category:Quantum mechanics



The word "total" is often overloaded to mean several different things. In this article, "total angular momentum" refers to a generic sum of two angular momentum operators  and . It is not to be confused with the other common use of the term "total angular momentum" that refers specifically to the sum of orbital angular momentum and spin.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




