


Orthogonal complement




Orthogonal complement

In the mathematical fields of linear algebra and functional analysis, the orthogonal complement of a subspace W of a vector space V equipped with a bilinear form B is the set W⊥ of all vectors in V that are orthogonal to every vector in W. Informally, it is called the perp, short for perpendicular complement. It is a subspace of V.
General bilinear forms
Let 
 
 
 
  be a vector space over a field 
 
 
 
  equipped with a bilinear form

 
 . We define 
 
 
 
  to be left-orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  to be right-orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 , when 
 
 
 
 . For a subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  we define the left orthogonal complement 
 
 
 
  to be



There is a corresponding definition of right orthogonal complement. For a reflexive bilinear form, where 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the left and right complements coincide. This will be the case if 
 
 
 
  is a symmetric or an alternating form.
The definition extends to a bilinear form on a free module over a commutative ring, and to a sesquilinear form extended to include any free module over a commutative ring with conjugation.1
Properties

An orthogonal complement is a subspace of 
 
 
 
 ;
If  then ;
The radical

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is a subspace of every orthogonal complement;


 
 ;
If 
 
 
 
  is non-degenerate and 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional, then 
 
 
 
 .

Example
In special relativity the orthogonal complement is used to determine the simultaneous hyperplane at a point of a world line. The bilinear form η used in Minkowski space determines a pseudo-Euclidean space of events. The origin and all events on the light cone are self-orthogonal. When a time event and a space event evaluate to zero under the bilinear form, then they are hyperbolic-orthogonal. This terminology stems from the use of two conjugate hyperbolas in the pseudo-Euclidean plane: conjugate diameters of these hyperbolas are hyperbolic-orthogonal.
Inner product spaces
This section considers orthogonal complements in inner product spaces.2
Properties
The orthogonal complement is always closed in the metric topology. In finite-dimensional spaces, that is merely an instance of the fact that all subspaces of a vector space are closed. In infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, some subspaces are not closed, but all orthogonal complements are closed. In such spaces, the orthogonal complement of the orthogonal complement of 
 
 
 
  is the closure of 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,


 
 .
Some other useful properties that always hold are the following. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hilbert space and let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be its linear subspaces. Then:



 
 ;
if 
 
 
 
 , then ;


 
 ;


 
 ;
if 
 
 
 
  is a closed linear subspace of 
 
 
 
 , then ;
if 
 
 
 
  is a closed linear subspace of 
 
 
 
 , then , the (inner) direct sum.

The orthogonal complement generalizes to the annihilator, and gives a Galois connection on subsets of the inner product space, with associated closure operator the topological closure of the span.
Finite dimensions
For a finite-dimensional inner product space of dimension n, the orthogonal complement of a k-dimensional subspace is an -dimensional subspace, and the double orthogonal complement is the original subspace:

(W⊥)⊥ = W.
 

If A is an  matrix, where , , and  refer to the row space, column space, and null space of A (respectively), we have

(Row A)⊥ = Null A

(Col A)⊥ = Null AT.
 

Banach spaces
There is a natural analog of this notion in general Banach spaces. In this case one defines the orthogonal complement of W to be a subspace of the dual of V defined similarly as the annihilator



It is always a closed subspace of V∗. There is also an analog of the double complement property. W⊥⊥ is now a subspace of V∗∗ (which is not identical to V). However, the reflexive spaces have a natural isomorphism i between V and V∗∗. In this case we have



This is a rather straightforward consequence of the Hahn–Banach theorem.
See also

Complemented lattice

References





External links

Instructional video describing orthogonal complements (Khan Academy)

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Functional analysis



Adkins & Weintraub (1992) p.359
Adkins&Weintraub; (1992) p.272




