


Space form




Space form

In mathematics, a space form is a complete Riemannian manifold M of constant sectional curvature K. The three obvious examples are Euclidean n-space, the n-dimensional sphere, and hyperbolic space, although a space form need not be simply connected.
Reduction to generalized crystallography
The Killing–Hopf theorem of Riemannian geometry states that the universal cover of an n-dimensional space form 
 
 
 
  with curvature 
 
 
 
  is isometric to 
 
 
 
 , hyperbolic space, with curvature 
 
 
 
  is isometric to 
 
 
 
 , Euclidean n-space, and with curvature 
 
 
 
  is isometric to 
 
 
 
 , the n-dimensional sphere of points distance 1 from the origin in 
 
 
 
 .
By rescaling the Riemannian metric on 
 
 
 
 , we may create a space 
 
 
 
  of constant curvature 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, by rescaling the Riemannian metric on 
 
 
 
 , we may create a space 
 
 
 
  of constant curvature 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 . Thus the universal cover of a space form 
 
 
 
  with constant curvature 
 
 
 
  is isometric to 
 
 
 
 .
This reduces the problem of studying space form to studying discrete groups of isometries

 
  of 
 
 
 
  which act properly discontinuously. Note that the fundamental group of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , will be isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 . Groups acting in this manner on 
 
 
 
  are called crystallographic groups. Groups acting in this manner on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called Fuchsian groups and Kleinian groups, respectively.
Space form problem
The space form problem is a conjecture stating that any two compact aspherical Riemannian manifolds with isomorphic fundamental groups are homeomorphic.
The possible extensions are limited. One might wish to conjecture that the manifolds are isometric, but rescaling the Riemannian metric on a compact aspherical Riemannian manifold preserves the fundamental group and shows this to be false. One might also wish to conjecture that the manifolds are diffeomorphic, but John Milnor's exotic spheres are all homeomorphic and hence have isomorphic fundamental group, showing this to be false.
See also

Borel conjecture

References




"
Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Conjectures


