


Hilbert's Theorem 90




Hilbert's Theorem 90

In abstract algebra, Hilbert's Theorem 90 (or Satz 90) is an important result on cyclic extensions of fields (or to one of its generalizations) that leads to Kummer theory. In its most basic form, it states that if L/K is a cyclic extension of fields with Galois group G = Gal(L/K) generated by an element s and if a is an element of L of relative norm 1, then there exists b in L such that

a = s(b)/b.
 

The theorem takes its name from the fact that it is the 90th theorem in David Hilbert's famous Zahlbericht , although it is originally due to . Often a more general theorem due to  is given the name, stating that if L/K is a finite Galois extension of fields with Galois group G = Gal(L/K), then the first cohomology group is trivial:

H1(G, L×) = {1}
 

Examples
Let L/K be the quadratic extension

 
 . The Galois group is cyclic of order 2, its generator s acting via conjugation:



An element 
 
 
 
  in L has norm 
 
 
 
 
 . An element of norm one corresponds to a rational solution of the equation 
 
 
 
  or in other words, a point with rational coordinates on the unit circle. Hilbert's Theorem 90 then states that every element y of norm one can be parametrized (with integral c, d) as


 
  which may be viewed as a rational parametrization of the rational points on the unit circle. Rational points 
 
 
 
  on the unit circle 
 
 
 
  correspond to Pythagorean triples, i.e. triples 
 
 
 
 
  of integers satisfying 
 
 
 
 .
Cohomology
The theorem can be stated in terms of group cohomology: if L× is the multiplicative group of any (not necessarily finite) Galois extension L of a field K with corresponding Galois group G, then

H1(G, L×) = {1}.
 

A further generalization using non-abelian group cohomology states that if H is either the general or special linear group over L, then

H1(G,H) = {1}.
 

This is a generalization since L× = GL1(L).
Another generalization is 
 
 
 
  for X a scheme, and another one to Milnor K-theory plays a role in Voevodsky's proof of the Milnor conjecture.
References





Chapter II of J.S. Milne, Class Field Theory, available at his website 1.




"
Category:Theorems in algebraic number theory


