


Mahler measure




Mahler measure

In mathematics, the Mahler measure

 
  of a polynomial

 
  with complex coefficients is


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  factorizes over the complex numbers 
 
 
 
  as



It can be shown using Jensen's formula that also


 
  which is the geometric mean of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
  on the unit circle 
 
 

The Mahler measure of an algebraic number

 
  is defined as the Mahler measure of the minimal polynomial of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if 
 
 
 
 
  is a Pisot number or a Salem number then its Mahler measure is simply 
 
 
 
 .
The Mahler measure is named after Kurt Mahler. It is in fact a kind of Height function.
Properties

The Mahler measure is multiplicative, i.e. 
 
 

Also 
 
 
 
  where



 
  is the 

 
 
  norm of 
 
 
 
  (although this is not a true norm for values of 
 
 
 
 ).

(Kronecker's Theorem) If 
 
 
 
  is an irreducible monic integer polynomial with 
 
 
 
 , then either 
 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is a cyclotomic polynomial.
Lehmer's conjecture asserts that there is a constant 
 
 
 
  such that if 
 
 
 
  is an irreducible integer polynomial, then either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 
 .
The Mahler measure of a monic integer polynomial is a Perron number.

Higher-dimensional Mahler measure
The Mahler measure 
 
 
 
  of a multi-variable polynomial 
 
 
 
  is defined similarly by the formula1


 
  They inherit the above three properties of the Mahler measure for a one-variable polynomial.
The multi-variable Mahler measure has been shown, in some cases, to be related to special values of zeta-functions and 

 
 -functions. For example, In 1981 Chris Smyth 2 proved the formulas


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirichlet L-function, and


 
  , where 
 
 
 
  is the Riemann zeta function. Here 
 
 
 
  is called the logarithmic Mahler measure.
Some results by Lawton and Boyd
From the definition the Mahler measure is viewed as the integrated values of polynomials over the torus (also see Lehmer's conjecture). If 
 
 
 
 
  vanishes on the torus 
 
 
 
 , then the convergence of the integral defining 
 
 
 
  is not obvious, but it is known that 
 
 
 
  does converge and is equal to a limit of one-variable Mahler measures,3 which had been conjectured by D. Boyd.45
This is formulated as follows: Let 
 
 
 
  denote the integers and define 
 
 
 
 
  . If 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial in 
 
 
 
  variables and 
 
 
 
  define the polynomial 
 
 
 
  of one variable by



and define 
 
 
 
  by



where 
 
 
 
  .
Theorem (Lawton) : Let 
 
 
 
  be a polynomial in N variables with complex coefficients. Then the following limit is valid (even if the condition that 
 
 
 
 
  is relaxed):



Boyd's proposal
D. Boyd provided more general statements than the above theorem. He pointed out that the classical Kronecker's theorem which characterizes monic polynomials with integer coefficients all of whose roots are inside the unit disk can be regarded as characterizing those polynomials of one variable whose measure is exactly 1 and this result extends to polynomials in several variables.6
Define an extended cyclotomic polynomial to be of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the m-th cyclotomic polynomial, the 
 
 
 
  are integers and the 
 
 
 
 
  are chosen minimally so that 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial in the 
 
 
 
 . Then let 
 
 
 
  be the set of polynomials that are products of monomials 
 
 
 
  and extended cyclotomic polynomials.
Theorem (Boyd) : Suppose that 
 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial with integer coefficients then 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is an element of 
 
 
 
 .
This led him to define for a polynomial 
 
 



 
  and set 
 
 
 
  as their limit. He made the far-reaching conjecture7 that the set of 
 
 
 
  is closed. An immediate consequence of this conjecture is the truth of Lehmer's conjecture, albeit without any explicit lower bound. As the above Smyth's result suggests 
 
 
 
  , he also conjectured


 
  . But as far as is known his conjectures are not yet proved.
See also

Bombieri norm
Height of a polynomial

References

Hazewinkel, Michiel, ed. (2001), Mahler measure, Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer, ISBN 978-1-55608-010-4 1











David Boyd and F. Rodriguez Villegas: Mahler's measure and the dilogarithm, part 1, Canadian J. Math., vol, 54, 2002, pp. 468–492

External links

Mahler Measure on MathWorld
Jensen's Formula on MathWorld

"
Category:Analytic number theory Category:Polynomials



Schinzel (2000) p.224
Smyth (1981)
Lawton (1983)
Boyd (1981a)
Boyd (1981b)
D. Boyd (1981b)
D. Boyd (1981a)




