


Mill (grinding)




Mill (grinding)

A mill is a device that breaks solid materials into smaller pieces by grinding, crushing, or cutting. Such comminution is an important unit operation in many processes. There are many different types of mills and many types of materials processed in them. Historically mills were powered by hand (e.g., via a hand crank), working animal (e.g., horse mill), wind (windmill) or water (watermill). Today they are usually powered by electricity.
The grinding of solid matters occurs under exposure of mechanical forces that trench the structure by overcoming of the interior bonding forces. After the grinding the state of the solid is changed: the grain size, the grain size disposition and the grain shape.
Milling also refers to the process of breaking down, separating, sizing, or classifying aggregate material. For instance rock crushing or grinding to produce uniform aggregate size for construction purposes, or separation of rock, soil or aggregate material for the purposes of structural fill or land reclamation activities. Aggregate milling processes are also used to remove or separate contamination or moisture from aggregate or soil and to produce "dry fills" prior to transport or structural filling.
Grinding may serve the following purposes in engineering:

increase of the surface area of a solid
manufacturing of a solid with a desired grain size
pulping of resources

Grinding laws
In spite of a great number of studies in the field of fracture schemes there is no formula known which connects the technical grinding work with grinding results. To calculate the needed grinding work against the grain size changing three half-empirical models are used. These can be related to the Hukki relationship between particle size and the energy required to break the particles. In stirred mills, the Hukki relationship does not apply and instead, experimentation has to be performed to determine any relationship.1

Kick for d > 50 mm





Bond2 for 50 mm > d > 0.05 mm





Von Rittinger for d < 0.05 mm




with W as grinding work in kJ/kg, c as grinding coefficient, dA as grain size of the source material and dE as grain size of the ground material.
A reliable value for the grain sizes dA and dE is d80. This value signifies that 80% (mass) of the solid matter has a smaller grain size. The Bond's grinding coefficient for different materials can be found in various literature. To calculate the KICK's and Rittinger's coefficients following formulas can be used




with the limits of Bond's range: upper dBU = 50 mm and lower dBL = 0.05 mm.
To evaluate the grinding results the grain size disposition of the source material (1) and of the ground material (2) is needed. Grinding degree is the ratio of the sizes from the grain disposition. There are several definitions for this characteristic value:

Grinding degree referring to grain size d80





Instead of the value of d80 also d50 or other grain diameter can be used.
 


Grinding degree referring to specific surface





The specific surface area referring to volume Sv and the specific surface area referring to mass Sm can be found out through experiments.
 


Pretended grinding degree





The discharge die gap a of the grinding machine is used for the ground solid matter in this formula.
 

(Figure)
Simple Grinding Forces.png

Grinding machines
In materials processing a grinder is a machine for producing fine particle size reduction through attrition and compressive forces at the grain size level. See also crusher for mechanisms producing larger particles. In general, grinding processes require a relatively large amount of energy; for this reason, an experimental method to measure the energy used locally during milling with different machines was recently proposed.3
(Figure)
Operation of a ball mill

Ball mill
A typical type of fine grinder is the ball mill. A slightly inclined or horizontal rotating cylinder is partially filled with balls, usually stone or metal, which grinds material to the necessary fineness by friction and impact with the tumbling balls. Ball mills normally operate with an approximate ball charge of 30%. Ball mills are characterized by their smaller (comparatively) diameter and longer length, and often have a length 1.5 to 2.5 times the diameter. The feed is at one end of the cylinder and the discharge is at the other. Ball mills are commonly used in the manufacture of Portland cement and finer grinding stages of mineral processing, one example being the Sepro tyre drive Grinding Mill. Industrial ball mills can be as large as 8.5 m (28 ft) in diameter with a 22 MW motor,4 drawing approximately 0.0011% of the total world's power (see List of countries by electricity consumption). However, small versions of ball mills can be found in laboratories where they are used for grinding sample material for quality assurance.
The power predictions for ball mills typically use the following form of the Bond equation:5


 
  where

E is the energy (kilowatt-hours per metric or short ton)
W is the work index measured in a laboratory ball mill (kilowatt-hours per metric or short ton)
P80 is the mill circuit product size in micrometers
F80 is the mill circuit feed size in micrometers.

Rod mill
A rotating drum causes friction and attrition between steel rods and ore particles. But note that the term 'rod mill' is also used as a synonym for a slitting mill, which makes rods of iron or other metal. Rod mills are less common than ball mills for grinding minerals.
The rods used in the mill, usually a high-carbon steel, can vary in both the length and the diameter. However, the smaller the rods, the larger is the total surface area and hence, the greater the grinding efficiency6
Autogenous mill
Autogenous or autogenic mills are so-called due to the self-grinding of the ore: a rotating drum throws larger rocks of ore in a cascading motion which causes impact breakage of larger rocks and compressive grinding of finer particles. It is similar in operation to a SAG mill as described below but does not use steel balls in the mill. Also known as ROM or "Run Of Mine" grinding.
SAG mill
(Figure)
Principle of SAG Mill operation

SAG is an acronym for Semi-Autogenous Grinding. SAG mills are essentially autogenous mills, but utilize grinding balls to aid in grinding like in a ball mill. A SAG mill is generally used as a primary or first stage grinding solution. SAG mills use a ball charge of 8 to 21%.78 The largest SAG mill is 42' in diameter, powered by a 28 MW (38,000 HP) motor.9 A SAG mill with a 44' diameter and a power of 35 MW (47,000 HP) has been designed.10
Attrition between grinding balls and ore particles causes grinding of finer particles. SAG mills are characterized by their large diameter and short length as compared to ball mills. The inside of the mill is lined with lifting plates to lift the material inside the mill, where it then falls off the plates onto the rest of the ore charge. SAG mills are primarily used at gold, copper and platinum mines with applications also in the lead, zinc, silver, alumina and nickel industries.
Pebble mill
A rotating drum causes friction and attrition between rock pebbles and ore particles. May be used where product contamination by iron from steel balls must be avoided. Quartz or silica is commonly used because it is inexpensive to obtain.
High pressure grinding rolls
The high pressure grinding rolls, often referred to as HPGRs or roller press, consists out of two rollers with the same dimensions, which are rotating against each other with the same circumferential speed. The special feeding of bulk material through a hopper leads to a material bed between the two rollers. The bearing units of one roller can move linearly and are pressed against the material bed by springs or hydraulic cylinders. The pressures in the material bed are greater than 50 MPa (7,000 PSI). In general they achieve 100 to 300 MPa. By this the material bed is compacted to a solid volume portion of more than 80%.
The roller press has a certain similarity to roller crushers and roller presses for the compacting of powders, but purpose, construction and operation mode are different.
Extreme pressure causes the particles inside of the compacted material bed to fracture into finer particles and also causes microfracturing at the grain size level. Compared to ball mills HPGRs are achieving a 30 to 50% lower specific energy consumption, although they are not as common as ball mills since they are a newer technology.
A similar type of intermediate crusher is the edge runner, which consists of a circular pan with two or more heavy wheels known as mullers rotating within it; material to be crushed is shoved underneath the wheels using attached plow blades.
Buhrstone mill
Another type of fine grinder commonly used is the buhrstone mill, which is similar to old-fashioned flour mills.
Vertical shaft impactor mill (VSI mill)
A VSI mill throws rock or ore particles against a wear plate by slinging them from a spinning center that rotates on a vertical shaft. This type of mill uses the same principle as VSI Crusher
Tower mill
Tower mills, often called vertical mills, stirred mills or regrind mills, are a more efficient means of grinding material at smaller particle sizes, and can be used after ball mills in a grinding process. Like ball mills, grinding (steel) balls or pebbles are often added to stirred mills to help grind ore, however these mills contain a large screw mounted vertically to lift and grind material. In tower mills, there is no cascading action as in standard grinding mills. Stirred mills are also common for mixing quicklime (CaO) into a lime slurry. There are several advantages to the tower mill: low noise, efficient energy usage, and low operating costs.
Types of grinding mills

windmill, wind powered
watermill, water powered
horse mill, animal powered
treadwheel, human powered (archaic: "treadmill")
ship mill, floats near a river bank or bridge
arrastra, simple mill for grinding and pulverizing (typically) gold or silver ore.
roller mill, an equipment for the grinding or pulverizing of grain and other raw materials using cylinders
Stamp mill, a specialized machine for reducing ore to powder for further processing or for fracturing other materials
a place of business for making articles of manufacture. The term mill was once in common use for a factory because many factories in the early stages of the Industrial Revolution were powered by a watermill, but nowadays it is only used in a few specific contexts; e.g.,
 
bark mill produces tanbark for tanneries
cider mill crushes apples to give cider
gristmill grinds grain into flour
oil mill, see expeller pressing, extrusion
paper mill produces paper
sawmill cuts timber
starch mill
steel mill manufactures steel
sugar mill (also called a sugar refinery) processes sugar beets or sugar cane into various finished products
textile mill (disambiguation)

silk mill, for silk
flax mill, for flax
cotton mill, for cotton

huller (also called a rice mill, or rice husker) is used to hull rice
powder mill produces gunpowder



Ball mill
Bead mill
Coffee mill
Colloid mill
Conical mill
Disintegrator
Disk mill
Edge mill
Gristmill, also called flour mill or corn mill
Hammer mill
IsaMillTM
Jet mill
Mortar and pestle
Pellet mill
Planetary mill
Stirred mill
Three roll mill
Vibratory mill
VSI mill
Wiley mill
Windmill

See also

Burr grinder
Coffee grinder
Expeller
Extruder
Grist mill
Herb grinder
Millstone
Rock crusher
IsaMill

References
External links

Animation of Horizontal Grinder
Video of fine grinder in mining application
Image of SAG mill during installation

"
  Category:Mining equipment




[http://www.onemine.org/search/summary.cfm/Mineral-Beneficiation--The-Third-Theory-of-Comminution?d=33A4C4B0EF40AA84EB2CE2F8607CDBC29A9E29D95F765C17CE2C0815BCC2006D18644&fullText;;=The%20Third%20Theory%20of%20Comminution&author;=Fred%20Bond Mineral Beneficiation – The Third Theory of Comminution – Document Summary]. Onemine.org. Retrieved on 2010-10-09.




Strohmayr, S. and Valery, W. Jr. SAG mill circuit optimisation at Ernest Henry Mining. metso.com


Gearless mill drives. abb.com




