


Reciprocal polynomial




Reciprocal polynomial

In algebra, the reciprocal polynomial p* of a polynomial p with coefficients from an arbitrary field, such as


 
  is the polynomial1



Essentially, the coefficients are written in reverse order. They arise naturally in linear algebra as the characteristic polynomial of the inverse of a matrix.
In the special case that the polynomial p has complex coefficients, that is,



the conjugate reciprocal polynomial, p† given by,



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the complex conjugate of 
 
 
 
 , is also called the reciprocal polynomial when no confusion can arise.
A polynomial p is called self-reciprocal if 
 
 
 
 .
The coefficients of a self-reciprocal polynomial satisfy ai = an−i, and in this case p is also called a palindromic polynomial. In the conjugate reciprocal case, the coefficients must be real to satisfy the condition.
Properties
Reciprocal polynomials have several connections with their original polynomials, including:

α is a root of polynomial p if and only if α−1 is a root of p*.2
If p(x) ≠ x then p is irreducible if and only if p* is irreducible.3
p is primitive if and only if p* is primitive.4

Other properties of reciprocal polynomials may be obtained, for instance:

If a polynomial is self-reciprocal and irreducible then it must have even degree.5

Conjugate reciprocal polynomials
A polynomial is conjugate reciprocal if 
 
 
 
  and self-inversive if 
 
 
 
  for a scale factor ω on the unit circle.6
If p(z) is the minimal polynomial of z0 with |z0| = 1, 
 
 
 
 , and p(z) has real coefficients, then p(z) is self-reciprocal. This follows because



So z0 is a root of the polynomial 
 
 
 
  which has degree n. But, the minimal polynomial is unique, hence


 
  for some constant c, i.e. 
 
 
 
 . Sum from i = 0 to n and note that 1 is not a root of p. We conclude that c = 1.
A consequence is that the cyclotomic polynomials

 
  are self-reciprocal for 
 
 
 
 ; this is used in the special number field sieve to allow numbers of the form 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to be factored taking advantage of the algebraic factors by using polynomials of degree 5, 6, 4 and 6 respectively – note that 
 
 
 
  (Euler's totient function) of the exponents are 10, 12, 8 and 12.
Application in coding theory
The reciprocal polynomial finds a use in the theory of cyclic error correcting codes. Suppose xn − 1 can be factored into the product of two polynomials, say xn − 1 = g(x)p(x). When g(x) generates a cyclic code C, then the reciprocal polynomial p*(x) generates C⊥, the orthogonal complement of C.7 Also, C is self-orthogonal (that is, C ⊆ C⊥), if and only if p*(x) divides g(x).8
Notes
References






External links

Reciprocal Polynomial (on MathWorld)

"
Category:Polynomials



↩
↩
↩


↩
↩
↩




