


Frobenius endomorphism




Frobenius endomorphism

In commutative algebra and field theory, the Frobenius endomorphism (after Ferdinand Georg Frobenius) is a special endomorphism of commutative rings with prime characteristic

 
 , an important class which includes finite fields. The endomorphism maps every element to its 
 
 
 
 -th power. In certain contexts it is an automorphism, but this is not true in general.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a commutative ring with prime characteristic 
 
 
 
 
  (an integral domain of positive characteristic always has prime characteristic, for example). The Frobenius endomorphism F is defined by



for all r in R. Clearly this respects the multiplication of R:



and 
 
 
 
  is clearly 1 also. What is interesting, however, is that it also respects the addition of 
 
 
 
 . The expression  can be expanded using the binomial theorem. Because 
 
 
 
 
  is prime, it divides 
 
 
 
  but not any 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 




if 
 
 
 
 
 . Therefore the coefficients of all the terms except  and  are divisible by 
 
 
 
 , the characteristic, and hence they vanish.1 Thus



This shows that F is a ring homomorphism.
If 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphism of rings of characteristic 
 
 
 
 , then:


 
 
  If  and  are the Frobenius endomorphisms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then this can be rewritten as:


 
  This means that the Frobenius endomorphism is a natural transformation from the identity functor on the category of characteristic 
 
 
 
  rings to itself.
If the ring 
 
 
 
 
  is a ring with no nilpotent elements, then the Frobenius endomorphism is injective: 
 
 
 
  means  0}}, which by definition means that 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent of order at most 
 
 
 
 . In fact, this is an if and only if, because if 
 
 
 
  is any nilpotent, then one of its powers will be nilpotent of order at most 
 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if 
 
 
 
  is a field then the Frobenius endomorphism is injective.
The Frobenius morphism is not necessarily surjective, even when 
 
 
 
  is a field. For example let  Fp(t)}} be the finite field of 
 
 
 
  elements together with a single transcendental element; equivalently, 
 
 
 
  is the field of rational functions with coefficients in . Then the image of 
 
 
 
 
  does not contain 
 
 
 
 . If it did, then there would be a rational function 
 
 
 
  whose 
 
 
 
 -th power  would equal 
 
 
 
 . But the degree of this 
 
 
 
 
 -th power is 
 
 
 
 , which is a multiple of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, it can't be 1, which is the degree of 
 
 
 
 . This is a contradiction, so 
 
 
 
  is not in the image of 
 
 
 
 
 .
A field 
 
 
 
  is called perfect if either it is of characteristic zero or if it is of positive characteristic and its Frobenius endomorphism is an automorphism. For example, all finite fields are perfect.
Fixed points of the Frobenius endomorphism
Consider the finite field . By Fermat's little theorem, every element 
 
 
 
  of  satisfies  x}}. Equivalently, it is a root of the polynomial . The elements of  therefore determine 
 
 
 
  roots of this equation, and because this equation has degree 
 
 
 
  it has no more than 
 
 
 
 
  roots over any extension. In particular, if 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic extension of  (such as the algebraic closure or another finite field), then  is the fixed field of the Frobenius automorphism of 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a ring of characteristic 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 
  is an integral domain, then by the same reasoning, the fixed points of Frobenius are the elements of the prime field. However, if 
 
 
 
  is not a domain, then  may have more than 
 
 
 
  roots; for example, this happens if  Fp × Fp}}.
A similar property is enjoyed on the finite field 
 
 
 
  by the eth iterate of the Frobenius automorphism: Every element of 
 
 
 
  is a root of 
 
 
 
 
 , so if 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic extension of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the Frobenius automorphism of 
 
 
 
 , then the fixed field of  is 
 
 
 
 
 . If R is a domain which is an 
 
 
 
 -algebra, then the fixed points of the eth iterate of Frobenius are the elements of the image of 
 
 
 
 .
Iterating the Frobenius map gives a sequence of elements in 
 
 
 
 :


 
  This sequence of iterates is used in defining the Frobenius closure and the tight closure of an ideal.
As a generator of Galois groups
The Galois group of an extension of finite fields is generated by an iterate of the Frobenius automorphism. First, consider the case where the ground field is the prime field. Let  be the finite field of 
 
 
 
 
  elements, where  pe}}. The Frobenius automorphism 
 
 
 
  of  fixes the prime field , so it is an element of the Galois group . In fact, this Galois group is cyclic and 
 
 
 
  is a generator. The order of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  because  acts on an element 
 
 
 
 
  by sending it to , and this is the identity on elements of . Every automorphism of  is a power of 
 
 
 
 , and the generators are the powers  with 
 
 
 
  coprime to 
 
 
 
 .
Now consider the finite field  as an extension of . The Frobenius automorphism 
 
 
 
  of  does not fix the ground field , but its 
 
 
 
 
 -th iterate  does. The Galois group  is cyclic of order 
 
 
 
  and is generated by . It is the subgroup of  generated by . The generators of  are the powers  where 
 
 
 
  is coprime to 
 
 
 
 .
The Frobenius automorphism is not a generator of the absolute Galois group



because this Galois group is



which is not cyclic. However, because the Frobenius automorphism is a generator of the Galois group of every finite extension of , it is a generator of every finite quotient of the absolute Galois group. Consequently it is a topological generator in the usual Krull topology on the absolute Galois group.
Frobenius for schemes
There are several different ways to define the Frobenius morphism for a scheme. The most fundamental is the absolute Frobenius morphism. However, the absolute Frobenius morphism behaves poorly in the relative situation because it pays no attention to the base scheme. There are several different ways of adapting the Frobenius morphism to the relative situation, each of which is useful in certain situations.
The absolute Frobenius morphism
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a scheme of characteristic 
 
 
 
 . Choose an open affine subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . The ring 
 
 
 
 
  is an -algebra, so it admits a Frobenius endomorphism. If 
 
 
 
  is an open affine subset of 
 
 
 
 , then by the naturality of Frobenius, the Frobenius morphism on 
 
 
 
 , when restricted to 
 
 
 
 , is the Frobenius morphism on 
 
 
 
 
 . Consequently the Frobenius morphism glues to give an endomorphism of 
 
 
 
 . This endomorphism is called the absolute Frobenius morphism of 
 
 
 
 . By definition, it is a homeomorphism of 
 
 
 
  with itself. The absolute Frobenius morphism is a natural transformation from the identity functor on the category of -schemes to itself.
If 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 
 -scheme and the Frobenius morphism of 
 
 
 
  is the identity, then the absolute Frobenius morphism is a morphism of 
 
 
 
 -schemes. In general, however, it is not. For example, consider the ring 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  both equal 
 
 
 
  with the structure map 
 
 
 
  being the identity. The Frobenius morphism on 
 
 
 
  sends 
 
 
 
  to . It is not a morphism of 
 
 
 
 
 -algebras. If it were, then multiplying by an element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  would commute with applying the Frobenius endomorphism. But this is not true because:


 
  The former is the action of 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
 
 -algebra structure that 
 
 
 
  begins with, and the latter is the action of 
 
 
 
  induced by Frobenius. Consequently, the Frobenius morphism on 
 
 
 
  is not a morphism of 
 
 
 
 -schemes.
The absolute Frobenius morphism is a purely inseparable morphism of degree 
 
 
 
 
 . Its differential is zero. It preserves products, meaning that for any two schemes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,  FX × FY}}.
Restriction and extension of scalars by Frobenius
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is the structure morphism for an 
 
 
 
 -scheme 
 
 
 
 
 . The base scheme 
 
 
 
  has a Frobenius morphism FS. Composing 
 
 
 
  with FS results in an 
 
 
 
 -scheme XF called the restriction of scalars by Frobenius. The restriction of scalars is actually a functor, because an 
 
 
 
 -morphism 
 
 
 
 
  induces an 
 
 
 
 -morphism .
For example, consider a ring A of characteristic 
 
 
 
  and a finitely presented algebra over A:


 
  The action of A on R is given by:


 
  where α is a multi-index. Let 
 
 
 
 
 . Then  is the affine scheme 
 
 
 
 , but its structure morphism 
 
 
 
 , and hence the action of A on R, is different:



Because restriction of scalars by Frobenius is simply composition, many properties of 
 
 
 
  are inherited by XF under appropriate hypotheses on the Frobenius morphism. For example, if 
 
 
 
  and SF are both finite type, then so is XF.
The extension of scalars by Frobenius is defined to be:


 
  The projection onto the 
 
 
 
  factor makes  an 
 
 
 
 -scheme. If 
 
 
 
  is not clear from the context, then  is denoted by . Like restriction of scalars, extension of scalars is a functor: An 
 
 
 
 
 -morphism 
 
 
 
  determines an 
 
 
 
 -morphism .
As before, consider a ring A and a finitely presented algebra R over A, and again let 
 
 
 
 . Then:


 
  A global section of  is of the form:


 
  where α is a multi-index and every aiα and bi is an element of A. The action of an element c of A on this section is:


 
  Consequently,  is isomorphic to:


 
  where, if:


 
  then:


 
  A similar description holds for arbitrary A-algebras R.
Because extension of scalars is base change, it preserves limits and coproducts. This implies in particular that if 
 
 
 
 
  has an algebraic structure defined in terms of finite limits (such as being a group scheme), then so does . Furthermore, being a base change means that extension of scalars preserves properties such as being of finite type, finite presentation, separated, affine, and so on.
Extension of scalars is well-behaved with respect to base change: Given a morphism 
 
 
 
 , there is a natural isomorphism:



Relative Frobenius
The relative Frobenius morphism of an 
 
 
 
 -scheme X is the morphism:


 
  defined by:


 
 
  Because the absolute Frobenius morphism is natural, the relative Frobenius morphism is a morphism of 
 
 
 
 -schemes.
Consider, for example, the A-algebra:


 
  We have:


 
  The relative Frobenius morphism is the homomorphism  defined by:



Relative Frobenius is compatible with base change in the sense that, under the natural isomorphism of  and , we have:



Relative Frobenius is a universal homeomorphism. If 
 
 
 
  is an open immersion, then it is the identity. If 
 
 
 
  is a closed immersion determined by an ideal sheaf I of , then  is determined by the ideal sheaf  and relative Frobenius is the augmentation map .
X is unramified over 
 
 
 
  if and only if FX/S is unramified and if and only if FX/S is a monomorphism. X is étale over 
 
 
 
  if and only if FX/S is étale and if and only if FX/S is an isomorphism.
Arithmetic Frobenius
The arithmetic Frobenius morphism of an 
 
 
 
 
 -scheme 
 
 
 
  is a morphism:


 
  defined by:


 
  That is, it is the base change of FS by 1X.
Again, if:





 
  then the arithmetic Frobenius is the homomorphism:


 
  If we rewrite  as:


 
  then this homomorphism is:



Geometric Frobenius
Assume that the absolute Frobenius morphism of 
 
 
 
  is invertible with inverse 
 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the 
 
 
 
 -scheme 
 
 
 
 . Then there is an extension of scalars of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 :


 
  If:


 
  then extending scalars by 
 
 
 
  gives:


 
  If:


 
  then we write:


 
  and then there is an isomorphism:



The geometric Frobenius morphism of an 
 
 
 
 -scheme 
 
 
 
  is a morphism:


 
  defined by:


 
  It is the base change of 
 
 
 
  by .
Continuing our example of A and R above, geometric Frobenius is defined to be:


 
  After rewriting R(1/p) in terms of 
 
 
 
 , geometric Frobenius is:



Arithmetic and geometric Frobenius as Galois actions
Suppose that the Frobenius morphism of 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism. Then it generates a subgroup of the automorphism of group of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is the spectrum of a finite field, then its automorphism group is the Galois group of the field over the prime field, and the Frobenius morphism and its inverse are both generators of the automorphism group. In addition,  and  may be identified with 
 
 
 
 . The arithmetic and geometric Frobenius morphisms are then endomorphisms of 
 
 
 
 
 , and so they lead to an action of the Galois group of k on X.
Consider the set of K-points 
 
 
 
 . This set comes with a Galois action: Each such point x corresponds to a homomorphism  from the structure sheaf to the residue field at x, and the action of Frobenius on x is the application of the Frobenius morphism to the residue field. This Galois action agrees with the action of arithmetic Frobenius: The composite morphism


 
  is the same as the composite morphism:


 
  by the definition of the arithmetic Frobenius. Consequently, arithmetic Frobenius explicitly exhibits the action of the Galois group on points as an endomorphism of X.
Frobenius for local fields
Given an unramified finite extension

 
  of local fields, there is a concept of Frobenius endomorphism which induces the Frobenius endomorphism in the corresponding extension of residue fields.2
Suppose 
 
 
 
 
  is an unramified extension of local fields, with ring of integers OK of 
 
 
 
  such that the residue field, the integers of 
 
 
 
  modulo their unique maximal ideal 
 
 
 
 , is a finite field of order 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 
  is a prime of 
 
 
 
  lying over 
 
 
 
 , that 
 
 
 
  is unramified means by definition that the integers of 
 
 
 
  modulo 
 
 
 
 
 , the residue field of 
 
 
 
 , will be a finite field of order  extending the residue field of 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the degree of 
 
 
 
 . We may define the Frobenius map for elements of the ring of integers  of 
 
 
 
 
  as an automorphism  of 
 
 
 
  such that



Frobenius for global fields
In algebraic number theory, Frobenius elements are defined for extensions 
 
 
 
  of global fields that are finite Galois extensions for prime ideals

 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  that are unramified in 
 
 
 
 . Since the extension is unramified the decomposition group of 
 
 
 
  is the Galois group of the extension of residue fields. The Frobenius element then can be defined for elements of the ring of integers of 
 
 
 
  as in the local case, by



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the order of the residue field  mod 
 
 
 
 .
Lifts of the Frobenius are in correspondence with p-derivations.
Examples
The polynomial




has discriminant



 
 ,
 

and so is unramified at the prime 3; it is also irreducible mod 3. Hence adjoining a root 
 
 
 
  of it to the field of 
 
 
 
 -adic numbers  gives an unramified extension  of . We may find the image of 
 
 
 
 
  under the Frobenius map by locating the root nearest to , which we may do by Newton's method. We obtain an element of the ring of integers  in this way; this is a polynomial of degree four in 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in the 
 
 
 
 -adic integers . Modulo  this polynomial is


 
 .
This is algebraic over 
 
 
 
  and is the correct global Frobenius image in terms of the embedding of 
 
 
 
 
  into ; moreover, the coefficients are algebraic and the result can be expressed algebraically. However, they are of degree 120, the order of the Galois group, illustrating the fact that explicit computations are much more easily accomplished if 
 
 
 
 -adic results will suffice.
If 
 
 
 
  is an abelian extension of global fields, we get a much stronger congruence since it depends only on the prime 
 
 
 
  in the base field 
 
 
 
 . For an example, consider the extension 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  obtained by adjoining a root 
 
 
 
  satisfying



to 
 
 
 
 . This extension is cyclic of order five, with roots



for integer 
 
 
 
 . It has roots which are Chebyshev polynomials of 
 
 
 
 :




give the result of the Frobenius map for the primes 2, 3 and 5, and so on for larger primes not equal to 11 or of the form 
 
 
 
  (which split). It is immediately apparent how the Frobenius map gives a result equal mod 
 
 
 
  to the 
 
 
 
 
 -th power of the root $β$.
See also

Perfect field
Frobenioid

References




"
Category:Finite fields Category:Algebraic number theory Category:Galois theory



This is known as the Freshman's dream.↩
↩




