


Bulk modulus




Bulk modulus

(Figure)
Illustration of uniform compression

The bulk modulus (
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ) of a substance measures the substance's resistance to uniform compression. It is defined as the ratio of the infinitesimal pressure increase to the resulting relative decrease of the volume. Its SI unit is the pascal, and its dimensional form is M1L−1T−2.1
Definition
The bulk modulus 
 
 
 
  can be formally defined by the equation



where 
 
 
 
  is pressure, 
 
 
 
  is volume, and 
 
 
 
  denotes the derivative of pressure with respect to volume. Equivalently



where ρ is density and dP/dρ denotes the derivative of pressure with respect to density. The inverse of the bulk modulus gives a substance's compressibility.
Other moduli describe the material's response (strain) to other kinds of stress: the shear modulus describes the response to shear, and Young's modulus describes the response to linear stress. For a fluid, only the bulk modulus is meaningful. For an anisotropic solid such as wood or paper, these three moduli do not contain enough information to describe its behaviour, and one must use the full generalized Hooke's law.
Thermodynamic relation
Strictly speaking, the bulk modulus is a thermodynamic quantity, and in order to specify a bulk modulus it is necessary to specify how the temperature varies during compression: constant-temperature (isothermal 
 
 
 
 ), constant-entropy (isentropic

 
 ), and other variations are possible. Such distinctions are especially relevant for gases.
For an ideal gas, the isentropic bulk modulus 
 
 
 
  is given by



and the isothermal bulk modulus 
 
 
 
  is given by



where

γ is the heat capacity ratio

p is the pressure.
 

When the gas is not ideal, these equations give only an approximation of the bulk modulus. In a fluid, the bulk modulus K and the density ρ determine the speed of sound c (pressure waves), according to the Newton-Laplace formula



In solids, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have very similar values. Solids can also sustain transverse waves: for these materials one additional elastic modulus, for example the shear modulus, is needed to determine wave speeds.
Measurement
It is possible to measure the bulk modulus using powder diffraction under applied pressure. It is a property of a fluid which shows its ability to change its volume under its pressure.
Selected values




Approximate bulk modulus (K) for common materials

Material

Bulk modulus in GPa

Bulk modulus in psi



Glass (see also diagram below table)

to 




Steel





Diamond (at 4K) 2





(Figure)
Influences of selected glass component additions on the bulk modulus of a specific base glass.3

A material with a bulk modulus of 35 GPa loses one percent of its volume when subjected to an external pressure of 0.35 GPa (~).




Approximate bulk modulus (K) for other substances



Water



Methanol



Air



Air



Solid helium



References
Further reading



"
Category:Elasticity (physics) Category:Physical quantities



↩
Page 52 of "Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th edition" by Charles Kittel, 2005, ISBN 0-471-41526-X↩
↩




