


Dedekind sum




Dedekind sum

In mathematics, Dedekind sums are certain sums of products of a sawtooth function, and are given by a function D of three integer variables. Dedekind introduced them to express the functional equation of the Dedekind eta function. They have subsequently been much studied in number theory, and have occurred in some problems of topology. Dedekind sums obey a large number of relationships on themselves; this article lists only a tiny fraction of these.
Dedekind sums were introduced by Richard Dedekind in a commentary on fragment XXVIII of Bernhard Riemann's collected papers.
Definition
Define the sawtooth function

 
  as



We then let

D :Z3 → R


be defined by



the terms on the right being the Dedekind sums. For the case a=1, one often writes

s(b,c) = D(1,b;c).
 

Simple formulae
Note that D is symmetric in a and b, and hence



and that, by the oddness of (()),

D(−a,b;c) = −D(a,b;c),
 


D(a,b;−c) = D(a,b;c).
 

By the periodicity of D in its first two arguments, the third argument being the length of the period for both,

D(a,b;c)=D(a+kc,b+lc;c), for all integers k,l.
 

If d is a positive integer, then

D(ad,bd;cd) = dD(a,b;c),
 


D(ad,bd;c) = D(a,b;c), if (d,c) = 1,
 


D(ad,b;cd) = D(a,b;c), if (d,b) = 1.
 

There is a proof for the last equality making use of



Furthermore, az = 1 (mod c) implies D(a,b;c) = D(1,bz;c).
Alternative forms
If b and c are coprime, we may write s(b,c) as



where the sum extends over the c-th roots of unity other than 1, i.e. over all 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
If b, c > 0 are coprime, then



Reciprocity law
If b and c are coprime positive integers then



Rewriting this as



it follows that the number 6c s(b,c) is an integer.
If k = (3, c) then



and



A relation that is prominent in the theory of the Dedekind eta function is the following. Let q = 3, 5, 7 or 13 and let n = 24/(q − 1). Then given integers a, b, c, d with ad − bc = 1 (thus belonging to the modular group), with c chosen so that c = kq for some integer k > 0, define



Then one has nδ is an even integer.
Rademacher's generalization of the reciprocity law
Hans Rademacher found the following generalization of the reciprocity law for Dedekind sums:1 If a,b, and c are pairwise coprime positive integers, then



References


Further reading

Tom M. Apostol, Modular functions and Dirichlet Series in Number Theory (1990), Springer-Verlag, New York. ISBN 0-387-97127-0 (See chapter 3.)
Matthias Beck and Sinai Robins, Dedekind sums: a discrete geometric viewpoint, (2005 or earlier)
Hans Rademacher and Emil Grosswald, Dedekind Sums, Carus Math. Monographs, 1972. ISBN 0-88385-016-8.

"
Category:Number theory Category:Modular forms



↩




