


Square pyramid




Square pyramid

In geometry, a square pyramid is a pyramid having a square base. If the apex is perpendicularly above the center of the square, it will have C4v symmetry.
Johnson solid (J1)
If the sides are all equilateral triangles, the pyramid is one of the Johnson solids (J1). The 92 Johnson solids were named and described by Norman Johnson in 1966.
The Johnson square pyramid can be characterized by a single edge-length parameter a. The height H (from the midpoint of the square to the apex), the surface area A (including all five faces), and the volume V of such a pyramid are:









Other square pyramids
Other square pyramids have isosceles triangle sides.
For square pyramids in general, with base length l and height h, the surface area and volume are:






Related polyhedra and honeycombs



(Figure)
Square bipyramid.png

(Figure)
Tetrakishexahedron.jpg

(Figure)
Usech kvadrat piramid.png






A regular octahedron can be considered a square bipyramid, i.e. two Johnson square pyramids connected base-to-base.

The tetrakis hexahedron can be constructed from a cube with short square pyramids added to each face.

Square frustum is a square pyramid with the apex truncated.



Square pyramid fill the space with tetrahedron or truncated cube or cuboctahedron.1
Dual polyhedron
The square pyramid is topologically a self-dual polyhedron. The dual edge lengths are different due to the polar reciprocation.




Dual Square pyramid

Net of dual




(Figure)
Dual square pyramid.png

(Figure)
Dual square pyramid net.png




Topology
Like all pyramids, the square pyramid is self-dual, having the same number of vertices as faces.
A square pyramid can be represented by the Wheel graph W5.
References
External links



Square Pyramid -- Interactive Polyhedron Model
Virtual Reality Polyhedra www.georgehart.com: The Encyclopedia of Polyhedra (VRML model)

"
Category:Self-dual polyhedra Category:Prismatoid polyhedra Category:Johnson solids Category:Pyramids and bipyramids



http://woodenpolyhedra.web.fc2.com/JohnsonHoneycomb.pdf↩




