


Yule–Simon distribution




Yule–Simon distribution

{(\rho-3)\;\rho}\, for 
 
 
 
 |
 kurtosis   =

 for 

|
 entropy    =|
 mgf        =

|
 char       =

|
}} In probability and statistics, the Yule–Simon distribution is a discrete probability distribution named after Udny Yule and Herbert A. Simon. Simon originally called it the Yule distribution.1
The probability mass function of the Yule–Simon (ρ) distribution is



for integer

 
  and real

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the beta function. Equivalently the pmf can be written in terms of the falling factorial as



where 
 
 
 
  is the gamma function. Thus, if 
 
 
 
  is an integer,



The parameter 
 
 
 
  can be estimated using a fixed point algorithm.2
The probability mass function f has the property that for sufficiently large k we have



This means that the tail of the Yule–Simon distribution is a realization of Zipf's law

 
  can be used to model, for example, the relative frequency of the 
 
 
 
 th most frequent word in a large collection of text, which according to Zipf's law is inversely proportional to a (typically small) power of 
 
 
 
 .
Occurrence
The Yule–Simon distribution arose originally as the limiting distribution of a particular stochastic process studied by Yule as a model for the distribution of biological taxa and subtaxa.3 Simon dubbed this process the "Yule process" but it is more commonly known today as a preferential attachment process. The preferential attachment process is an urn process in which balls are added to a growing number of urns, each ball being allocated to an urn with probability linear in the number the urn already contains.
The distribution also arises as a compound distribution, in which the parameter of a geometric distribution is treated as a function of random variable having an exponential distribution. Specifically, assume that 
 
 
 
  follows an exponential distribution with scale

 
  or rate 
 
 
 
 :


 
  with density



Then a Yule–Simon distributed variable K has the following geometric distribution conditional on W:



The pmf of a geometric distribution is



for 
 
 
 
 . The Yule–Simon pmf is then the following exponential-geometric compound distribution:



Recurrence relation



Generalizations
The two-parameter generalization of the original Yule distribution replaces the beta function with an incomplete beta function. The probability mass function of the generalized Yule–Simon(ρ, α) distribution is defined as



with 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
  the ordinary Yule–Simon(ρ) distribution is obtained as a special case. The use of the incomplete beta function has the effect of introducing an exponential cutoff in the upper tail.
See also

Beta function
Preferential attachment

Bibliography

Colin Rose and Murray D. Smith, Mathematical Statistics with Mathematica. New York: Springer, 2002, ISBN 0-387-95234-9. (See page 107, where it is called the "Yule distribution".)

References


"
Category:Discrete distributions Category:Compound distributions Category:Probability distributions










