


Cartan decomposition




Cartan decomposition

The Cartan decomposition is a decomposition of a semisimple Lie group or Lie algebra, which plays an important role in their structure theory and representation theory. It generalizes the polar decomposition or singular value decomposition of matrices. Its history can be traced to the 1880s work of Élie Cartan and Wilhelm Killing. [http://books.google.com/books?id=udj-1UuaOiIC&pg;;=PA46&dq;=history+cartan+decomposition&hl;=en&sa;=X&ei;=aa-wUuCDEMGmkQfNqoHABg&ved;=0CDQQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q;=history%20cartan%20decomposition&f;=false]
Cartan involutions on Lie algebras
Let 
 
 
 
  be a real semisimple Lie algebra and let 
 
 
 
  be its Killing form. An involution on 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra automorphism

 
  of 
 
 
 
  whose square is equal to the identity. Such an involution is called a Cartan involution on 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is a positive definite bilinear form.
Two involutions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are considered equivalent if they differ only by an inner automorphism.
Any real semisimple Lie algebra has a Cartan involution, and any two Cartan involutions are equivalent.
Examples
{{^|NOTE: Blank lines between items helped source readability, but screwed up list formatting}}

A Cartan involution on 
 
 
 
  is defined by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the transpose matrix of 
 
 
 
 .
The identity map on 
 
 
 
  is an involution, of course. It is the unique Cartan involution of 
 
 
 
  if and only if the Killing form of 
 
 
 
  is negative definite. Equivalently, 
 
 
 
  is the Lie algebra of a compact semisimple Lie group.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the complexification of a real semisimple Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 , then complex conjugation on 
 
 
 
  is an involution on 
 
 
 
 . This is the Cartan involution on 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is the Lie algebra of a compact Lie group.
The following maps are involutions of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of the special unitary group SU(n):
 
the identity involution 
 
 
 
 , which is the unique Cartan involution in this case;


 
  which on 
 
 
 
  is also the complex conjugation;
if 
 
 
 
  is odd, 
 
 
 
 . These are all equivalent, but not equivalent to the identity involution (because the matrix 
 
 
 
  does not belong to 
 
 
 
 .)
if 
 
 
 
  is even, we also have 
 
 



Cartan pairs
Let 
 
 
 
  be an involution on a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 , the linear map 
 
 
 
  has the two eigenvalues 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the corresponding eigenspaces, then 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra automorphism, eigenvalues are multiplicative. It follows that


 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is a Lie subalgebra, while any subalgebra of 
 
 
 
  is commutative.
Conversely, a decomposition 
 
 
 
  with these extra properties determines an involution 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  that is 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 .
Such a pair 
 
 
 
  is also called a Cartan pair of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is called a symmetric pair. This notion of "Cartan pair" is not to be confused with a distinct notion involving the relative Lie algebra cohomology 
 
 
 
 .
The decomposition 
 
 
 
  associated to a Cartan involution is called a Cartan decomposition of 
 
 
 
 . The special feature of a Cartan decomposition is that the Killing form is negative definite on 
 
 
 
  and positive definite on 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are orthogonal complements of each other with respect to the Killing form on 
 
 
 
 .
Cartan decomposition on the Lie group level
Let 
 
 
 
  be a semisimple Lie group and 
 
 
 
  its Lie algebra. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Cartan involution on 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the resulting Cartan pair. Let 
 
 
 
  be the analytic subgroup of 
 
 
 
  with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . Then:

There is a Lie group automorphism 
 
 
 
  with differential 
 
 
 
  that satisfies 
 
 
 
 .
The subgroup of elements fixed by 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 ; in particular, 
 
 
 
  is a closed subgroup.
The mapping 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
  is a diffeomorphism.
The subgroup 
 
 
 
  contains the center 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is compact modulo center, that is, 
 
 
 
  is compact.
The subgroup 
 
 
 
  is the maximal subgroup of 
 
 
 
  that contains the center and is compact modulo center.

The automorphism 
 
 
 
  is also called global Cartan involution, and the diffeomorphism 
 
 
 
  is called global Cartan decomposition.
For the general linear group, we get 
 
 
 
  as the Cartan involution.
A refinement of the Cartan decomposition for symmetric spaces of compact or noncompact type states that the maximal Abelian subalgebras 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  are unique up to conjugation by K. Moreover



In the compact and noncompact case this Lie algebraic result implies the decomposition



where A = exp 
 
 
 
 . Geometrically the image of the subgroup A in G / K is a totally geodesic submanifold.
Relation to polar decomposition
Consider 
 
 
 
  with the Cartan involution 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is the real Lie algebra of skew-symmetric matrices, so that 
 
 
 
 , while 
 
 
 
  is the subspace of symmetric matrices. Thus the exponential map is a diffeomorphism from 
 
 
 
  onto the space of positive definite matrices. Up to this exponential map, the global Cartan decomposition is the polar decomposition of a matrix. Notice that the polar decomposition of an invertible matrix is unique.
See also

Lie group decompositions

References


A. W. Knapp, Lie groups beyond an introduction, ISBN 0-8176-4259-5, Birkhäuser.

"
Category:Lie groups Category:Lie algebras


