


Iwasawa decomposition




Iwasawa decomposition

In mathematics, the Iwasawa decomposition KAN of a semisimple Lie group generalises the way a square real matrix can be written as a product of an orthogonal matrix and an upper triangular matrix (a consequence of Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization). It is named after Kenkichi Iwasawa, the Japanese mathematician who developed this method.1
Definition

G is a connected semisimple real Lie group.


 
  is the Lie algebra of G


 
 
  is the complexification of 
 
 
 
 .
θ is a Cartan involution of 
 
 



 
  is the corresponding Cartan decomposition


 
  is a maximal abelian subalgebra of 
 
 

Σ is the set of restricted roots of 
 
 
 
 , corresponding to eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  acting on 
 
 
 
 .
Σ+ is a choice of positive roots of Σ


 
  is a nilpotent Lie algebra given as the sum of the root spaces of Σ+
K, A, N, are the Lie subgroups of G generated by 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

Then the Iwasawa decomposition of 
 
 
 
  is


 
  and the Iwasawa decomposition of G is



The dimension of A (or equivalently of 
 
 
 
 
 ) is called the real rank of G.
Iwasawa decompositions also hold for some disconnected semisimple groups G, where K becomes a (disconnected) maximal compact subgroup provided the center of G is finite.
The restricted root space decomposition is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the centralizer of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  is the root space. The number 
 
 
 
  is called the multiplicity of 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
If G=''SLn''(R), then we can take K to be the orthogonal matrices, A to be the positive diagonal matrices, and N to be the unipotent group consisting of upper triangular matrices with 1s on the diagonal.
Non-Archimedean Iwasawa decomposition
There is an analogon to the above Iwasawa decomposition for a non-Archimedean field

 
 : In this case, the group 
 
 
 
  can be written as a product of the subgroup of upper-triangular matrices and the (maximal compact) subgroup 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the ring of integers of 
 
 
 
 . 2
See also

Lie group decompositions

References


A. W. Knapp, Structure theory of semisimple Lie groups, in ISBN 0-8218-0609-2: Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms: Instructional Conference, International Centre for Mathematical Sciences, March 1996, Edinburgh, Scotland (Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics) by T. N. Bailey (Editor), Anthony W. Knapp (Editor)

"
Category:Lie groups




Bump, Automorphic Forms and Representations, Prop. 4.5.2




