


Rouché's theorem




Rouché's theorem

Rouché's theorem, named after , states that if the complex-valued functions f and g are holomorphic inside and on some closed contour K, with |g(z)| K\subset G be a bounded region with continuous boundary 
 
 
 
 . Two holomorphic functions 
 
 
 
  have the same number of roots in 
 
 
 
 , if the strict inequality



holds on the boundary 
 
 
 
 .
The original Rouché's theorem then follows by setting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Usage
The theorem is usually used to simplify the problem of locating zeros, as follows. Given an analytic function, we write it as the sum of two parts, one of which is simpler and grows faster than (thus dominates) the other part. We can then locate the zeros by looking at only the dominating part. For example, the polynomial 
 
 
 
  has exactly 5 zeros in the disk 
 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , the dominating part, has five zeros in the disk.
Geometric explanation
(Figure)
Since the distance between the curves is small, h(z) does exactly one turn around just as f(z) does.

It is possible to provide an informal explanation of Rouché's theorem.
Let C be a closed, simple curve (i.e., not self-intersecting). Let h(z) = f(z) + g(z). If f and g are both holomorphic on the interior of C, then h must also be holomorphic on the interior of C. Then, with the conditions imposed above, the Rouche's theorem in its original (and not symmetric) form says that

If |f(z)| > |h(z) − f(z)|, for every z in C, then f and h have the same number of zeros in the interior of C.
 

Notice that the condition |f(z)| > |h(z) − f(z)| means that for any z, the distance from f(z) to the origin is larger than the length of h(z) − f(z), which in the following picture means that for each point on the blue curve, the segment joining it to the origin is larger than the green segment associated with it. Informally we can say that the blue curve f(z) is always closer to the red curve h(z) than it is to the origin.
The previous paragraph shows that h(z) must wind around the origin exactly as many times as f(z). The index of both curves around zero is therefore the same, so by the argument principle, f(z) and h(z) must have the same number of zeros inside C.
One popular, informal way to summarize this argument is as follows: If a person were to walk a dog on a leash around and around a tree, and if the length of the leash is less than the circumference of the tree, then the person and the dog go around the tree an equal number of times.
Applications
Consider the polynomial 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
 
 ). By the quadratic formula it has two zeros at 
 
 
 
 . Rouché's theorem can be used to obtain more precise positions of them. Since


 
  for every 
 
 
 
 , Rouché's theorem says that the polynomial has exactly one zero inside the disk 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
  is clearly outside the disk, we conclude that the zero is 
 
 
 
 . This sort of arguments can be useful in locating residues when one applies Cauchy's residue theorem.
Rouché's theorem can also be used to give a short proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra. Let



and choose 
 
 
 
  so large that:



Since 
 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  zeros inside the disk 
 
 
 
  (because 
 
 
 
 ), it follows from Rouché's theorem that 
 
 
 
  also has the same number of zeros inside the disk.
One advantage of this proof over the others is that it shows not only that a polynomial must have a zero but the number of its zeros is equal to its degree (counting, as usual, multiplicity).
Another use of Rouché's theorem is to prove the open mapping theorem for analytic functions. We refer to the article for the proof.
Proof of the symmetric form of Rouché's theorem
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a simple closed curve whose image is the boundary 
 
 
 
 . The hypothesis implies that f has no roots on 
 
 
 
 , hence by the argument principle, the number Nf(K) of zeros of f in K is


 
  i.e., the winding number of the closed curve 
 
 
 
  around the origin; similarly for g. The hypothesis ensures that g(z) is not a negative real multiple of f(z) for any z = C(x), thus 0 does not lie on the line segment joining f(C(x)) to g(C(x)), and


 
  is a homotopy between the curves 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  avoiding the origin. The winding number is homotopy-invariant: the function


 
  is continuous and integer-valued, hence constant. This shows



See also

Hurwitz's theorem (complex analysis)
Sturm's theorem
Rational root theorem
Properties of polynomial roots
Riemann mapping theorem

Notes
References




External links

Module for Rouche’s Theorem by John H. Mathews

"
Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in complex analysis


