


Egyptian numerals




Egyptian numerals

The system of ancient Egyptian numerals was used in Ancient Egypt in around 3000 BC1 until the early first millennium AD. It was a system of numeration based on the scale of ten, often rounded off to the higher power, written in hieroglyphs, but they had no concept of a place-valued system such as the decimal system is.2 The hieratic form of numerals stressed an exact finite series notation, ciphered one to one onto the Egyptian alphabet. The Ancient Egyptian system used bases of ten.
Digits and numbers
The following hieroglyphics were used to denote powers of ten:




Value

1

10

100

1,000

10,000

100,000

1 million, or
many





Hieroglyph

Z1

V20

V1

M12

D50

I8
 or
I7

C11



Description

Single stroke

Heel bone

Coil of rope

Water lily
 (also called Lotus)

Bent Finger

Tadpole
 or Frog

Man with both hands raised,
  perhaps Heh.3



Multiples of these values were expressed by repeating the symbol as many times as needed. For instance, a stone carving from Karnak shows the number 4622 as




M12-M12-M12-M12-!-V1*V1*V1:V1*V1*V1-!-V20-V20-Z1-Z1



Egyptian hieroglyphs could be written in both directions (and even vertically). This example is written left-to-right and top-down; on the original stone carving, it is right-to-left, and the signs are thus reversed
Zero and negative numbers




nfr
  

heart with trachea
 beautiful, pleasant, good

F35





By 1740 BCE, the Egyptians had a symbol for zero in accounting texts. The symbol nfr, meaning beautiful, was also used to indicate the base level in drawings of tombs and pyramids and distances were measured relative to the base line as being above or below this line.4
Fractions
Rational numbers could also be expressed, but only as sums of unit fractions, i.e., sums of reciprocals of positive integers, except for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The hieroglyph indicating a fraction looked like a mouth, which meant "part":




D21



Fractions were written with this fractional solidus, i.e., the numerator 1, and the positive denominator below. Thus, 
 
 
 
  was written as:




D21:Z1*Z1*Z1







There were special symbols for 
 
 
 
  and for two non-unit fractions, 
 
 
 
  (used frequently) and 
 
 
 
  (used less frequently):




Aa13





 

D22





 

D23







If the denominator became too large, the "mouth" was just placed over the beginning of the "denominator":




D21:V1*V1*V1-V20*V20:V20*Z1







Addition and subtraction
For plus and minus signs, the hieroglyphs D54-and-D55 were used: if the feet pointed into the direction of writing, it signified addition, otherwise subtraction.5
Written numbers
As with most modern day languages, the ancient Egyptian language could also write out numerals as words phonetically, just like one can write thirty instead of "30" in English. The word (thirty), for instance, was written as




Aa15:D36-D58



while the numeral (30) was




V20-V20-V20



This was, however, uncommon for most numbers other than one and two and the signs were used most of the time.
Hieratic numerals
As administrative and accounting texts were written on papyrus or ostraca, rather than being carved into hard stone (as were hieroglyphic texts), the vast majority of texts employing the Egyptian numeral system utilize the hieratic script. Instances of numerals written in hieratic can be found as far back as the Early Dynastic Period. The Old Kingdom Abusir Papyri are a particularly important corpus of texts that utilize hieratic numerals.
Boyer proved 50 years ago that hieratic script used a different numeral system, using individual signs for the numbers 1 to 9, multiples of 10 from 10 to 90, the hundreds from 100 to 900, and the thousands from 1000 to 9000. A large number like 9999 could thus be written with only four signs—combining the signs for 9000, 900, 90, and 9—as opposed to 36 hieroglyphs. Boyer saw the new hieratic numerals as ciphered, mapping one number onto one Egyptian letter for the first time in human history. Greeks adopted the new system, mapping their counting numbers onto two of their alphabets, the Doric and Ionian.
In the oldest hieratic texts the individual numerals were clearly written in a ciphered relationship to the Egyptian alphabet. But during the Old Kingdom a series of standardized writings had developed for sign-groups containing more than one numeral, repeated as Roman numerals practiced. However, repetition of the same numeral for each place-value was not allowed in the hieratic script. As the hieratic writing system developed over time, these sign-groups were further simplified for quick writing; this process continued into Demotic as well.
Two famous mathematical papyri using hieratic script are the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus and the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus.
Egyptian words for numbers
The following table shows the reconstructed Middle Egyptian forms of the numerals6 (which are indicated by a preceding asterisk), followed by the transliteration of the hieroglyphs used to write them, and finally the Coptic numerals which descended from them and which give Egyptologists clues as to the vocalism of the original Egyptian numbers. The majuscule letter "A" in some reconstructed forms means that the quality of that vowel remains uncertain:




Egyptian Transliteration

English Translation

Coptic (Sahidic dialect)





 ‹  (masc.)
 ''' ''' ‹  (fem.)

one

oua (masc.)
 ouei (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

two

snau (masc.)
 snte (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

three

šomnt (masc.)
 šomte (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

four

ftoou (masc.)
 ftoe (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

five

tiou (masc.)
 tie (fem.)



 ‹  or  (?) (masc.)
 ‹  or  (?) (fem.)

six

soou (masc.)
 soe (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

seven

šašf(masc.)
 šašfe (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

eight

šmoun (masc.)
 šmoune (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

nine

psis (masc.)
 psite (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

ten

mēt (masc.)
 mēte (fem.)



 ‹ 

twenty

jōt (masc.)
 jōti (fem.)



 ‹  (masc.)
 ‹  (fem.)

thirty

maab (masc.)
 maabe (fem.)



 (?) ‹  (masc.)

forty

xme



 ‹ 

fifty

taeiou



 ‹  or  (?)

sixty

se



 ‹  (masc.)

seventy

šfe



 ‹  (masc.)

eighty

xmene



 ‹  (masc.)

ninety

pstaiou



 ‹ 

one hundred

še



 ‹ 

two hundred

šēt



 ‹ 

one thousand

šo



 ‹ 


ten thousand

tba



‹ 

one hundred thousand



 ‹ 

one million

xax "many"



See also

Ancient Egypt
Egyptian language
Egyptian mathematics

References

Allen, James Paul. 2000. Middle Egyptian: An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Numerals discussed in §§9.1–9.6.
Gardiner, Alan Henderson. 1957. Egyptian Grammar; Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs. 3rd ed. Oxford: Griffith Institute. For numerals, see §§259–266.
Goedicke, Hans. 1988. Old Hieratic Paleography. Baltimore: Halgo, Inc.
Möller, Georg. 1927. Hieratische Paläographie: Die aegyptische Buchschrift in ihrer Entwicklung von der Fünften Dynastie bis zur römischen Kaiserzeit. 3 vols. 2nd ed. Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs'schen Buchhandlungen. (Reprinted Osnabrück: Otto Zeller Verlag, 1965)

Notes


External links

Introduction
Egyptian numerals
Numbers and dates


http://egyptianmath.blogspot.com

"
Category:Egyptian hieroglyphs Category:Numeral systems Category:Numerals Category:Egyptian mathematics




"The Story of Numbers" by John McLeish
Merzbach, Uta C., and Carl B. Boyer. A History of Mathematics. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2011, p. 10


John B. Callender, Middle Egyptian, 1975




