


Bogoliubov transformation




Bogoliubov transformation

In theoretical physics, the Bogoliubov transformation, named after Nikolay Bogolyubov, is a unitary transformation  from a unitary representation of some canonical commutation relation algebra or canonical anticommutation relation algebra into another unitary representation, induced by an isomorphism of the commutation relation algebra. The Bogoliubov transformation is often used to diagonalize Hamiltonians, which yields the steady-state solutions of the corresponding Schrödinger equation. The solutions of BCS theory in a homogeneous system, for example, are found using a Bogoliubov transformation. The Bogoliubov transformation is also important for understanding the Unruh effect, Hawking radiation and many other topics.
Single bosonic mode example
Consider the canonical commutation relation for bosonic creation and annihilation operators in the harmonic basis


 
  Define a new pair of operators





 
  where the latter is the hermitian conjugate of the first.
The Bogoliubov transformation is a canonical transformation of these operators. To find the conditions on the constants u and v such that the transformation is canonical, the commutator is evaluated, viz.


 
  It is then evident that 
 
 
 
  is the condition for which the transformation is canonical.
Since the form of this condition is suggestive of the hyperbolic identity


 
 , the constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be readily parametrized as






Applications
The most prominent application is by Nikolai Bogoliubov himself in the context of superfluidity.1 Other applications comprise Hamiltonians and excitations in the theory of antiferromagnetism.2 When calculating quantum field theory in curved space-times the definition of the vacuum changes and a Bogoliubov transformation between these different vacua is possible. This is used in the derivation of Hawking radiation.
Fermionic mode
For the anticommutation relation


 
 , the same transformation with u and v becomes



To make the transformation canonical, u and v can be parameterized as






Applications
The most prominent application is again by Nikolai Bogoliubov himself, this time for the BCS theory of superconductivity .3 The point where the necessity to perform a Bogoliubov transform becomes obvious is that in mean-field approximation the Hamiltonian of the system can be written in both cases as a sum of bilinear terms in the original creation and destruction operators, involving finite  
 
 
 
 -terms, i.e. one must go beyond the usual Hartree–Fock method (-> Hartree–Fock-Bogoliubov method). Also in nuclear physics this method is applicable since it may describe the "pairing energy" of nucleons in a heavy element.4
Multimode example
The Hilbert space under consideration is equipped with these operators, and henceforth describes a higher-dimensional quantum harmonic oscillator (usually an infinite-dimensional one).
The ground state of the corresponding Hamiltonian is annihilated by all the annihilation operators:



All excited states are obtained as linear combinations of the ground state excited by some creation operators:



One may redefine the creation and the annihilation operators by a linear redefinition:



where the coefficients 
 
 
 
  must satisfy certain rules to guarantee that the annihilation operators and the creation operators 
 
 
 
 , defined by the Hermitian conjugate equation, have the same commutators for bosons and anticommutators for fermions.
The equation above defines the Bogoliubov transformation of the operators.
The ground state annihilated by all 
 
 
 
  is different from the original ground state 
 
 
 
  and they can be viewed as the Bogoliubov transformations of one another using the operator-state correspondence. They can also be defined as squeezed coherent states. BCS wave function is an example of squeezed coherent state of fermions.5
References
Literature
The whole topic, and a lot of definite applications, are treated in the following textbooks:

J.-P. Blaizot and G. Ripka: Quantum Theory of Finite Systems, MIT Press (1985)
A. Fetter and J. Walecka: Quantum Theory of Many-Particle Systems, Dover (2003)
Ch. Kittel: Quantum theory of solids, Wiley (1987)

External links
"
Category:Quantum field theory Category:Canonical unitary transformation



Nikolai Bogoliubov: On the theory of superfluidity, J. Phys. (USSR), 11, p. 23 (1947)
See e.g. the textbook by Charles Kittel: Quantum theory of solids, New York, Wiley 1987.

Vilen Mitrovanovich Strutinsky: Shell effects in nuclear physics and deformation energies, Nuclear Physics A, Vol. 95, p. 420-442 (1967), 1 .
Svozil, K. (1990), "Squeezed Fermion states", Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3341-3343. 




