


Nilpotent matrix




Nilpotent matrix

In linear algebra, a nilpotent matrix is a square matrix N such that


 
  for some positive integer k. The smallest such k is sometimes called the degree or index of N.1
More generally, a nilpotent transformation is a linear transformation L of a vector space such that Lk = 0 for some positive integer k (and thus, Lj = 0 for all j ≥ k).234 Both of these concepts are special cases of a more general concept of nilpotence that applies to elements of rings.
Examples
The matrix


 
  is nilpotent, since M2 = 0. More generally, any triangular matrix with 0s along the main diagonal is nilpotent. For example, the matrix


 
  is nilpotent, with


 
  Though the examples above have a large number of zero entries, a typical nilpotent matrix does not. For example, the matrix


 
  squares to zero, though the matrix has no zero entries.
Characterization
For an n × n square matrix N with real (or complex) entries, the following are equivalent:

N is nilpotent.
The minimal polynomial for N is xk for some positive integer k ≤ n.
The characteristic polynomial for N is xn.
The only eigenvalue for N is 0.5
tr(Nk) = 0 for all k > 0.

The last theorem holds true for matrices over any field of characteristic 0 or sufficiently large characteristic. (cf. Newton's identities)
This theorem has several consequences, including:

The degree of an n × n nilpotent matrix is always less than or equal to n. For example, every 2 × 2 nilpotent matrix squares to zero.
The determinant and trace of a nilpotent matrix are always zero. Consequently, a nilpotent matrix cannot be invertible.
The only nilpotent diagonalizable matrix is the zero matrix.

Classification
Consider the n × n shift matrix:


 
  This matrix has 1s along the superdiagonal and 0s everywhere else. As a linear transformation, the shift matrix “shifts” the components of a vector one position to the left, with a zero appearing in the last position:


6 This matrix is nilpotent with degree n, and is the “canonical” nilpotent matrix.
Specifically, if N is any nilpotent matrix, then N is similar to a block diagonal matrix of the form


 
  where each of the blocks S1, S2, ..., Sr is a shift matrix (possibly of different sizes). This form is a special case of the Jordan canonical form for matrices.78
For example, any nonzero 2 × 2 nilpotent matrix is similar to the matrix


 
  That is, if N is any nonzero 2 × 2 nilpotent matrix, then there exists a basis b1, b2 such that ''N''b1 = 0 and Nb2 = b1.
This classification theorem holds for matrices over any field. (It is not necessary for the field to be algebraically closed.)
Flag of subspaces
A nilpotent transformation L on Rn naturally determines a flag of subspaces


 
  and a signature



The signature characterizes L up to an invertible linear transformation. Furthermore, it satisfies the inequalities


 
  Conversely, any sequence of natural numbers satisfying these inequalities is the signature of a nilpotent transformation.
Additional properties

If N is nilpotent, then I + N is invertible, where I is the n × n identity matrix. The inverse is given by








where only finitely many terms of this sum are nonzero.
 


If N is nilpotent, then








where I denotes the n × n identity matrix. Conversely, if A is a matrix and
 
 



for all values of t, then A is nilpotent. In fact, since 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
 , it suffices to have this hold for 
 
 
 
  distinct values of 
 
 
 
 .
 


Every singular matrix can be written as a product of nilpotent matrices.9


A nilpotent matrix is a special case of a convergent matrix.

Generalizations
A linear operator T is locally nilpotent if for every vector v, there exists a k such that


 
  For operators on a finite-dimensional vector space, local nilpotence is equivalent to nilpotence.
Notes


References





External links

Nilpotent matrix and [http://planetmath.org/?op=getobj&from;;=objects&id;=1961 nilpotent transformation] on PlanetMath.

"
Category:Matrices











R. Sullivan, Products of nilpotent matrices, Linear and Multilinear Algebra, Vol. 56, No. 3




