


Unified Thread Standard




Unified Thread Standard

The Unified Thread Standard (UTS) defines a standard thread form and series—along with allowances, tolerances, and designations—for screw threads commonly used in the United States and Canada. It is the main standard for bolts, nuts, and a wide variety of other threaded fasteners used in these countries. It has the same 60° profile as the ISO metric screw thread, but the characteristic dimensions of each UTS thread (outer diameter and pitch) were chosen as an inch fraction rather than a millimeter value. The UTS is currently controlled by ASME/ANSI in the United States.
Origins

See the "History of standardization" section of the screw thread article.


Basic profile
(Figure)
The basic profile of all UTS threads is the same as that of all ISO metric screw threads. Only the commonly used values for Dmaj and P differ between the two standards.

Each thread in the series is characterized by its major diameter Dmaj and its pitch, P. UTS threads consist of a symmetric V-shaped thread. In the plane of the thread axis, the flanks of the V have an angle of 60° to each other. The outermost 0.125 and the innermost 0.25 of the height H of the V-shape are cut off from the profile.
The pitch P is the distance between thread peaks. For UTS threads, which are single-start threads, it is equal to the lead, the axial distance that the screw advances during a 360° rotation. UTS threads do not usually use the pitch parameter; instead a parameter known as threads per inch (TPI) is used, which is the reciprocal of the pitch.
The relationship between the height H and the pitch P is found using the following equation:1



In an external (male) thread (e.g., on a bolt), the major diameter Dmaj and the minor diameter Dmin define maximum dimensions of the thread. This means that the external thread must end flat at Dmaj, but can be rounded out below the minor diameter Dmin. Conversely, in an internal (female) thread (e.g., in a nut), the major and minor diameters are minimum dimensions, therefore the thread profile must end flat at Dmin but may be rounded out beyond Dmaj.
The minor diameter Dmin and effective pitch diameter Dp are derived from the major diameter and pitch as



Designation
The standard designation for a UTS thread is a number indicating the nominal (major) diameter of the thread, followed by the pitch measured in threads per inch. For diameters smaller than 
 
 
 
  inch, the diameter is indicated by an integer number defined in the standard; for all other diameters, the inch figure is given.
This number pair is optionally followed by the letters UNC, UNF or UNEF if the diameter-pitch combination is from the "coarse", "fine" or "extra fine" series, and may also be followed by a tolerance class.
Example: #6-32 UNC 2B (major diameter: 0.1380 inch, pitch: 32 tpi)




Unified Screw Threads — UNC, UNF and UNEF2



Major diameter
 (inch \ mm)



Coarse (UNC)



d (TPI)



#0



#1



#2



#3



#4



#5



#6



#8



#10



#12

























































1



It should be noted that for many years now 1 inch 12 tpi is harder to find than 1 inch 14 tpi. As a result 1"-14 products (ie. Hex Bolts) are easier to find and less expensive than 1"12 and over the decades most people now refer to 1"-14 as UNF or Fine Thread. Though technically incorrect as it was not in the original specs, it is universally accepted as NF within the fastener industry. Therefore 1"-14 called NF now falls under the common use terminology, also called a genericized brand name/standard. That means there's been a lack of effective enforcement of the standard for a long enough time (in this case many decades) and has led to a situation that can be referred to as Generic trademark.
The following formula is used to calculate the major diameter of a numbered screw greater than or equal to 0: Major diameter = Screw # × 0.013 in + 0.060 in. For example, a number 10 calculates as: #10 × 0.013 in + 0.060 in = 0.190 in major diameter.
The number series of machine screws has been extended downward to include #00-90 (0.047 in = 0.060 − 0.013 in) and #000-120 (0.034 in = 0.060 − 2 × 0.013 in) screws3 screws; however, the main standard for screws smaller than #0 is ANSI/ASME standard B1.10 Unified Miniature Screw Threads. This defines a series of metric screws named after their major diameters in mm, from 0.30 UNM to 1.40 UNM. Preferred sizes are 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0 and 1.2 mm, with additional defined sizes halfway between.4 The standard thread pitch is approximately 1/4 of the major diameter. The thread form is slightly modified to increase the minor diameter, and thus the strength of screws and taps. The major diameter still extends to within 1/8 H of the theoretical sharp V, but the total depth of the thread is reduced 4% from 5/8 H = 5/8 cos(30°) P ≈ 0.541 P to 0.52 P.5 This increases the amount of the theoretical sharp V which is cut off at the minor diameter by 10% from 0.25 H to 7/8 − 0.52/cos (30°) ≈ 0.27456 H.
The number series of machine screws once included more odd numbers and went up to #16 or more. Standardization efforts in the late 19th and the early part of the 20th century reduced the range of sizes considerably. Now, it is less common to see machine screws larger than #14, or odd number sizes other than #1, #3 and #5. Even though #14 and #16 screws are still available, they are not as common as sizes #0 through #12.
Sometimes "special" diameter and pitch combinations (UNS) are used, for example a  major diameter with 20 threads per inch. UNS threads are rarely used for bolts, but rather on nuts, tapped holes, and threaded ODs. Because of this UNS taps are readily available.67 Most UNS threads have more threads per inch than the correlating UNF or UNEF standard, therefore they are often the strongest thread available.8 Because of this they are often used in applications where high stresses are encountered, such as machine tool spindles9 or automotive spindles.10
Gauging
A screw thread gauging system comprises a list of screw thread characteristics that must be inspected to establish the dimensional acceptability of the screw threads on a threaded product and the gauge(s) which shall be used when inspecting those characteristics.
Currently this gauging UTS is controlled by:

ASME/ANSI B1.2-1983 Gauges And Gauging For Unified Inch Screw Threads

This Standard provides essential specifications and dimensions for the gauges used on Unified inch screw threads UN [unified] and UNR [external threads only] thread form, and covers the specifications and dimensions for the thread gauges and measuring equipment listed in Tables 1 and 2. The basic purpose and use of each gauge are also described.

ASME/ANSI B1.3-2007 Screw Thread Gauging Systems for Acceptability: Inch and Metric Screw Threads (UN, UNR, UNJ, M, and MJ)

(a) This Standard presents screw thread gauging systems suitable for determining the acceptability of Unified [UN], UNR [external threads only], UNJ [internal and external threads], M, and MJ screw threads on externally and internally threaded products. It establishes the criteria for screw thread acceptance when a gauging system is used. (b) A screw thread gauging system comprises a list of screw thread characteristics that must be inspected to establish the dimensional acceptability of the screw threads on a threaded product and the gauge(s) which shall be used when inspecting those characteristics. (c) Federal Government Use. When this Standard is approved by the Department of Defense and federal agencies and is incorporated into Federal Standard-H28/20 [FED-STD-H28/20], Screw Thread Standards for Federal Services, Section 20, the use of this Standard by the federal government is subject to all the requirements and limitations of Federal Standard-H28/20 [FED-STD-H28/20]. These standards provide essential specifications and dimensions for the gauges used on Unified inch screw threads (UN, UNR, UNJ thread form) on externally and internally threaded products. It also covers the specifications and dimensions for the thread gauges and measuring equipment. The basic purpose and use of each gauge are also described. It also establishes the criteria for screw thread acceptance when a gauging system is used.
Tolerance classes
A classification system exists for ease of manufacture and interchangeability of fabricated threaded items. Most (but certainly not all) threaded items are made to a classification standard called the Unified Screw Thread Standard Series. This system is analogous to the fits used with assembled parts.
Classes 1A, 2A, 3A apply to external threads; Classes 1B, 2B, 3B apply to internal threads.
Class 1 threads are loosely fitting threads intended for ease of assembly or use in a dirty environment.
Class 2 threads are the most common. They are designed to maximize strength considering typical machine shop capability and machine practice.
Class 3 threads are used for closer tolerances.
Thread class refers to the acceptable range of pitch diameter for any given thread. The pitch diameter is indicated as Dp in the figure shown above. There are several methods that are used to measure the pitch diameter. The most common method used in production is by way of a Go/no go gauge.
Related standards

ASME/ANSI B1.1 – 2003 Unified Inch Screw Threads, UN & UNR Thread Form
ASME/ANSI B1.10M – 2004 Unified Miniature Screw Threads
ASME/ANSI B1.15 – 1995 Unified Inch Screw Threads, UNJ Thread Form

See also

British standard pipe thread
British Standard Whitworth
ISO metric screw thread


List of drill and tap sizes
List of screw drives
National pipe thread


Nut (hardware)
William Sellers
United States Standard thread

Notes
Bibliography


.

.

External links

Unified Screw Threads with Tolerances
Unified Coarse/Fine diameters and tap drill sizes (US units)
Unified Coarse/Fine tap drill sizes (US units)
Imperial Metric fastening size conversion charts
International Thread Standards
Conversion chart Whitworth/BSF/AF and metric
Spanner Jaw Sizes Additional information and spanner jaw size table.
Unified Screw Threads Series
ASME B1.1-2003 Unified Inch Screw Threads, (UN and UNR Thread Form)

"
Category:Mechanical standards Category:Screws Category:Threading (manufacturing)



.

[http://www.metricscrews.us/index.php?main_page=index&cPath;;=79 #00-90 and #000-120 screws for sale]




.
.
.




