


Hermitian adjoint




Hermitian adjoint

In mathematics, specifically in functional analysis, each bounded linear operator on a complex Hilbert space has a corresponding adjoint operator. Adjoints of operators generalize conjugate transposes of square matrices to (possibly) infinite-dimensional situations. If one thinks of operators on a complex Hilbert space as "generalized complex numbers", then the adjoint of an operator plays the role of the complex conjugate of a complex number.
The adjoint of an operator 
 
 
 
  may also be called the Hermitian adjoint, Hermitian conjugate or Hermitian transpose1 (after Charles Hermite) of 
 
 
 
  and is denoted by 
 
 
 
  or  (the latter especially when used in conjunction with the bra–ket notation).
Definition for bounded operators
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a complex Hilbert space, with inner product

 
 . Consider a continuous linear operator

 
  (for linear operators, continuity is equivalent to being a bounded operator). Then the adjoint of 
 
 
 
  is the continuous linear operator 
 
 
 
  satisfying



Existence and uniqueness of this operator follows from the Riesz representation theorem.2
This can be seen as a generalization of the adjoint matrix of a square matrix which has a similar property involving the standard complex inner product.
Properties
The following properties of the Hermitian adjoint of bounded operators are immediate:3



 
  – involutiveness
If 
 
 
 
  is invertible, then so is 
 
 
 
 , with 





 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the complex conjugate of the complex number

 
  – antilinearity (together with 3.)




If we define the operator norm of 
 
 
 
  by


 
  then


4 Moreover,


5
One says that a norm that satisfies this condition behaves like a "largest value", extrapolating from the case of self-adjoint operators.
The set of bounded linear operators on a complex Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  together with the adjoint operation and the operator norm form the prototype of a C*-algebra.
Adjoint of densely defined operators
A densely defined operator

 
  from a complex Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  to itself is a linear operator whose domain 
 
 
 
  is a dense linear subspace of 
 
 
 
  and whose values lies in 
 
 
 
 .6 By definition, the domain 
 
 
 
  of its adjoint 
 
 
 
  is the set of all 
 
 
 
  for which there is a 
 
 
 
  satisfying



and 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the 
 
 
 
  thus found.7
Properties 1.–5. hold with appropriate clauses about domains and codomains. For instance, the last property now states that 
 
 
 
  is an extension of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are densely defined operators.8
The relationship between the image of 
 
 
 
  and the kernel of its adjoint is given by:






These statements are equivalent. See orthogonal complement for the proof of this and for the definition of 
 
 
 
 .
Proof of the first equation:9



The second equation follows from the first by taking the orthogonal complement on both sides. Note that in general, the image need not be closed, but the kernel of a continuous operator10 always is.
Hermitian operators
A bounded operator

 
  is called Hermitian or self-adjoint if



which is equivalent to


11
In some sense, these operators play the role of the real numbers (being equal to their own "complex conjugate") and form a real vector space. They serve as the model of real-valued observables in quantum mechanics. See the article on self-adjoint operators for a full treatment.
Adjoints of antilinear operators
For an antilinear operator the definition of adjoint needs to be adjusted in order to compensate for the complex conjugation. An adjoint operator of the antilinear operator 
 
 
 
  on a complex Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  is an antilinear operator 
 
 
 
  with the property:



Other adjoints
The equation


 
  is formally similar to the defining properties of pairs of adjoint functors in category theory, and this is where adjoint functors got their name from.
See also

Mathematical concepts
 
Hermitian operator
Norm (mathematics)
Transpose of linear maps

Physical applications
 
Operator (physics)
†-algebra


Footnotes
References


.

.

"
Category:Operator theory




; 



See unbounded operator for details.
; 

See  for the case of bounded operators
The same as a bounded operator.
; 




