


Torus knot




Torus knot

 
In knot theory, a torus knot is a special kind of knot that lies on the surface of an unknotted torus in R3. Similarly, a torus link is a link which lies on the surface of a torus in the same way. Each torus knot is specified by a pair of coprime integers p and q. A torus link arises if p and q are not coprime (in which case the number of components is gcd(p, q)). A torus knot is trivial (equivalent to the unknot) if and only if either p or q is equal to 1 or −1. The simplest nontrivial example is the (2,3)-torus knot, also known as the trefoil knot.
(Figure)
the (2,−3)-torus knot, also known as the left-handed trefoil knot

Geometrical representation
A torus knot can be rendered geometrically in multiple ways which are topologically equivalent (see Properties below) but geometrically distinct. The convention used in this article and its figures is the following.
The (p,q)-torus knot winds q times around a circle in the interior of the torus, and p times around its axis of rotational symmetry. If p and q are not relatively prime, then we have a torus link with more than one component.
The direction in which the strands of the knot wrap around the torus is also subject to differing conventions. The most common is to have the strands form a right-handed screw for p q > 0.123
The (p,q)-torus knot can be given by the parametrization



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This lies on the surface of the torus given by 
 
 
 
  (in cylindrical coordinates).
Other parameterizations are also possible, because knots are defined up to continuous deformation. The illustrations for the (2,3)- and (3,8)-torus knots can be obtained by taking 
 
 
 
 , and in the case of the (2,3)-torus knot by furthermore subtracting respectively 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  from the above parameterizations of x and y. The latter generalizes smoothly to any coprime p,q satisfying 
 
 
 
  (This formula assumes the common convention that braid generators are right twists,4567 which is not followed by the Wikipedia page on braids.)
The crossing number of a (p,q) torus knot with p,q > 0 is given by

c = min((p−1)q, (q−1)p).
 

The genus of a torus knot with p,q > 0 is


 
  The Alexander polynomial of a torus knot is 89


 
  The Jones polynomial of a (right-handed) torus knot is given by



The complement of a torus knot in the 3-sphere is a Seifert-fibered manifold, fibred over the disc with two singular fibres.
Let Y be the p-fold dunce cap with a disk removed from the interior, Z be the q-fold dunce cap with a disk removed its interior, and X be the quotient space obtained by identifying Y and Z along their boundary circle. The knot complement of the (p, q) -torus knot deformation retracts to the space X. Therefore, the knot group of a torus knot has the presentation



Torus knots are the only knots whose knot groups have nontrivial center (which is infinite cyclic, generated by the element 
 
 
 
  in the presentation above).
Connection to complex hypersurfaces
The (p,q)−torus knots arise when considering the link of an isolated complex hypersurface singularity. One intersects the complex hypersurface with a hypersphere, centred at the isolated singular point, and with sufficiently small radius so that it does not enclose, nor encounter, any other singular points. The intersection gives a submanifold of the hypersphere.
Let p and q be coprime integers, greater than or equal to two. Consider the holomorphic function

 
  given by 
 
 
 
  Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  Given a real number 
 
 
 
  we define the real three-sphere 
 
 
 
  as given by 
 
 
 
  The function 
 
 
 
  has an isolated critical point at 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  Thus, we consider the structure of 
 
 
 
  close to 
 
 
 
  In order to do this, we consider the intersection 
 
 
 
  This intersection is the so-called link of the singularity 
 
 
 
  The link of $f(w,z) = w^p + z^q$, where p and q are coprime, and both greater than or equal to two, is exactly the (p,q)−torus knot.10
List

Unknot, 31 knot (2,3), 51 knot (5,2), 71 knot (7,2), 819 knot (4,3), 91 knot (9,2), 10124 knot (5,3)

See also

Alternating knot
Cinquefoil knot
Irrational winding of a torus

References
External links



Torus knot renderer in Actionscript
Fun with the PQ-Torus Knot

"
  Category:Algebraic topology



Livingston, Charles (1993). Knot theory. Mathematical Association of America. ISBN 0-88385-027-3
Murasugi, Kunio (1996). Knot theory and its applications. Birkhäuser. ISBN 3-7643-3817-2
Kawauchi, Akio (1996). A survey of knot theory. Birkhäuser. ISBN 3-7643-5124-1


Dehornoy, P. et al. (2000). Why are braids orderable? http://www.math.unicaen.fr/~dehornoy/Books/Why/Dgr.pdf
Birman, J. S., and Brendle, T. E. Braids: a survey. In: Menasco, W., and Thistlethwaite, M. (Eds.) (2005). Handbook of knot theory. Elsevier. ISBN 0-444-51452-X.







