


Proper map




Proper map

In mathematics, a function between topological spaces is called proper if inverse images of compact subsets are compact. In algebraic geometry, the analogous concept is called a proper morphism.
Definition
A function f : X → Y between two topological spaces is proper if the preimage of every compact set in Y is compact in X.
There are several competing descriptions. For instance, a continuous map f is proper if it is a closed map and the pre-image of every point in Y is compact. The two definitions are equivalent if Y is locally compact and Hausdorff. For a proof of this fact see the end of this section. More abstractly, f is proper if f is universally closed, i.e. if for any topological space Z the map

f × idZ: X × Z → Y × Z


is closed. These definitions are equivalent to the previous one if X is Hausdorff and Y is locally compact Hausdorff.
An equivalent, possibly more intuitive definition when X and Y are metric spaces is as follows: we say an infinite sequence of points {pi} in a topological space X escapes to infinity if, for every compact set S ⊂ X only finitely many points pi are in S. Then a continuous map f : X → Y is proper if and only if for every sequence of points {pi} that escapes to infinity in X, {f(pi)} escapes to infinity in Y.
This last sequential idea looks like being related to the notion of sequentially proper, see a reference below.
Proof of fact
Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous closed map, such that 
 
 
 
  is compact (in X) for all 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a compact subset of 
 
 
 
 . We will show that 
 
 
 
  is compact.
Let 
 
 
 
  be an open cover of 
 
 
 
 . Then for all 
 
 
 
  this is also an open cover of 
 
 
 
 . Since the latter is assumed to be compact, it has a finite subcover. In other words, for all 
 
 
 
  there is a finite set 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . The set 
 
 
 
  is closed. Its image is closed in Y, because f is a closed map. Hence the set


 
  is open in Y. It is easy to check that 
 
 
 
  contains the point 
 
 
 
 . Now 
 
 
 
  and because K is assumed to be compact, there are finitely many points 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore the set 
 
 
 
  is a finite union of finite sets, thus 
 
 
 
  is finite.
Now it follows that 
 
 
 
  and we have found a finite subcover of 
 
 
 
 , which completes the proof.
Properties

A topological space is compact if and only if the map from that space to a single point is proper.
Every continuous map from a compact space to a Hausdorff space is both proper and closed.
If f : X → Y is a proper continuous map and Y is a compactly generated Hausdorff space (this includes Hausdorff spaces which are either first-countable or locally compact), then f is closed.1

Generalization
It is possible to generalize the notion of proper maps of topological spaces to locales and topoi, see .
See also

Perfect map
Topology glossary

References



, esp. section C3.2 "Proper maps"



, esp. p. 90 "Proper maps" and the Exercises to Section 3.6.


Brown, R. "Sequentially proper maps and a sequential compactification", J. London Math Soc. (2) 7 (1973) 515-522.

"
Category:Continuous mappings








