


Fundamental class




Fundamental class

In mathematics, the fundamental class is a homology class [M] associated to an oriented manifold M, which corresponds to the generator of the homology group 
 
 
 
  . The fundamental class can be thought of as the orientation of the top-dimensional simplices of a suitable triangulation of the manifold.
Definition
Closed, orientable
When M is a connected orientable closed manifold of dimension n, the top homology group is infinite cyclic

 
 , and an orientation is a choice of generator, a choice of isomorphism 
 
 
 
 . The generator is called the fundamental class.
If M is disconnected (but still orientable), a fundamental class is the direct sum of the fundamental classes for each connected component (corresponding to an orientation for each component).
In relation with de Rham cohomology It represents a integration over M; namely for M a smooth manifold, an n-form ω can be paired with the fundamental class as



which is the integral of ω over M, and depends only on the cohomology class of ω.
Stiefel-Whitney class
If M is not orientable, the homology group is not infinite cyclic 
 
 
 
  , one cannot define a orientation of M, Indeed, one cannot integrate differential n-forms over non-orientable manifolds.
However, every closed manifold is 
 
 
 
 -orientable, and 
 
 
 
  (for M connected). Thus every closed manifold is 
 
 
 
 -oriented (not just orientable: there is no ambiguity in choice of orientation), and has a 
 
 
 
 -fundamental class.
This 
 
 
 
 -fundamental class is used in defining Stiefel–Whitney class.
With boundary
If M is a compact orientable manifold with boundary, then the top relative homology group is again infinite cyclic 
 
 
 
 , and the notion of the fundamental class is extended to the relative case.
Poincaré duality
For any abelian group 
 
 
 
  and non negative integer 
 
 
 
  one can obtain an isomorphism


 
  . using the cap product of the fundamental class and the 
 
 
 
  -homology group . This isomorphism gives Poincaré duality:


 
  . Poincaré duality is extended to the relative case .
See also Twisted Poincaré duality
Applications
In the Bruhat decomposition of the flag variety of a Lie group, the fundamental class corresponds to the top-dimension Schubert cell, or equivalently the longest element of a Coxeter group.
See also

Longest element of a Coxeter group
Poincaré duality

External links

Fundamental class at the Manifold Atlas.
The Encyclopedia of Mathematics article on the fundamental class.

"
Category:Algebraic topology


