


Plücker embedding




Plücker embedding

In mathematics, the Plücker embedding describes a method to realize the Grassmannian of all r-dimensional subspaces of an n-dimensional vector space V as a subvariety of the projective space of the rth exterior power of that vector space, P(∧r V).
The Plücker embedding was first defined, in the case r = 2, n = 4, in coordinates by Julius Plücker as a way of describing the lines in three-dimensional space (which, as projective lines in real projective space, correspond to two-dimensional subspaces of a four-dimensional vector space). This was generalized by Hermann Grassmann to arbitrary r and n using a generalization of Plücker's coordinates, sometimes called Grassmann coordinates.
Definition
The Plücker embedding (over the field K) is the map ι defined by



where Gr(r, Kn) is the Grassmannian, i.e., the space of all r-dimensional subspaces of the n-dimensional vector space, Kn.
This is an isomorphism from the Grassmannian to the image of ι, which is a projective variety. This variety can be completely characterized as an intersection of quadrics, each coming from a relation on the Plücker (or Grassmann) coordinates that derives from linear algebra.
The bracket ring appears as the ring of polynomial functions on the exterior power.1
Plücker Relations
The embedding of the Grassmannian satisfies some very simple quadratic polynomials called the Plücker relations. These show that the Grassmannian embeds as an algebraic subvariety of  and give another method of constructing the Grassmannian. To state the Plücker relations, choose two 
 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  with bases  and  respectively. Then, for any integer 
 
 
 
 , the following equation is true in the homogeneous coordinate ring of :



When 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , the simplest Grassmannian which is not a projective space, the above reduces to a single equation. Denoting the coordinates of  by , we have that 
 
 
 
  is defined by the equation

 0.}}


In general, however, many more equations are needed to define the Plücker embedding of a Grassmannian in projective space.
References



Further reading



"
Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Differential geometry



↩




