


Pairing




Pairing

The concept of pairing treated here occurs in mathematics.
Definition
Let R be a commutative ring with unity, and let M, N and L be three R-modules.
A pairing is any R-bilinear map 
 
 
 
 . That is, it satisfies


 
 ,


 
  and 
 
 

for any 
 
 
 
  and any 
 
 
 
  and any 
 
 
 
 . Or equivalently, a pairing is an R-linear map



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the tensor product of M and N.
A pairing can also be considered as an R-linear map 
 
 
 
 , which matches the first definition by setting 
 
 
 
 .
A pairing is called perfect if the above map 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism of R-modules.
If 
 
 
 
  a pairing is called alternating if for the above map we have 
 
 
 
 .
A pairing is called non-degenerate if for the above map we have that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
Any scalar product on a real vector space V is a pairing (set M = N = V, R = R in the above definitions).
The determinant map (2 × 2 matrices over k) → k can be seen as a pairing 
 
 
 
 .
The Hopf map 
 
 
 
  written as 
 
 
 
  is an example of a pairing. In A nontrivial pairing of finite T0 spaces Authors: Hardie K.A.1; Vermeulen J.J.C.; Witbooi P.J.
Source: Topology and its Applications, Volume 125, Number 3, 20 November 2002 , pp. 533-542(10)
 for instance, Hardie et al. present an explicit construction of the map using poset models.
Pairings in cryptography
In cryptography, often the following specialized definition is used:1
Let 
 
 
 
  be additive groups and 
 
 
 
  a multiplicative group, all of prime order

 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be generators of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively.
A pairing is a map
 
 

for which the following holds:

Bilinearity


Non-degeneracy


For practical purposes, 
 
 
 
  has to be computable in an efficient manner

Note that is also common in cryptographic literature for all groups to be written in multiplicative notation.
In cases when 
 
 
 
 , the pairing is called symmetric. If, furthermore, 
 
 
 
  is cyclic, the map 
 
 
 
  will be commutative; that is, for any 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
 . This is because for a generator 
 
 
 
 , there exist integers 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Therefore 
 
 
 
 .
The Weil pairing is an important pairing in elliptic curve cryptography; e.g., it may be used to attack certain elliptic curves (see MOV attack). It and other pairings have been used to develop identity-based encryption schemes.
Slightly different usages of the notion of pairing
Scalar products on complex vector spaces are sometimes called pairings, although they are not bilinear. For example, in representation theory, one has a scalar product on the characters of complex representations of a finite group which is frequently called character pairing.
References


External links

The Pairing-Based Crypto Lounge

de:Bilineare Abbildung"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Module theory Category:Pairing-based cryptography



Dan Boneh, Matthew K. Franklin, Identity-Based Encryption from the Weil Pairing Advances in Cryptology - Proceedings of CRYPTO 2001 (2001)




