


Heine–Cantor theorem




Heine–Cantor theorem

In mathematics, the Heine–Cantor theorem, named after Eduard Heine and Georg Cantor, states that if f : M → N is a continuous function between two metric spaces, and M is compact, then f is uniformly continuous. An important special case is that every continuous function from a closed interval to the real numbers is uniformly continuous.
Proof
Suppose that M and N are two metric spaces with metrics dM and dN, respectively. Suppose further that 
 
 
 
  is continuous, and that M is compact. We want to show that f is uniformly continuous, that is, for every 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  such that for all points x,y in the domain M, 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
 .
Fix some positive 
 
 
 
 . Then by continuity, for any point x in our domain M, there exists a positive real number 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  when y is within 
 
 
 
  of x.
Let Ux be the open 
 
 
 
 -neighborhood of x, i.e. the set



Since each point x is contained in its own Ux, we find that the collection 
 
 
 
  is an open cover of M. Since M is compact, this cover has a finite subcover. That subcover must be of the form



for some finite set of points 
 
 
 
 . Each of these open sets has an associated radius 
 
 
 
 . Let us now define 
 
 
 
 , i.e. the minimum radius of these open sets. Since we have a finite number of positive radii, this number 
 
 
 
  is well-defined. We may now show that this 
 
 
 
  works for the definition of uniform continuity.
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  for any two x,y in M. Since the sets 
 
 
 
  form an open (sub)cover of our space M, we know that x must lie within one of them, say 
 
 
 
 . Then we have that 
 
 
 
 . The Triangle Inequality then implies that



implying that x and y are both at most 
 
 
 
  away from xi. By definition of 
 
 
 
 , this implies that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both less than 
 
 
 
 . Applying the Triangle Inequality then yields the desired



For an alternative proof in the case of M = [a, b] a closed interval, see the article on non-standard calculus.
External links




"
Category:Continuous mappings Category:Metric geometry Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Articles containing proofs


