


Jacobian conjecture




Jacobian conjecture

In mathematics, the Jacobian conjecture is a celebrated problem on polynomials in several variables. It was first posed in 1939 by Ott-Heinrich Keller. It was later named and widely publicised by Shreeram Abhyankar, as an example of a question in the area of algebraic geometry that requires little beyond a knowledge of calculus to state.
The Jacobian conjecture is notorious for the large number of attempted proofs that turned out to contain subtle errors. As of 2015, there are no plausible claims to have proved it. Even the two variable case has resisted all efforts. There are no known compelling reasons for believing it to be true, and according to  there are some suspicions that the conjecture is in fact false for large numbers of variables.
The Jacobian determinant
Let N > 1 be a fixed integer and consider the polynomials f1, ..., fN in variables X1, ..., XN with coefficients in a field k. Then we define a vector-valued function F: kN → kN by setting:

F(c1, ..., cN) = (f1(c1, ...,cN),..., fN(c1,...,cN))
 

The Jacobian determinant of F, denoted by JF, is defined as the determinant of the N × N Jacobian matrix consisting of the partial derivatives of fi with respect to Xj:



then JF is itself a polynomial function of the N variables X1, ..., XN.
Formulation of the conjecture
It follows from the multivariable chain rule that if F has a polynomial inverse function G: kN → kN, then JF has a polynomial reciprocal (so is a nonzero constant).
The Jacobian conjecture is the following partial converse:

Jacobian conjecture: If JF is a non-zero constant and k has characteristic 0, then F has an inverse function G: kN → kN, and G is regular (in the sense that its components are given by polynomial expressions).

The obvious analogue of the Jacobian conjecture fails if k has characteristic p > 0 even for 1 variable, as the polynomial x - xp has derivative 1 but no inverse function.
For real maps, the condition JF ≠ 0 is related to the inverse function theorem in multivariable calculus. In fact for smooth functions (and so in particular for polynomials) a smooth local inverse function to F exists at every point where JF is non-zero. The example x + x3 has a smooth global inverse.
Results
proved the Jacobian conjecture for polynomials of degree 2, and  showed that the general case follows from the special case where the polynomials are of degree 3, more particularly, of the form F = (X1 + H1, ..., Xn + Hn), where each Hi is either zero or a homogeneous cubic.  showed that one may further assume that the nonzero Hi are cubes of homogeneous linear polynomials. These reductions introduce additional variables and so are not available for fixed N.
proved that if the Jacobian conjecture is false, then it has a counterexample with integer coefficients and Jacobian determinant 1. In consequence, the Jacobian conjecture is true either for all fields of characteristic 0 or for none. For fixed N it is true if it holds for at least one algebraically closed field of characteristic 0.
checked the conjecture for polynomials of degree at most 100 in two variables.
and  showed that it is enough to prove the Jacobian Conjecture for complex maps with a symmetric Jacobian matrix.
The strong real Jacobian conjecture was that a real polynomial map with a nowhere vanishing Jacobian determinant has a smooth global inverse. That is equivalent to asking whether such a map is topologically a proper map, in which case it is a covering map of a simply connected manifold, hence invertible.  constructed two variable counterexamples of total degree 25 and higher.
and  showed that the Jacobian conjecture is equivalent to the Dixmier conjecture.
suggested modifying the Jacobian conjecture in characteristic p>0 by adding the condition that the degree of a certain field extension associated to F is not divisible by p.
References


















External links

Web page of T. T. Moh on the conjecture

"
Category:Polynomials Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Conjectures


