


Dual basis




Dual basis

In linear algebra, given a vector space V with a basis B of vectors indexed by an index set I (the cardinality of I is the dimensionality of V), its dual set is a set B∗ of vectors in the dual space V∗ with the same index set I such that B and B∗ form a biorthogonal system. The dual set is always linearly independent but does not necessarily span V∗. If it does span V∗, then B∗ is called the dual basis for the basis B.
Denoting the indexed vector sets as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , being biorthogonal means that the elements pair to 1 if the indexes are equal, and to zero otherwise. Symbolically, evaluating a dual vector in V∗ on a vector in the original space V:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta symbol.
A categorical and algebraic construction of the dual space
Another way to introduce the dual space of a vector space (module) is by introducing it in a categorical sense. To do this, let 
 
 
 
  be a module defined over the ring 
 
 
 
  (that is, 
 
 
 
  is an object in the category 
 
 
 
 ). Then we define the dual space of 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 , to be 
 
 
 
 , the module formed of all 
 
 
 
 -linear module homomorphisms from 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 . Note then that we may define a dual to the dual, referred to as the double dual of 
 
 
 
 , written as 
 
 
 
 , and defined as 
 
 
 
 .
To formally construct a basis for the dual space, we shall now restrict our view to the case where 
 
 
 
  is a finite-dimensional free (left) 
 
 
 
 -module, where 
 
 
 
  is a ring of unity. Then, we assume that the set 
 
 
 
  is a basis for 
 
 
 
 . From here, we define the Kronecker Delta function 
 
 
 
  over the basis 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . Then the set 
 
 
 
  describes a linearly independent set with each 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional, the basis 
 
 
 
  is of finite cardinality. Then, the set 
 
 
 
  is a basis to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a free (right) 
 
 
 
 -module.
Existence and uniqueness
The dual set always exists and gives an injection from V into V∗, namely the mapping that sends vi to vi. This says, in particular, that the dual space has dimension greater or equal to that of V.
However, the dual set of an infinite-dimensional V does not span its dual space V∗. For example, consider the map w in V∗ from V into the underlying scalars F given by  for all i. This map is clearly nonzero on all vi. If w were a finite linear combination of the dual basis vectors vi, say 
 
 
 
  for a finite subset K of I, then for any j not in K, 
 
 
 
 , contradicting the definition of w. So, this w does not lie in the span of the dual set.
The dual of an infinite-dimensional space has greater dimensionality (this being a greater infinite cardinality) than the original space has, and thus these cannot have a basis with the same indexing set. However, a dual set of vectors exists, which defines a subspace of the dual isomorphic to the original space. Further, for topological vector spaces, a continuous dual space can be defined, in which case a dual basis may exist.

Finite-dimensional vector spaces

In the case of finite-dimensional vector spaces, the dual set is always a dual basis and it is unique. These bases are denoted by  and . If one denotes the evaluation of a covector on a vector as a pairing, the biorthogonality condition becomes:



The association of a dual basis with a basis gives a map from the space of bases of V to the space of bases of V∗, and this is also an isomorphism. For topological fields such as the real numbers, the space of duals is a topological space, and this gives a homeomorphism between the Stiefel manifolds of bases of these spaces.
Introduction
To perform operations with a vector, we must have a straightforward method of calculating its components. In a Cartesian frame the necessary operation is simple dot product by the base vector.
e.g. 
 
 

where 
 
 
 
  is the bases in Cartesian frame.The components of 
 
 
 
  can be found by



In non-Cartesian frame, we do not necessarily have ei·ej=0 for all i≠j. However, it may still be possible to find a vector ei such that


 
 .
the equality holds when ei is the dual base of ei
In Cartesian frame, we have 
 
 

Examples
For example, the standard basis vectors of R2 (the Cartesian plane) are


 
  and the standard basis vectors of its dual space R2* are



In 3-dimensional Euclidean space, for a given basis {e1, e2, e3}, you can find the biorthogonal (dual) basis {e1, e2, e3} by formulas below:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the transpose and



is the volume of the parallelepiped formed by the basis vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

See also

Reciprocal lattice
Miller index
Zone axis

References



he:מרחב דואלי#הבסיס הדואלי zh:对偶基"
Category:Linear algebra


