


Saddle point




Saddle point

  In mathematics, a saddle point is a point in the domain of a function that is a stationary point but not a local extremum. The name derives from the fact that the prototypical example in two dimensions is a surface that curves up in one direction, and curves down in a different direction, resembling a saddle or a mountain pass. In terms of contour lines, a saddle point in two dimensions gives rise to a contour that appears to intersect itself.
Mathematical discussion
A simple criterion for checking if a given stationary point of a real-valued function F(x,y) of two real variables is a saddle point is to compute the function's Hessian matrix at that point: if the Hessian is indefinite, then that point is a saddle point. For example, the Hessian matrix of the function 
 
 
 
  at the stationary point 
 
 
 
  is the matrix


 
  which is indefinite. Therefore, this point is a saddle point. This criterion gives only a sufficient condition. For example, the point 
 
 
 
  is a saddle point for the function 
 
 
 
  but the Hessian matrix of this function at the origin is the null matrix, which is not indefinite.
In the most general terms, a saddle point for a smooth function (whose graph is a curve, surface or hypersurface) is a stationary point such that the curve/surface/etc. in the neighborhood of that point is not entirely on any side of the tangent space at that point. 
In one dimension, a saddle point is a point which is both a stationary point and a point of inflection. Since it is a point of inflection, it is not a local extremum.
Other uses
In dynamical systems, if the dynamic is given by a differentiable map f then a point is hyperbolic if and only if the differential of ƒ n (where n is the period of the point) has no eigenvalue on the (complex) unit circle when computed at the point. Then a saddle point is a hyperbolic periodic point whose stable and unstable manifolds have a dimension that is not zero.
In a two-player zero sum game defined on a continuous space, the equilibrium point is a saddle point.
A saddle point of a matrix is an element which is both the largest element in its column and the smallest element in its row.
For a second-order linear autonomous systems, a critical point is a saddle point if the characteristic equation has one positive and one negative real eigenvalue.1
See also

Saddle-point method is an extension of Laplace's method for approximating integrals
Extremum
First derivative test
Second derivative test
Higher-order derivative test
Saddle surface
Hyperbolic equilibrium point
Sion's minimax theorem
Mountain pass
Max–min inequality

Notes


References







"
Category:Differential geometry of surfaces Category:Multivariable calculus Category:Stability theory Category:Analytic geometry



↩




