


Graph homomorphism




Graph homomorphism

In the mathematical field of graph theory a graph homomorphism is a mapping between two graphs that respects their structure. More concretely it maps adjacent vertices to adjacent vertices.
Definitions
A graph homomorphism

 
  from a graph 
 
 
 
  to a graph 
 
 
 
 , written 
 
 
 
 , is a mapping 
 
 
 
 
  from the vertex set of 
 
 
 
  to the vertex set of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 .
The above definition is extended to directed graphs. Then, for a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is an arc of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is an arc of 
 
 
 
 .
If there exists a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 
  we shall write 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  otherwise. If 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is said to be homomorphic to 
 
 
 
 
  or 

 
 -colourable.
If the homomorphism 
 
 
 
  is a bijection whose inverse function is also a graph homomorphism, then 
 
 
 
  is a graph isomorphism.
Two graphs 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are homomorphically equivalent if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
A retract of a graph 
 
 
 
  is a subgraph

 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  such that there exists a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , called retraction with 
 
 
 
  for any vertex 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 . A core is a graph which does not retract to a proper subgraph. Any graph is homomorphically equivalent to a unique core.
Properties
The composition of homomorphisms are homomorphisms.
Graph homomorphism preserves connectedness.
The tensor product of graphs is the category-theoretic product for the category of graphs and graph homomorphisms.
Connection to coloring and girth
A graph coloring is an assignment of one of k colors to each vertex of a graph G so that the endpoints of each edge have different colors, for some number k. Any coloring corresponds to a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 
  from G to a complete graph Kk: the vertices of Kk correspond to the colors of G, and f maps each vertex of G with color c to the vertex of Kk that corresponds to c. This is a valid homomorphism because the endpoints of each edge of G are mapped to distinct vertices of Kk, and every two distinct vertices of Kk are connected by an edge, so every edge in G is mapped to an adjacent pair of vertices in Kk. Conversely if f is a homomorphism from G to Kk, then one can color G by using the same color for two vertices in G whenever they are both mapped to the same vertex in Kk. Because Kk has no edges that connect a vertex to itself, it is not possible for two adjacent vertices in G to both be mapped to the same vertex in Kk, so this gives a valid coloring. That is, G has a k-coloring if and only if it has a homomorphism to Kk.
If there are two homomorphisms 
 
 
 
 , then their composition 
 
 
 
  is also a homomorphism. In other words, if a graph G can be colored with k colors, and there is a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , then H can also be k-colored. Therefore, whenever a homomorphism 
 
 
 
  exists, the chromatic number of H is less than or equal to the chromatic number of G.
Homomorphisms can also be used very similarly to characterize the odd girth of a graph G, the length of its shortest odd-length cycle. The odd girth is, equivalently, the smallest odd number g for which there exists a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 
 . For this reason, if 
 
 
 
 , then the odd girth of G is greater than or equal to the corresponding invariant of H.1
Complexity
The associated decision problem, i.e. deciding whether there exists a homomorphism from one graph to another, is NP-complete. Determining whether there is an isomorphism between two graphs is also an important problem in computational complexity theory; see graph isomorphism problem.
See also

Hadwiger's conjecture.
Graph rewriting
Median graphs, definable as the retracts of hypercubes.

Notes
References




"
Category:Graph theory Category:Morphisms



, p. 7.




