


Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai




Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai

Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai (1901–1950) was an Nagercoil native Indian mathematician specialising in number theory. His contribution to Waring's problem was described in 1950 by K. S. Chandrasekharan as "almost certainly his best piece of work and one of the very best achievements in Indian Mathematics since Ramanujan".1
Biography
Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai was born to parents Subbayya Pillai and Gomati Ammal who were natives of Nagercoil. His mother died a year after his birth and his father when Pillai was in his last year at school.2
Pillai did his Intermediate course in the Scott Christian College at Nagercoil3 and managed to earn a B.A. degree from Maharaja's college, Trivandrum.4
In 1927, Pillai was awarded a research fellowship at the University of Madras to work among professors K. Ananda Rau and Ramaswamy S. Vaidyanathaswamy. He was from 1929 to 1941 at Annamalai University where he worked as a lecturer. It was in Annamalai University that he did his major work in Waring's problem.5 In 1941 he went to the University of Travancore and a year later to the University of Calcutta as a lecturer (where he was at the invitation of Friedrich Wilhelm Levi).6
For his achievements he was invited in August 1950, for a year to visit the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, USA. He was also invited to participate in the International Congress of Mathematicians at Harvard University as a delegate of the Madras University but he died in an air crash in Cairo on the way to the conference.7
Contributions
He proved the Waring's problem for 
 
 
 
  in 19358 under the further condition of 
 
 
 
  ahead of Leonard Eugene Dickson who around the same time proved it for 
 
 
9
He showed that 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the largest natural number 
 
 
 
  and hence computed the precise value of 
 
 
 
 .10
References
"
Category:1901 births Category:1950 deaths Category:Indian mathematicians Category:20th-century mathematicians Category:Number theorists Category:Tamil people Category:University of Calcutta faculty Category:Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars Category:University of Madras faculty Category:Annamalai University faculty



↩


↩

Raghavan Narasimhan The coming of age of mathematics in India, in Michael Atiyah u.a. Miscellanea Mathematica, Springer Verlag 1991, S. 250f↩
↩
↩
↩





