


H-cobordism




H-cobordism

In geometric topology and differential topology, an (n+1)-dimensional cobordism W between n-dimensional manifolds M and N is an h-cobordism (the h stands for homotopy equivalence) if the inclusion maps



are homotopy equivalences.
The h-cobordism theorem gives sufficient conditions for an h-cobordism to be trivial, i.e., to be Cat-isomorphic to the cylinder M × [0, 1]. Here Cat refers to any of the categories of smooth, piecewise linear, or topological manifolds.
The theorem was first proved by Stephen Smale for which he received the Fields Medal and is the fundamental result in the theory of high-dimensional manifolds. For a start, it almost immediately proves the Generalized Poincaré Conjecture.
Background
Before Smale proved this theorem, mathematicians became stuck while trying to understand manifolds of dimension 3 or 4, and assumed that the higher-dimensional cases were even harder. The h-cobordism theorem showed that (simply connected) manifolds of dimension at least 5 are much easier than those of dimension 3 or 4. The proof of the theorem depends on the "Whitney trick" of Hassler Whitney, which geometrically untangles homologically-tangled spheres of complementary dimension in a manifold of dimension >5. An informal reason why manifolds of dimension 3 or 4 are unusually hard is that the trick fails to work in lower dimensions, which have no room for untanglement.
Precise statement of the h-cobordism theorem
Let n be at least 5 and let W be a compact (n+1)-dimensional h-cobordism between M and N in the category Cat=Diff, PL, or Top such that W, M and N are simply connected, then W is Cat-isomorphic to M × [0, 1]. The isomorphism can be chosen to be the identity on M × {0}.
This means that the homotopy equivalence between M, W, and N is homotopic to a Cat-isomorphism.
Low dimensions
For n = 4, the h-cobordism theorem is true topologically (proved by Michael Freedman using a 4-dimensional Whitney trick) but is false PL and smoothly (as shown by Simon Donaldson).
For n = 3, the h-cobordism theorem for smooth manifolds has not been proved and, due to the Poincaré conjecture, is equivalent to the hard open question of whether the 4-sphere has non-standard smooth structures.
For n = 2, the h-cobordism theorem1 is true – it is equivalent to the Poincaré conjecture, which has been proved by Grigori Perelman.
For n = 1, h-cobordism theorem is vacuously true, since there is no closed simply-connected 1-dimensional manifold.
For n = 0, the h-cobordism theorem is trivially true: the interval is the only connected cobordism between connected 0-manifolds.
A proof sketch
A Morse function

 
  induces a handle decomposition of W, i.e., if there is a single critical point of index k in 
 
 
 
 , then the ascending cobordism 
 
 
 
  is obtained from 
 
 
 
  by attaching a k-handle. The goal of the proof is to find a handle decomposition with no handles at all so that integrating the non-zero gradient vector field of f gives the desired diffeomorphism to the trivial cobordism.
This is achieved through a series of techniques.
1) Handle Rearrangement
First, we want to rearrange all handles by order so that lower order handles are attached first. The question is thus when can we slide an i-handle off of a j-handle? This can be done by a radial isotopy so long as the i attaching sphere and the j belt sphere do not intersect. We thus want 
 
 
 
  which is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 .
We then define the handle chain complex 
 
 
 
  by letting 
 
 
 
  be the free abelian group on the k-handles and defining 
 
 
 
  by sending a k-handle 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the intersection number of the k-attaching sphere and the (k-1)-belt sphere.
2) Handle Cancellation
Next, we want to "cancel" handles. The idea is that attaching a k-handle 
 
 
 
  might create a hole that can be filled in by attaching a (k+1)-handle 
 
 
 
 . This would imply that 
 
 
 
  and so the 
 
 
 
  entry in the matrix of 
 
 
 
  would be 
 
 
 
 . However, when is this condition sufficient? That is, when can we geometrically cancel handels if this condition is true? The answer lies in carefully analyzing when the manifold remains simply-connected after removing the attaching and belt spheres in question, and finding an embedded disk using the Whitney trick. This analysis leads to the requirement that n must be at least 5. Moreover, during the proof one requires that the cobordism has no 0-,1-,n-, or (n+1)-handles which is obtained by the next technique.
3) Handle Trading
The idea of handle trading is to create a cancelling pair of (k+1)- and (k+2)-handles so that a given k-handle cancels with the (k+1)-handle leaving behind the (k+2)-handle. To do this, consider the core of the k-handle which is an element in 
 
 
 
 . This group is trivial since W is an h-cobordism. Thus, there is a disk 
 
 
 
  which we can fatten to a cancelling pair as desired, so long as we can embed this disk into the boundary of W. This embedding exists if 
 
 
 
 . Since we are assuming n is at least 5 this means that k is either 0 or 1. Finally, by considering the negative of the given Morse function, -f, we can turn the handle decomposition upside down and also remove the n- and (n+1)-handles as desired.
4) Handle Sliding
Finally, we want to make sure that doing row and column operations on 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a geometric operation. Indeed, it isn't hard to show (best done by drawing a picture) that sliding a k-handle 
 
 
 
  over another k-handle 
 
 
 
  replaces 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  in the basis for 
 
 
 
 .
The proof of the theorem now follows: the handle chain complex is exact since 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  since the 
 
 
 
  are free. Then 
 
 
 
 , which is an integer matrix, restricts to an invertible morphism which can thus be diagonalized via elementary row operations (handle sliding) and must have only 
 
 
 
  on the diagonal because it is invertible. Thus, all handles are paired with a single other cancelling handle yielding a decomposition with no handles.
The s-cobordism theorem
If the assumption that M and N are simply connected is dropped, h-cobordisms need not be cylinders; the obstruction is exactly the Whitehead torsion τ (W, M) of the inclusion 
 
 
 
 .
Precisely, the s-cobordism theorem (the s stands for simple-homotopy equivalence), proved independently by Barry Mazur, John Stallings, and Dennis Barden, states (assumptions as above but where M and N need not be simply connected):

An h-cobordism is a cylinder if and only if Whitehead torsion τ (W, M) vanishes.
 

The torsion vanishes if and only if the inclusion 
 
 
 
  is not just a homotopy equivalence, but a simple homotopy equivalence.
Note that one need not assume that the other inclusion 
 
 
 
  is also a simple homotopy equivalence—that follows from the theorem.
Categorically, h-cobordisms form a groupoid.
Then a finer statement of the s-cobordism theorem is that the isomorphism classes of this groupoid (up to Cat-isomorphism of h-cobordisms) are torsors for the respective2 Whitehead groups Wh(π), where $\pi \cong \pi_1(M) \cong \pi_1(W) \cong \pi_1(N).$
Notes


See also

Semi-s-cobordism

References

Freedman, Michael H.; Quinn, Frank, Topology of 4-manifolds, Princeton Mathematical Series, vol. 39, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1990. viii+259 pp. ISBN 0-691-08577-3. This does the theorem for topological 4-manifolds.
Milnor, John, Lectures on the h-cobordism theorem, notes by L. Siebenmann and J. Sondow, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1965. v+116 pp. This gives the proof for smooth manifolds.
Rourke, Colin Patrick; Sanderson, Brian Joseph, Introduction to piecewise-linear topology, Springer Study Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1982. ISBN 3-540-11102-6. This proves the theorem for PL manifolds.
S. Smale, "On the structure of manifolds" Amer. J. Math., 84 (1962) pp. 387–399


"
Category:Differential topology Category:Surgery theory



In 3 dimensions and below, the categories are the same: Diff = PL = Top.↩
Note that identifying the Whitehead groups of the various manifolds requires that one choose base points $m\in M, n\in N$ and a path in W connecting them.↩




