


Total variation




Total variation

(Figure)
As the green ball travels on the graph of the given function, the length of the path travelled by that ball's projection on the y-axis, shown as a red ball, is the total variation of the function.

In mathematics, the total variation identifies several slightly different concepts, related to the (local or global) structure of the codomain of a function or a measure. For a real-valued continuous function f, defined on an interval [a, b] ⊂ ℝ, its total variation on the interval of definition is a measure of the one-dimensional arclength of the curve with parametric equation x ↦ f(x), for x ∈ [a, b].
Historical note
The concept of total variation for functions of one real variable was first introduced by Camille Jordan in the paper .1 He used the new concept in order to prove a convergence theorem for Fourier series of discontinuous periodic functions whose variation is bounded. The extension of the concept to functions of more than one variable however is not simple for various reasons.
Definitions
Total variation for functions of one real variable
1|Definition 1.1. The total variation of a real-valued (or more generally complex-valued) function 

, defined on an interval

 
  is the quantity



where the supremum runs over the set of all partitions

 
  of the given interval.
Total variation for functions of n > 1 real variables
2|Definition 1.2. Let Ω be an open subset of ℝn. Given a function f belonging to L1(Ω), the total variation of f in Ω is defined as



where 
 
 
 
  is the set of continuously differentiable vector functions of compact support contained in 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the essential supremum norm. Note that this definition does not require that the domain

 
  of the given function is a bounded set.
Total variation in measure theory
Classical total variation definition
Following , consider a signed measure 

 on a measurable space

 
 : then it is possible to define two set functions

 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively called upper variation and lower variation, as follows






clearly


3|Definition 1.3. The variation (also called absolute variation) of the signed measure 

 is the set function



and its total variation is defined as the value of this measure on the whole space of definition, i.e.



Modern definition of total variation norm
uses upper and lower variations to prove the Hahn–Jordan decomposition: according to his version of this theorem, the upper and lower variation are respectively a non-negative and a non-positive measure. Using a more modern notation, define






Then 

 and 

 are two non-negative measures such that






The last measure is sometimes called, by abuse of notation, total variation measure.
Total variation norm of complex measures
If the measure 

 is complex-valued i.e. is a complex measure, its upper and lower variation cannot be defined and the Hahn–Jordan decomposition theorem can only be applied to its real and imaginary parts. However, it is possible to follow  and define the total variation of the complex-valued measure 

 as follows
4|Definition 1.4. The variation of the complex-valued measure 

 is the set function



where the supremum is taken over all partitions 

 of a measurable set 

 into a finite number of disjoint measurable subsets.
This definition coincides with the above definition 

 for the case of real-valued signed measures.
Total variation norm of vector-valued measures
The variation so defined is a positive measure (see ) and coincides with the one defined by  when 

 is a signed measure: its total variation is defined as above. This definition works also if 

 is a vector measure: the variation is then defined by the following formula



where the supremum is as above. Note also that this definition is slightly more general than the one given by  since it requires only to consider finite partitions of the space 

: this implies that it can be used also to define the total variation on finite-additive measures.
Total variation of probability measures
The total variation of any probability measure is exactly one, therefore it is not interesting as a means of investigating the properties of such measures. However, when μ and ν are probability measures, the total variation distance of probability measures can be defined as 

 where the norm is the total variation norm of signed measures. Using the property that 

, we eventually arrive at the equivalent definition



and its values are non-trivial. Informally, this is the largest possible difference between the probabilities that the two probability distributions can assign to the same event. For a categorical distribution it is possible to write the total variation distance as follows



The total variational distance for categorical probability distributions is called statistical distance: sometimes, in the definition of this distance, the factor 
 
 
 
  is omitted.
Basic properties
Total variation of differentiable functions
The total variation of a differentiable function

 
  can be expressed as an integral involving the given function instead of as the supremum of the functionals of definitions  and .
The form of the total variation of a differentiable function of one variable
5|Theorem 1. The total variation of a differentiable function 

, defined on an interval

 
 , has the following expression if 

 is Riemann integrable



The form of the total variation of a differentiable function of several variables
6|Theorem 2. Given a differentiable function 

 defined on a bounded open set

 
 , the total variation of 
 
 
 has the following expression



Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the 
 
 
 
 -norm.
Proof
The first step in the proof is to first prove an equality which follows from the Gauss-Ostrogradsky theorem.
Lemma
Under the conditions of the theorem, the following equality holds:



Proof of the lemma
From the Gauss-Ostrogradsky theorem:


 
  by substituting 
 
 
 
 , we have:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is zero on the border of 
 
 
 
  by definition:















Proof of the equality
Under the conditions of the theorem, from the lemma we have:


 
  in the last part 
 
 
 
  could be omitted, because by definition its essential supremum is at most one.
On the other hand we consider 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which is the up to 
 
 
 
  approximation of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  with the same integral. We can do this since 
 
 
 
  is dense in 
 
 
 
 . Now again substituting into the lemma:


 
  This means we have a convergent sequence of 
 
 
 
  that tends to 
 
 
 
  as well as we know that 
 
 
 
 . q.e.d.
It can be seen from the proof that the supremum is attained when



The function 

 is said to be of bounded variation precisely if its total variation is finite.
Total variation of a measure
The total variation is a norm defined on the space of measures of bounded variation. The space of measures on a σ-algebra of sets is a Banach space, called the ca space, relative to this norm. It is contained in the larger Banach space, called the ba space, consisting of finitely additive (as opposed to countably additive) measures, also with the same norm. The distance function associated to the norm gives rise to the total variation distance between two measures μ and ν.
For finite measures on ℝ, the link between the total variation of a measure μ and the total variation of a function, as described above, goes as follows. Given μ, define a function 
 
 
 
  by


 
  Then, the total variation of the signed measure μ is equal to the total variation, in the above sense, of the function φ. In general, the total variation of a signed measure can be defined using Jordan's decomposition theorem by


 
  for any signed measure μ on a measurable space 
 
 
 
 .
Applications
Total variation can be seen as a non-negative real-valued functional defined on the space of real-valued functions (for the case of functions of one variable) or on the space of integrable functions (for the case of functions of several variables). As a functional, total variation finds applications in several branches of mathematics and engineering, like optimal control, numerical analysis, and calculus of variations, where the solution to a certain problem has to minimize its value. As an example, use of the total variation functional is common in the following two kind of problems

Numerical analysis of differential equations: it is the science of finding approximate solutions to differential equations. Applications of total variation to this problems are detailed in the article "total variation diminishing"


Image denoising: in image processing, denoising is a collection of methods used to reduce the noise in an image reconstructed from data obtained by electronic means, for example data transmission or sensing. "Total variation denoising" is the name for the application of total variation to image noise reduction; further details can be found in the papers of  and . A sensible extension of this model to colour images, called Colour TV, can be found in .

See also

Bounded variation
Total variation diminishing
Total variation denoising
Quadratic variation
Total variation distance of probability measures
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test

Notes
Historical references


.

.

.

.

.

.

.


(available at Gallica). This is, according to Boris Golubov, the first paper on functions of bounded variation.

.

. The paper containing the first proof of Vitali covering theorem.

References


.

. Available at Numdam.

. (available at the Polish Virtual Library of Science). English translation from the original French by Laurence Chisholm Young, with two additional notes by Stefan Banach.

.

External links
One variable

"Total variation" on Planetmath.

One and more variables

Function of bounded variation at Encyclopedia of Mathematics

Measure theory


.

.
Jordan decomposition at Encyclopedia of Mathematics

Applications


(a work dealing with total variation application in denoising problems for image processing).



.



.


Tony F. Chan and Jackie (Jianhong) Shen (2005), Image Processing and Analysis - Variational, PDE, Wavelet, and Stochastic Methods, SIAM, ISBN 0-89871-589-X (with in-depth coverage and extensive applications of Total Variations in modern image processing, as started by Rudin, Osher, and Fatemi).

"
Category:Mathematical analysis Category:Probability theory



According to .↩




