


Rotation operator (quantum mechanics)




Rotation operator (quantum mechanics)

This article concerns the rotation operator, as it appears in quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanical rotations
With every physical rotation R, we postulate a quantum mechanical rotation operator D(R) which rotates quantum mechanical states.



In terms of the generators of rotation,



 
  is rotation axis, and 
 
 
 
  is angular momentum.
The translation operator
The rotation operator

 
 , with the first argument 
 
 
 
 
  indicating the rotation axis and the second 
 
 
 
  the rotation angle, can operate through the translation operator

 
  for infinitesimal rotations as explained below. This is why, it is first shown how the translation operator is acting on a particle at position x (the particle is then in the state

 
  according to Quantum Mechanics).
Translation of the particle at position x to position x+a
 
 

Because a translation of 0 does not change the position of the particle, we have (with 1 meaning the identity operator, which does nothing):









Taylor development gives:



with



From that follows:






This is a differential equation with the solution 
 
 
 
 .
Additionally, suppose a Hamiltonian

 
  is independent of the 
 
 
 
  position. Because the translation operator can be written in terms of 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , we know that 
 
 
 
 . This result means that linear momentum for the system is conserved.
In relation to the orbital angular momentum
Classically we have for the angular momentum

 
 . This is the same in quantum mechanics considering 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  as operators. Classically, an infinitesimal rotation 
 
 
 
  of the vector r=(x,y,z) about the z-axis to r'=(x',y',z) leaving z unchanged can be expressed by the following infinitesimal translations (using Taylor approximation):






From that follows for states:







And consequently:



Using 
 
 
 
 
  from above with 
 
 
 
  and Taylor development we get:




with lz = x py - y px the z-component of the angular momentum according to the classical cross product.
To get a rotation for the angle 
 
 
 
 , we construct the following differential equation using the condition 
 
 
 
 
 :











Similar to the translation operator, if we are given a Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
  which rotationally symmetric about the z axis, 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 . This result means that angular momentum is conserved.
For the spin angular momentum about the y-axis we just replace 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
  and we get the spin rotation operator 
 
 
 
 .
Effect on the spin operator and quantum states
Operators can be represented by matrices. From linear algebra one knows that a certain matrix 
 
 
 
  can be represented in another basis through the transformation



where 
 
 
 
  is the basis transformation matrix. If the vectors 
 
 
 
 
  respectively 
 
 
 
  are the z-axis in one basis respectively another, they are perpendicular to the y-axis with a certain angle 
 
 
 
  between them. The spin operator 
 
 
 
  in the first basis can then be transformed into the spin operator 
 
 
 
  of the other basis through the following transformation:



From standard quantum mechanics we have the known results 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the top spins in their corresponding bases. So we have:






Comparison with 
 
 
 
  yields 
 
 
 
 .
This means that if the state 
 
 
 
  is rotated about the y-axis by an angle 
 
 
 
 
 , it becomes the state 
 
 
 
 , a result that can be generalized to arbitrary axes. It is important, for instance, in Sakurai's Bell inequality.
See also

Symmetry in quantum mechanics
Spherical basis

References

L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz: Quantum Mechanics: Non-Relativistic Theory, Pergamon Press, 1985
P.A.M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1958
R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands: The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Addison-Wesley, 1965

See also

Optical phase space

"
Category:Rotational symmetry Category:Quantum mechanics


