   Affine logic      Affine logic   Affine logic is a substructural logic whose proof theory rejects the structural rule of contraction . It can also be characterized as linear logic with weakening .  The name "affine logic" is associated with linear logic , to which it differs by allowing the weakening rule. Jean-Yves Girard introduced the name as part of the geometry of interaction semantics of linear logic, which characterises linear logic in terms of linear algebra; here he alludes to affine transformations on vector spaces. 1  The logic predated linear logic. V. N. Grishin used this logic in 1974, 2 after observing that Russell's paradox cannot be derived in a set theory without contraction, even with an unbounded comprehension axiom . 3 Likewise, the logic formed the basis of a decidable subtheory of predicate logic , called 'Direct logic' (Ketonen & Wehrauch, 1984; Ketonen & Bellin, 1989).  Affine logic can be embedded into linear logic by rewriting the affine arrow    A  →  B     normal-→  A  B    A\rightarrow B   as the linear arrow    A  -  ∘  B  ⊗  ⊤     fragments  A    B  tensor-product  top    A{-\!\circ}B\otimes\top   .  Whereas full linear logic (i.e. propositional linear logic with multiplicatives, additives and exponentials) is undecidable, full affine logic is decidable.  Affine logic forms the foundation of ludics .  Notes    References   V.N. Grishin, 1974. “A nonstandard logic and its application to set theory,” (Russian). Studies in Formalized Languages and Nonclassical Logics (Russian), 135-171. Izdat, “Nauka,” Moskow. .  V.N. Grishin, 1981. “Predicate and set-theoretic calculi based on logic without contraction rules,” (Russian). Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR Seriya Matematicheskaya 45(1):47-68. 239. Math. USSR Izv., 18, no.1, Moscow.  Ketonen and Weyhrauch, 1984, A decidable fragment of predicate calculus. Theoretical Computer Science 32:297-307.  Ketonen and Bellin, 1989. A decision procedure revisited: notes on Direct Logic. In Linear Logic and its Implementation .   See also   Strict logic and relevant logic  Affine type system , a substructural type system   "  Category:Substructural logic     Jean-Yves Girard , 1997. ' Affine '. Message to the TYPES mailing list. ↩  Grishin, 1974, and later, Grishin, 1981. ↩  Cf. Frederic Fitch 's demonstrably consistent set theory ↩     