


L-theory




L-theory

In mathematics algebraic L-theory is the K-theory of quadratic forms; the term was coined by C. T. C. Wall, with L being used as the letter after K. Algebraic L-theory, also known as 'hermitian K-theory', is important in surgery theory.
Definition
One can define L-groups for any ring with involution R: the quadratic L-groups 
 
 
 
  (Wall) and the symmetric L-groups 
 
 
 
  (Mishchenko, Ranicki).
Even dimension
The even-dimensional L-groups 
 
 
 
  are defined as the Witt groups of ε-quadratic forms over the ring R with 
 
 
 
 . More precisely,



is the abelian group of equivalence classes 
 
 
 
  of non-degenerate ε-quadratic forms 
 
 
 
  over R, where the underlying R-modules F are finitely generated free. The equivalence relation is given by stabilization with respect to hyperbolic ε-quadratic forms:


 
 .
The addition in 
 
 
 
  is defined by



The zero element is represented by 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 . The inverse of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Odd dimension
Defining odd-dimensional L-groups is more complicated; further details and the definition of the odd-dimensional L-groups can be found in the references mentioned below.
Examples and applications
The L-groups of a group 
 
 
 
  are the L-groups 
 
 
 
  of the group ring

 
 . In the applications to topology 
 
 
 
  is the fundamental group

 
  of a space 
 
 
 
 . The quadratic L-groups 
 
 
 
  play a central role in the surgery classification of the homotopy types of 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifolds of dimension 
 
 
 
 , and in the formulation of the Novikov conjecture.
The distinction between symmetric L-groups and quadratic L-groups, indicated by upper and lower indices, reflects the usage in group homology and cohomology. The group cohomology

 
  of the cyclic group 
 
 
 
  deals with the fixed points of a 
 
 
 
 -action, while the group homology

 
  deals with the orbits of a 
 
 
 
 -action; compare 
 
 
 
  (fixed points) and 
 
 
 
  (orbits, quotient) for upper/lower index notation.
The quadratic L-groups
 
 
 
  and the symmetric L-groups
 
 
 
  are related by a symmetrization map 
 
 
 
  which is an isomorphism modulo 2-torsion, and which corresponds to the polarization identities.
The quadratic L-groups are 4-fold periodic. Symmetric L-groups are not 4-periodic in general (see Ranicki, page 12), though they are for the integers.
In view of the applications to the classification of manifolds there are extensive calculations of the quadratic 
 
 
 
 -groups 
 
 
 
 . For finite 
 
 
 
  algebraic methods are used, and mostly geometric methods (e.g. controlled topology) are used for infinite 
 
 
 
 .
More generally, one can define L-groups for any additive category with a chain duality, as in Ranicki (section 1).
Integers
The simply connected L-groups are also the L-groups of the integers, as 
 
 
 
  for both 
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  For quadratic L-groups, these are the surgery obstructions to simply connected surgery.
The quadratic L-groups of the integers are:


 
 
  In doubly even dimension (4k), the quadratic L-groups detect the signature; in singly even dimension (4k+2), the L-groups detect the Arf invariant (topologically the Kervaire invariant).
The symmetric L-groups of the integers are:


 
 
  In doubly even dimension (4k), the symmetric L-groups, as with the quadratic L-groups, detect the signature; in dimension (4k+1), the L-groups detect the de Rham invariant.
References





"
Category:Geometric topology Category:Algebraic topology Category:Quadratic forms Category:Surgery theory


