


Creation and annihilation operators




Creation and annihilation operators

Creation and annihilation operators are mathematical operators that have widespread applications in quantum mechanics, notably in the study of quantum harmonic oscillators and many-particle systems.1 An annihilation operator lowers the number of particles in a given state by one. A creation operator increases the number of particles in a given state by one, and it is the adjoint of the annihilation operator. In many subfields of physics and chemistry, the use of these operators instead of wavefunctions is known as second quantization.
Creation and annihilation operators can act on states of various types of particles. For example, in quantum chemistry and many-body theory the creation and annihilation operators often act on electron states. They can also refer specifically to the ladder operators for the quantum harmonic oscillator. In the latter case, the raising operator is interpreted as a creation operator, adding a quantum of energy to the oscillator system (similarly for the lowering operator). They can be used to represent phonons.
The mathematics for the creation and annihilation operators for bosons is the same as for the ladder operators of the quantum harmonic oscillator.2 For example, the commutator of the creation and annihilation operators that are associated with the same boson state equals one, while all other commutators vanish. However, for fermions the mathematics is different, involving anticommutators instead of commutators.3
Ladder operators for quantum harmonic oscillator
In the context of the quantum harmonic oscillator, we reinterpret the ladder operators as creation and annihilation operators, adding or subtracting fixed quanta of energy to the oscillator system. Creation/annihilation operators are different for bosons (integer spin) and fermions (half-integer spin). This is because their wavefunctions have different symmetry properties.
First consider the simpler bosonic case of the phonons of the quantum harmonic oscillator.
Start with the Schrödinger equation for the one-dimensional time independent quantum harmonic oscillator



Make a coordinate substitution to nondimensionalize the differential equation


 
 .
and the Schrödinger equation for the oscillator becomes


 
 .
Note that the quantity 
 
 
 
  is the same energy as that found for light quanta and that the parenthesis in the Hamiltonian can be written as



The last two terms can be simplified by considering their effect on an arbitrary differentiable function f(q),


 
  which implies,



Therefore


 
  and the Schrödinger equation for the oscillator becomes, with substitution of the above and rearrangement of the factor of 1/2,


 
 . If we define


 
  as the "creation operator" or the "raising operator" and


 
  as the "annihilation operator" or the "lowering operator" then the Schrödinger equation for the oscillator becomes


 
  This is significantly simpler than the original form. Further simplifications of this equation enables one to derive all the properties listed above thus far.
Letting 
 
 
 
 , where "p" is the nondimensionalized momentum operator then we have


 
  and





 
 .
Note that these imply that


 
 .
The operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  may be contrasted with normal operators. A normal operator has a representation 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are self-adjoint and commute, i.e. 
 
 
 
 . By contrast, 
 
 
 
  has the representation 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are self-adjoint but 
 
 
 
 . As a consequence, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have a common set of eigenfunctions (and are simultaneously diagonalizable), whereas p and q famously don't and aren't.
Thus, although in the present case one is dealing with non-normal operators, by the commutation relations given above, the Hamiltonian operator can be expressed as



And the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  operators have the following commutation relations with the Hamiltonian4






These relations can be used to find the energy eigenstates of the quantum harmonic oscillator. Assuming that 
 
 
 
  is an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 . Using these commutation relations it can be shown that5






This shows that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are also eigenstates of the Hamiltonian with eigenvalues 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This identifies the operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as lowering and rising operators between the eigenstates. Energy difference between two eigenstates is 
 
 
 
 .
The ground state can be found by assuming that the lowering operator possesses a nontrivial kernel, 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . Using the formula above for the Hamiltonian, one obtains



so 
 
 
 
  is an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian. This gives the ground state energy 
 
 
 
 . This allows to identify the energy eigenvalue of any eigenstate 
 
 
 
  as6



Furthermore it can be shown that the first-mentioned operator, the number operator

 
  plays a most-important role in applications, while the second one, 
 
 
 
  can simply be replaced by 
 
 
 
  So one simply gets


 
 .
Applications
The ground state 
 
 
 
  of the quantum harmonic oscillator can be found by imposing the condition that


 
 .
Written out as a differential equation, the wavefunction satisfies



which has the solution



The normalization constant C can be found to be  
 
 
 
   from 
 
 
 
 ,  using the Gaussian integral.
Matrix representation
The matrix counterparts of the creation and annihilation operators obtained from the quantum harmonic oscillator model are






Substituting backwards, the laddering operators are recovered. They can be obtained via the relationships 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The wavefunctions are those of the quantum harmonic oscillator, and are sometimes called the "number basis".
Generalized creation and annihilation operators
The operators derived above are actually a specific instance of a more generalized class of creation and annihilation operators. The more abstract form of the operators satisfy the properties below.
Let H be the one-particle Hilbert space. To get the bosonic CCR algebra, look at the algebra generated by a(f) for any f in H. The operator a(f) is called an annihilation operator and the map a(.) is antilinear. Its adjoint is a†(f) which is linear in H.
For a boson,





 
 ,
where we are using bra–ket notation.
For a fermion, the anticommutators are





 
 .
A CAR algebra.
Physically speaking, a(f) removes (i.e. annihilates) a particle in the state 
 
 
 
  whereas a†(f) creates a particle in the state 
 
 
 
 .
The free field vacuum state is the state with no particles. In other words,



where 
 
 
 
  is the vacuum state.
If 
 
 
 
  is normalized so that 
 
 
 
  = 1, then a†(f) a(f) gives the number of particles in the state 
 
 
 
 .
Creation and annihilation operators for reaction-diffusion equations
The annihilation and creation operator description has also been useful to analyze classical reaction diffusion equations, such as the situation when a gas of molecules A diffuse and interact on contact, forming an inert product:  To see how this kind of reaction can be described by the annihilation and creation operator formalism, consider 
 
 
 
  particles at a site 
 
 
 
  on a 1-d lattice. Each particle moves to the right or left with a certain probability, and each pair of particles at the same site annihilates each other with a certain other probability.
The probability that one particle leaves the site during the short time period 
 
 
 
  is proportional to 
 
 
 
 , let us say a probability 
 
 
 
  to hop left and 
 
 
 
  to hop right. All 
 
 
 
  particles will stay put with a probability 
 
 
 
 . (Since 
 
 
 
  is so short, the probability that two or more will leave during 
 
 
 
  is very small and will be ignored.)
We can now describe the occupation of particles on the lattice as a `ket' of the form . It represents the juxtaposition (or conjunction, or tensor product) of the number states ..., , , , ... located at the individual sites of the lattice. A slight modification of the annihilation and creation operators is needed so that



and


 
 ,
for all n≥0. This modification preserves the commutation relation


 
 .
Now let ai=a πi, where πi selects the ith component of ψ. That is, ai makes a copy of the state  in an abstract place and then applies a to it. Then ai†=ιi a†, where ιi inserts an abstract state at the ith site. Thus, for example, the net effect of ai-1†ai is to move an eigenstate from the ith to the (i-1)th site while multiplying with the appropriate factor.
This allows us to write the pure diffusive behaviour of the particles as



where the sum is over i.
The reaction term can be deduced by noting that 
 
 
 
  particles can interact in 
 
 
 
  different ways, so that the probability that a pair annihilates is 
 
 
 
  and the probability that no pair annihilates is 
 
 
 
  leaving us with a term



yielding



Other kinds of interactions can be included in a similar manner.
This kind of notation allows the use of quantum field theoretic techniques to be used in the analysis of reaction diffusion systems.
Creation and annihilation operators in quantum field theories
In quantum field theories and many-body problems one works with creation and annihilation operators of quantum states, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . These operators change the eigenvalues of the number operator,


 
 , by one, in analogy to the harmonic oscillator. The indices (such as 
 
 
 
 ) represent quantum numbers that label the single-particle states of the system; hence, they are not necessarily single numbers. For example, a tuple of quantum numbers 
 
 
 
  is used to label states in the hydrogen atom.
The commutation relations of creation and annihilation operators in a multiple-boson system are,





 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the commutator and 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta.
For fermions, the commutator is replaced by the anticommutator

 
 ,





 
  Therefore, exchanging disjoint (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) operators in a product of creation of annihilation operators will reverse the sign in fermion systems, but not in boson systems.
See also

Bogoliubov transformations - arises in the theory of quantum optics.
Optical Phase Space
Fock space
Canonical commutation relations

References



Footnotes


"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum field theory













