


Radix




Radix

In mathematical numeral systems, the radix or base is the number of unique digits, including zero, used to represent numbers in a positional numeral system. For example, for the decimal system (the most common system in use today) the radix is ten, because it uses the ten digits from 0 through 9.
In any positional numeral system (except unary, where the radix is 1), the number x and its base y are conventionally written as 
 
 
 
  although for base ten the subscript is usually assumed and not written, as it is the most common way to express value. For example, 
 
 
 
  (in the decimal system) represents the number one hundred, whilst 
 
 
 
  (in the binary system with base 2) represents the number four.1
Etymology
Radix is a Latin word for "root". Root can be considered a synonym for base in the arithmetical sense.
In numeral systems
In the system with radix 13, for example, a string of digits such as 398 denotes the decimal number 
 
 
 
 .
More generally, in a system with radix b (b > 1), a string of digits 
 
 
 
  denotes the decimal number 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 .2
Commonly used numeral systems include:




Base/Radix

Name

Description





10

decimal system

the most used system of numbers in the world, is used in arithmetic. Its ten digits are "0–9". Used in most mechanical counters.



12

duodecimal (dozenal) system

is often used due to divisibility by 2, 3, 4 and 6. It was traditionally used as part of quantities expressed in dozens and grosses.



2

binary numeral system

used internally by nearly all computers, is base two. The two digits are "0" and "1", expressed from switches displaying OFF and ON respectively. Used in most electric counters.



16

hexadecimal system

is often used in computing. The sixteen digits are "0–9" followed by "A–F".



8

octal system

is occasionally used in computing. The eight digits are "0–7".



60

sexagesimal system

originated in ancient Sumeria and passed to the Babylonians.3 Used nowadays as the basis of our modern circular coordinate system (degrees, minutes, and seconds) and time measuring (hours, minutes, and seconds).



64

MIME Base64

is also used in computing, using as digits "A–Z", "a–z", "0–9", plus two more characters, often "+" and "/".45



85

PostScript Ascii85

used in computing to encode sequences of bits as base 85 numbers



256

byte

is used internally by computers, actually grouping eight binary digits together. For reading by humans, a byte is usually shown as a pair of hexadecimal digits.6



For an advanced list, see List of numeral systems.
The octal, hexadecimal and base-64 systems are often used in computing because of their ease as shorthand for binary. For example, every hexadecimal digit has an equivalent 4 digit binary number.
Radices are usually natural numbers. However, other positional systems are possible, e.g. golden ratio base (whose radix is a non-integer algebraic number),7 and negative base (whose radix is negative).8
See also

Base (exponentiation)
Non-standard positional numeral systems

External links

Base Convert, a floating-point base calculator
MathWorld entry on base

References
"
Category:Elementary mathematics Category:Numeral systems




↩
↩
↩
↩
.↩
↩
↩




