


Ham sandwich theorem




Ham sandwich theorem

In mathematical measure theory, the sandwich theorem states that given 
 
 
measurable "objects" in 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space, it is possible to divide all of them in half (with respect to their measure, i.e. volume) with a single 
 
 
 
 -dimensional hyperplane.
It was proposed by Hugo Steinhaus and proved by Stefan Banach (explicitly in dimension 3, without bothering to automatically state the theorem in the n-dimensional case), and also years later called the Stone–Tukey theorem after Arthur H. Stone and John Tukey,
Naming
(Figure)
A ham sandwich

The ham sandwich theorem takes its name from the case when 
 
 
 
  and the three objects of any shape are a chunk of ham and two chunks of bread — notionally, a sandwich — which can then all be simultaneously bisected with a single cut (i.e., a plane). In two dimensions, the theorem is known as the pancake theorem of having to cut two infinitesimally thin pancakes on a plate each in half with a single cut (i.e., a straight line).
History
According to , the earliest known paper about the ham sandwich theorem, specifically the 
 
 
 
  case of bisecting three solids with a plane, is by . Beyer and Zardecki's paper includes a translation of the 1938 paper. It attributes the posing of the problem to Hugo Steinhaus, and credits Stefan Banach as the first to solve the problem, by a reduction to the Borsuk–Ulam theorem. The paper poses the problem in two ways: first, formally, as "Is it always possible to bisect three solids, arbitrarily located, with the aid of an appropriate plane?" and second, informally, as "Can we place a piece of ham under a meat cutter so that meat, bone, and fat are cut in halves?" Later, the paper offers a proof of the theorem.
A more modern reference is , which is the basis of the name "Stone–Tukey theorem". This paper proves the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional version of the theorem in a more general setting involving measures. The paper attributes the 
 
 
 
  case to Stanislaw Ulam, based on information from a referee; but  claim that this is incorrect, given Steinhaus's paper, although "Ulam did make a fundamental contribution in proposing" the Borsuk–Ulam theorem.
Reduction to the Borsuk–Ulam theorem
The ham sandwich theorem can be proved as follows using the Borsuk–Ulam theorem. This proof follows the one described by Steinhaus and others (1938), attributed there to Stefan Banach, for the 
 
 
 
  case.
Let  denote the 
 
 
 
  objects that we wish to simultaneously bisect. Let 
 
 
 
  be the unit 

 
 -sphere embedded in 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space

 
 , centered at the origin. For each point 
 
 
 
  on the surface of the sphere 
 
 
 
 , we can define a continuum of oriented affine hyperplanes (not necessarily centred at 0) perpendicular to the (normal) vector from the origin to 
 
 
 
 , with the "positive side" of each hyperplane defined as the side pointed to by that vector. By the intermediate value theorem, every family of such hyperplanes contains at least one hyperplane that bisects the bounded object : at one extreme translation, no volume of  is on the positive side, and at the other extreme translation, all of 's volume is on the positive side, so in between there must be a translation that has half of 's volume on the positive side. If there is more than one such hyperplane in the family, we can pick one canonically by choosing the midpoint of the interval of translations for which  is bisected. Thus we obtain, for each point 
 
 
 
  on the sphere 
 
 
 
 , a hyperplane 
 
 
 
  that is perpendicular to the vector from the origin to 
 
 
 
  and that bisects .
Now we define a function 
 
 
 
  from the 
 
 
 
 -sphere 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space 
 
 
 
  as follows:



 
 vol of  on the positive side of 
 
 
 
 , vol of  on the positive side of 
 
 
 
 , ..., vol of  on the positive side of 
 
 
 
 .
 

This function 
 
 
 
  is continuous. By the Borsuk–Ulam theorem, there are antipodal points

 
  and 
 
 
 
  on the sphere 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Antipodal points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  correspond to hyperplanes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that are equal except that they have opposite positive sides. Thus, 
 
 
 
  means that the volume of  is the same on the positive and negative side of 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ), for 
 
 
 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ) is the desired ham sandwich cut that simultaneously bisects the volumes of .
Measure theoretic versions
In measure theory,  proved two more general forms of the ham sandwich theorem. Both versions concern the bisection of 
 
 
subsets  of a common set 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  has a Carathéodory outer measure and each  has finite outer measure.
Their first general formulation is as follows: for any suitably restricted real function

 
 , there is a point 
 
 
 
  of the 
 
 
 
 -sphere  such that the surface 
 
 
 
 , dividing 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 

Their second formulation is as follows: for any 
 
 
 
  measurable functions  over 
 
 
 
  that are linearly independent over any subset of 
 
 
 
  of positive measure, there is a linear combination  such that the surface 
 
 
 
 , dividing 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 

Discrete and computational geometry versions
(Figure)
A ham-sandwich cut of eight red points and seven blue points in the plane.

In discrete geometry and computational geometry, the ham sandwich theorem usually refers to the special case in which each of the sets being divided is a finite set of points. Here the relevant measure is the counting measure, which simply counts the number of points on either side of the hyperplane. In two dimensions, the theorem can be stated as follows:

For a finite set of points in the plane, each colored "red" or "blue", there is a line that simultaneously bisects the red points and bisects the blue points, that is, the number of red points on either side of the line is equal and the number of blue points on either side of the line is equal.
 

There is an exceptional case when points lie on the line. In this situation, we count each of these points as either being on one side, on the other, or on neither side of the line (possibly depending on the point), i.e. "bisecting" in fact means that each side contains less than half of the total number of points. This exceptional case is actually required for the theorem to hold, of course when the number of red points or the number of blue is odd, but also in specific configurations with even numbers of points, for instance when all the points lie on the same line and the two colors are separated from each other (i.e. colors don't alternate along the line). A situation where the numbers of points on each side cannot match each other is provided by adding an extra point out of the line in the previous configuration.
In computational geometry, this ham sandwich theorem leads to a computational problem, the ham sandwich problem. In two dimensions, the problem is this: given a finite set of 
 
 
 
  points in the plane, each colored "red" or "blue", find a ham sandwich cut for them. First,  described an algorithm for the special, separated case. Here all red points are on one side of some line and all blue points are on the other side, a situation where there is a unique ham sandwich cut, which Megiddo could find in linear time. Later,  gave an algorithm for the general two-dimensional case; the running time of their algorithm is 
 
 
 
 , where the symbol 
 
 
 
  indicates the use of Big O notation. Finally,  found an optimal 
 
 
 
 -time algorithm. This algorithm was extended to higher dimensions by . Given 
 
 
 
  sets of points in general position in 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space, the algorithm computes a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional hyperplane that has equal numbers of points of each of the sets in each of its half-spaces, i.e., a ham-sandwich cut for the given points.
Generalizations
The original theorem works for at most n collections, where n is the number of dimensions. If we want to bisect a larger number of collections, we can use, instead of a hyperplane, an algebraic surface of degree k, i.e., an n-1 dimensional surface defined by a polynomial function of degree k:
Given 
 
 
 
  measures in an n-dimensional space, there exists an algebraic surface of degree k which bisects them all. ().
This generalization is proved by mapping the n-dimensional plane into a $\binom{k+n}{n}-1$ dimensional plane, and then applying the original theorem. For example, for n=2 and k=2, the 2-dimensional plane is mapped to a 5-dimensional plane via:
$(x,y) \to (x,y,x^2,y^2,xy)$.
See also

Exact division

References


.

.

.

.

.


.

.

External links


ham sandwich theorem on the Earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics
Ham Sandwich Cuts by Danielle MacNevin
An interactive 2D demonstration

"
Category:Theorems in measure theory Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in topology


