


Cesàro summation




Cesàro summation

In mathematical analysis, Cesàro summation assigns values to some infinite sums that are not convergent in the usual sense, while coinciding with the standard sum if they are convergent. The Cesàro sum is defined as the limit of the arithmetic mean of the partial sums of the series.
Cesàro summation is named for the Italian analyst Ernesto Cesàro (1859–1906).
Definition
Let {an} be a sequence, and let



be the kth partial sum of the series



The series 
 
 
 
  is called Cesàro summable, with Cesàro sum 
 
 
 
 , if the average value of its partial sums 
 
 
 
  tends to 
 
 
 
 :



In other words, the Cesàro sum of an infinite series is the limit of the arithmetic mean (average) of the first n partial sums of the series, as n goes to infinity. It is easy to show that any convergent series is Cesàro summable, and the sum of the series agrees with its Cesàro sum. However, as the first example below demonstrates, there are series that diverge but are nonetheless Cesàro summable.
Examples
Let an = (−1)n+1 for n ≥ 1. That is, {an} is the sequence



and let G denote the series 
 
 

Then the sequence of partial sums {sn} 
 
 
 
  is



so that the series G, known as Grandi's series, clearly does not converge. On the other hand, the terms of the sequence {tn} of the (partial) means of the {sn} where


 
  are



so that



Therefore the Cesàro sum of the series G is 1/2.
On the other hand, now let an = n for n ≥ 1. That is, {an} is the sequence



and let G now denote the series 
 
 

Then the sequence of partial sums {sn} is



and the evaluation of G diverges to infinity. The terms of the sequence of means of partial sums {tn } are here



Thus, this sequence diverges to infinity as well as G, and G is now not Cesàro summable. In fact, any series which diverges to (positive or negative) infinity the Cesàro method also leads to a sequence that diverges likewise, and hence such a series is not Cesàro summable.
(C, α) summation
In 1890, Ernesto Cesàro stated a broader family of summation methods which have since been called (C, α) for non-negative integers α. The (C, 0) method is just ordinary summation, and (C, 1) is Cesàro summation as described above.
The higher-order methods can be described as follows: given a series Σan, define the quantities



(where the upper indices do not denote exponents) and define Enα to be Anα for the series 1 + 0 + 0 + 0 + · · ·. Then the (C, α) sum of Σan is denoted by (C, α)-Σan and has the value


 
 –
 
 

if it exists . This description represents an 
 
 
 
 -times iterated application of the initial summation method and can be restated as


 
 –
 
 

Even more generally, for 
 
 
 
 , let Anα be implicitly given by the coefficients of the series



and Enα as above. In particular, Enα are the binomial coefficients of power −1 − α. Then the (C, α) sum of Σ an is defined as above.
If Σan has a (C, α) sum, then it also has a (C, β) sum for every β>α, and the sums agree; furthermore we have an = o(nα) if α > −1 (see little-o notation).
Cesàro summability of an integral
Let α ≥ 0. The integral

 
  is Cesàro summable (C, α) if



exists and is finite . The value of this limit, should it exist, is the (C, α) sum of the integral. Analogously to the case of the sum of a series, if α=0, the result is convergence of the improper integral. In the case α=1, (C, 1) convergence is equivalent to the existence of the limit



which is the limit of means of the partial integrals.
As is the case with series, if an integral is (C,α) summable for some value of α ≥ 0, then it is also (C,β) summable for all β > α, and the value of the resulting limit is the same.
See also

Abel summation
Abel's summation formula
Abel–Plana formula
Abelian and tauberian theorems
Borel summation
Cesàro mean
Divergent series
Euler summation
Fejér's theorem
Lambert summation
Perron's formula
Ramanujan summation
Riesz mean
Silverman–Toeplitz theorem
Summation by parts

References






"
Category:Summability methods


