


Vieta's formulas




Vieta's formulas

In mathematics, Vieta's formulas are formulas that relate the coefficients of a polynomial to sums and products of its roots. Named after François Viète (more commonly referred to by the Latinised form of his name, Franciscus Vieta), the formulas are used specifically in algebra.
The Laws
Basic formulas
Any general polynomial of degree n



(with the coefficients being real or complex numbers and an ≠ 0) is known by the fundamental theorem of algebra to have n (not necessarily distinct) complex roots x1, x2, ..., xn. Vieta's formulas relate the polynomial's coefficients { ak } to signed sums and products of its roots { xi } as follows:



Equivalently stated, the (n − k)th coefficient an−k is related to a signed sum of all possible subproducts of roots, taken k-at-a-time:



for k = 1, 2, ..., n (where we wrote the indices ik in increasing order to ensure each subproduct of roots is used exactly once).
The left hand sides of Vieta's formulas are the elementary symmetric functions of the roots.
Generalization to rings
Vieta's formulas are frequently used with polynomials with coefficients in any integral domain R. In this case the quotients 
 
 
 
  belong to the ring of fractions of R (or in R itself if 
 
 
 
  is invertible in R) and the roots 
 
 
 
  are taken in an algebraically closed extension. Typically, R is the ring of the integers, the field of fractions is the field of the rational numbers and the algebraically closed field is the field of the complex numbers.
Vieta's formulas are useful in this situation, because they provide relations between the roots without having to compute them.
For polynomials over a commutative ring which is not an integral domain, Vieta's formulas are only valid when 
 
 
 
  is a non-zerodivisor and 
 
 
 
  factors as 
 
 
 
 . For example, in the ring of the integers modulo 8, the polynomial 
 
 
 
  has four roots: 1, 3, 5, and 7. Vieta's formulas are not true if, say, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , because 
 
 
 
 . However, 
 
 
 
  does factor as 
 
 
 
  and as 
 
 
 
 , and Vieta's formulas hold if we set either 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Vieta's formulas applied to quadratic and cubic polynomial:
For the second degree polynomial (quadratic) 
 
 
 
 , roots 
 
 
 
  of the equation 
 
 
 
  satisfy



The first of these equations can be used to find the minimum (or maximum) of P. See second order polynomial.
For the cubic polynomial

 
 , roots 
 
 
 
  of the equation 
 
 
 
  satisfy



Proof
Vieta's formulas can be proved by expanding the equality



(which is true since 
 
 
 
  are all the roots of this polynomial), multiplying the factors on the right-hand side, and identifying the coefficients of each power of 
 
 

Formally, if one expands 
 
 
 
  the terms are precisely 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is either 0 or 1, accordingly as whether 
 
 
 
  is included in the product or not, and k is the number of 
 
 
 
  that are excluded, so the total number of factors in the product is n (counting 

 with multiplicity k) – as there are n binary choices (include 
 
 
 
  or x), there are 
 
 
 
  terms – geometrically, these can be understood as the vertices of a hypercube. Grouping these terms by degree yields the elementary symmetric polynomials in 
 
 
 
  – for xk, all distinct k-fold products of 
 
 

History
As reflected in the name, these formulas were discovered by the 16th century French mathematician François Viète, for the case of positive roots.
In the opinion of the 18th century British mathematician Charles Hutton, as quoted in , the general principle (not only for positive real roots) was first understood by the 17th century French mathematician Albert Girard; Hutton writes:

...[Girard was] the first person who understood the general doctrine of the formation of the coefficients of the powers from the sum of the roots and their products. He was the first who discovered the rules for summing the powers of the roots of any equation.

See also

Newton's identities
Elementary symmetric polynomial
Symmetric polynomial
Content (algebra)
Properties of polynomial roots
Gauss–Lucas theorem
Rational root theorem

References










"
Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Polynomials Category:Elementary algebra


