


Kronecker product




Kronecker product

In mathematics, the Kronecker product, denoted by ⊗, is an operation on two matrices of arbitrary size resulting in a block matrix. It is a generalization of the outer product (which is denoted by the same symbol) from vectors to matrices, and gives the matrix of the tensor product with respect to a standard choice of basis. The Kronecker product should not be confused with the usual matrix multiplication, which is an entirely different operation.
The Kronecker product is named after Leopold Kronecker, even though there is little evidence that he was the first to define and use it. Indeed, in the past the Kronecker product was sometimes called the Zehfuss matrix, after Johann Georg Zehfuss who in 1858 described the matrix operation we now know as the Kronecker product.1
Definition
If A is an m × n matrix and B is a p × q matrix, then the Kronecker product A ⊗ B is the mp × nq block matrix:



more explicitly:



If A and B represent linear transformations V1 → W1 and V2 → W2, respectively, then A ⊗ B represents the tensor product of the two maps, V1 ⊗ V2 → W1 ⊗ W2.
Examples



Properties
Relations to other matrix operations
) = \exp(\mathbf{N}) \otimes \exp(\mathbf{M}) 
Kronecker sums appear naturally in physics when considering ensembles of non-interacting systems. Let Hi be the Hamiltonian of the i-th such system. Then the total Hamiltonian of the ensemble is


 
 . }}
Abstract properties
Matrix equations
The Kronecker product can be used to get a convenient representation for some matrix equations. Consider for instance the equation AXB = C, where A, B and C are given matrices and the matrix X is the unknown. We can rewrite this equation as



Here, vec(X) denotes the vectorization of the matrix X formed by stacking the columns of X into a single column vector. It now follows from the properties of the Kronecker product that the equation AXB = C has a unique solution if and only if A and B are nonsingular .
If X is row-ordered into the column vector x then AXB can be also be written as  (A ⊗ BT)x.
Applications
For an example of the application of this formula, see the article on the Lyapunov equation. This formula also comes in handy in showing that the matrix normal distribution is a special case of the multivariate normal distribution.
Related matrix operations 
Two related matrix operations are the Tracy–Singh and Khatri–Rao products which operate on partitioned matrices. Let the m × n matrix A be partitioned into the mi × nj blocks Aij and p × q matrix B into the pk × q blocks Bkl with of course Σi mi = m, Σj nj = n, Σk pk = p and Σ q = q.
Tracy–Singh product
The Tracy–Singh product is defined as23



which means that the (ij)-th subblock of the mp × nq product A ○ B is the mi p × nj q matrix Aij ○ B, of which the (k)-th subblock equals the mi pk × nj q matrix Aij ⊗ Bk. Essentially the Tracy-Singh product is the pairwise Kronecker product for each pair of partitions in the two matrices.
For example, if A and B both are 2 × 2 partitioned matrices e.g.:


 
  we get:






Khatri–Rao product
The Khatri–Rao product is defined as45


 
  in which the ij-th block is the mipi × njqj sized Kronecker product of the corresponding blocks of A and B, assuming the number of row and column partitions of both matrices is equal. The size of the product is then (Σi mipi) × (Σj njqj). Proceeding with the same matrices as the previous example we obtain:



This is a submatrix of the Tracy-Singh product of the two matrices (each partition in this example is a partition in a corner of the Tracy-Singh product).
A column-wise Kronecker product of two matrices may also be called the Khatri-Rao product. This product assumes the partitions of the matrices are their columns. In this case m1 = m, p1 = p, n = q and for each j: nj = pj = 1. The resulting product is a mp × n matrix of which each column is the Kronecker product of the corresponding columns of A and B. Using the matrices from the previous examples with the columns partitioned:


 
  so that:



See also

Generalized linear array model
Matrix product

Notes
References


.

.



External links



MathWorld Kronecker Product
New Kronecker product problems
Earliest Uses: The entry on The Kronecker, Zehfuss or Direct Product of matrices has historical information.
Generic C++ and Fortran 90 codes for calculating Kronecker products of two matrices.

"
Category:Matrix theory












