


Cross-correlation




Cross-correlation

In signal processing, cross-correlation is a measure of similarity of two series as a function of the lag of one relative to the other. This is also known as a sliding dot product or sliding inner-product. It is commonly used for searching a long signal for a shorter, known feature. It has applications in pattern recognition, single particle analysis, electron tomography, averaging, cryptanalysis, and neurophysiology.
For continuous functions f and g, the cross-correlation is defined as:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the complex conjugate of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the lag.
Similarly, for discrete functions, the cross-correlation is defined as:



 The cross-correlation is similar in nature to the convolution of two functions.
In an autocorrelation, which is the cross-correlation of a signal with itself, there will always be a peak equal to unity at a lag of zero.
In probability and statistics, the term cross-correlations is used for referring to the correlations between the entries of two random vectors X and Y, while the autocorrelations of a random vector X are considered to be the correlations between the entries of X itself, those forming the correlation matrix (matrix of correlations) of X. This is analogous to the distinction between autocovariance of a random vector and cross-covariance of two random vectors. One more distinction to point out is that in probability and statistics the definition of correlation always includes a standardising factor in such a way that correlations have values between −1 and +1.
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two independent random variables with probability density functions f and g, respectively, then the probability density of the difference 
 
 
 
  is formally given by the cross-correlation (in the signal-processing sense) 
 
 
 
 ; however this terminology is not used in probability and statistics. In contrast, the convolution

 
  (equivalent to the cross-correlation of f(t) and g(−t) ) gives the probability density function of the sum 
 
 
 
 .
Explanation
As an example, consider two real valued functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  differing only by an unknown shift along the x-axis. One can use the cross-correlation to find how much 
 
 
 
  must be shifted along the x-axis to make it identical to 
 
 
 
 . The formula essentially slides the 
 
 
 
  function along the x-axis, calculating the integral of their product at each position. When the functions match, the value of 
 
 
 
  is maximized. This is because when peaks (positive areas) are aligned, they make a large contribution to the integral. Similarly, when troughs (negative areas) align, they also make a positive contribution to the integral because the product of two negative numbers is positive.
With complex-valued functions

 
  and 
 
 
 
 , taking the conjugate of 
 
 
 
  ensures that aligned peaks (or aligned troughs) with imaginary components will contribute positively to the integral.
In econometrics, lagged cross-correlation is sometimes referred to as cross-autocorrelation.1
Properties

The cross-correlation of functions f(t) and g(t) is equivalent to the convolution of f*(−t) and g(t). That is:










If f is a Hermitian function, then 
 
 








Analogous to the convolution theorem, the cross-correlation satisfies










where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Fourier transform, and an asterisk again indicates the complex conjugate. Coupled with fast Fourier transform algorithms, this property is often exploited for the efficient numerical computation of cross-correlations (see circular cross-correlation).
 


The cross-correlation is related to the spectral density (see Wiener–Khinchin theorem).


The cross-correlation of a convolution of f and h with a function g is the convolution of the cross-correlation of f and g with the kernel h:









Time series analysis
In time series analysis, as applied in statistics and signal processing, the cross-correlation between two time series describes the normalized cross-covariance function.
Let 
 
 
 
  represent a pair of stochastic processes that are jointly wide-sense stationary. Then the cross-covariance and the cross-correlation are given by






cross-covariance







cross-correlation









where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the mean and standard deviation of the process 
 
 
 
 , which are constant over time due to stationarity; and similarly for 
 
 
 
 , respectively. That the cross-covariance and cross-correlation are independent of t is precisely the additional information (beyond being individually wide-sense stationary) conveyed by the requirement that 
 
 
 
  are jointly wide-sense stationary.
The cross-correlation of a pair of jointly wide sense stationary stochastic process can be estimated by averaging the product of samples measured from one process and samples measured from the other (and its time shifts). The samples included in the average can be an arbitrary subset of all the samples in the signal (e.g., samples within a finite time window or a sub-sampling of one of the signals). For a large number of samples, the average converges to the true cross-correlation.
Time delay analysis
Cross-correlations are useful for determining the time delay between two signals, e.g. for determining time delays for the propagation of acoustic signals across a microphone array.23 After calculating the cross-correlation between the two signals, the maximum (or minimum if the signals are negatively correlated) of the cross-correlation function indicates the point in time where the signals are best aligned, i.e. the time delay between the two signals is determined by the argument of the maximum, or arg max of the cross-correlation, as in



Normalized cross-correlation
For image-processing applications in which the brightness of the image and template can vary due to lighting and exposure conditions, the images can be first normalized. This is typically done at every step by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. That is, the cross-correlation of a template, 
 
 
 
  with a subimage 
 
 
 
  is


 
 . where 
 
 
 
  is the number of pixels in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the average of f and 
 
 
 
  is standard deviation of f. In functional analysis terms, this can be thought of as the dot product of two normalized vectors. That is, if


 
  and


 
  then the above sum is equal to


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the inner product and 
 
 
 
  is the L² norm. Thus, if f and t are real matrices, their normalized cross-correlation equals the cosine of the angle between the unit vectors F and T, being thus 1 if and only if F equals T multiplied by a positive scalar.
Normalized correlation is one of the methods used for template matching, a process used for finding incidences of a pattern or object within an image. It is also the 2-dimensional version of Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient.
Nonlinear systems
Caution must be applied when using cross correlation for nonlinear systems. In certain circumstances, which depend on the properties of the input, cross correlation between the input and output of a system with nonlinear dynamics can be completely blind to certain nonlinear effects.4 This problem arises because some quadratic moments can equal zero and this can incorrectly suggest that there is little "correlation" (in the sense of statistical dependence) between two signals, when in fact the two signals are strongly related by nonlinear dynamics.
See also

Autocorrelation
Autocovariance
Coherence
Convolution
Correlation
Cross-covariance
Cross-spectrum
Covariance mapping
Digital image correlation
Phase correlation
Scaled correlation
Spectral density
Wiener–Khinchin theorem

References
Further reading



External links

Cross Correlation from Mathworld
http://scribblethink.org/Work/nvisionInterface/nip.html
http://www.phys.ufl.edu/LIGO/stochastic/sign05.pdf
http://www.staff.ncl.ac.uk/oliver.hinton/eee305/Chapter6.pdf

"
Category:Bilinear operators Category:Covariance and correlation Category:Signal processing Category:Time domain analysis



↩
↩
↩
↩




