


Cross-polytope




Cross-polytope

In geometry, a cross-polytope,1 orthoplex,2 hyperoctahedron, or cocube is a regular, convex polytope that exists in any number of dimensions. The vertices of a cross-polytope are all the permutations of (±1, 0, 0, …, 0). The cross-polytope is the convex hull of its vertices. Its facets are simplexes of the previous dimension, while the cross-polytope's vertex figure is another cross-polytope from the previous dimension.
The n-dimensional cross-polytope can also be defined as the closed unit ball (or, according to some authors, its boundary) in the ℓ1-norm on Rn:



In 1 dimension the cross-polytope is simply the line segment [−1, +1], in 2 dimensions it is a square (or diamond) with vertices {(±1, 0), (0, ±1)}. In 3 dimensions it is an octahedron—one of the five convex regular polyhedra known as the Platonic solids. Higher-dimensional cross-polytopes are generalizations of these.



(Figure)
A 2-dimensional cross-polytope


(Figure)
A 3-dimensional cross-polytope


(Figure)
A 4-dimensional cross-polytope




2 dimensions
square


3 dimensions
octahedron


4 dimensions
16-cell



The cross-polytope is the dual polytope of the hypercube. The 1-skeleton of a n-dimensional cross-polytope is a Turán graph T(2n,n).
4 dimensions
The 4-dimensional cross-polytope also goes by the name hexadecachoron or 16-cell. It is one of six convex regular 4-polytopes. These 4-polytopes were first described by the Swiss mathematician Ludwig Schläfli in the mid-19th century.
Higher dimensions
The cross polytope family is one of three regular polytope families, labeled by Coxeter as βn, the other two being the hypercube family, labeled as γn, and the simplices, labeled as αn. A fourth family, the infinite tessellations of hypercubes, he labeled as δn.
The n-dimensional cross-polytope has 2n vertices, and 2n facets (n−1 dimensional components) all of which are n−1 simplices. The vertex figures are all n − 1 cross-polytopes. The Schläfli symbol of the cross-polytope is {3,3,…,3,4}. The dihedral angle of the n-dimensional cross-polytope is


 
 .
The number of k-dimensional components (vertices, edges, faces, …, facets) in an n-dimensional cross-polytope is given by (see binomial coefficient):



The volume of the n-dimensional cross-polytope is



There are many possible orthographic projections that can show the cross-polytopes as 2-dimensional graphs. Petrie polygon projections map the points into a regular 2n-gon or lower order regular polygons. A second projection takes the 2(n-1)-gon petrie polygon of the lower dimension, seen as a bipyramid, projected down the axis, with 2 vertices mapped into the center.




Cross-polytope elements



n



1



2



3



4



5



6



7



8



9



10



...



n



The vertices of an axis-aligned cross polytope are all at equal distance from each other in the Manhattan distance (L1 norm). Kusner's conjecture states that this set of 2d points is the largest possible equidistant set for this distance.3
See also

List of regular polytopes
Hyperoctahedral group, the symmetry group of the cross-polytope

Notes
References


p. 296, Table I (iii): Regular Polytopes, three regular polytopes in n-dimensions (n>=5)

External links


Polytope Viewer (Click  to select cross polytope.)


"
Category:Polytopes Category:Multi-dimensional geometry Category:Four-dimensional geometry



 Chapter IV, five dimensional semiregular polytope 1
Conway calls it an n-orthoplex for orthant complex.
.




