


Triakis tetrahedron




Triakis tetrahedron

In geometry, a triakis tetrahedron (or kistetrahedron1) is an Archimedean dual solid, or a Catalan solid. Its dual is the truncated tetrahedron.
It can be seen as a tetrahedron with triangular pyramids added to each face; that is, it is the Kleetope of the tetrahedron. It is very similar to the net for the 5-cell, as the net for a tetrahedron is a triangle with other triangles added to each edge, the net for the 5-cell a tetrahedron with pyramids attached to each face. This interpretation is expressed in the name.
If the triakis tetrahedron has shorter edge lengths 1, it has area 
 
 
 
  and volume 
 
 
 
 .
Orthogonal projections




Orthogonal projection

Centered by

Edge normal

Face normal

Face/vertex

Edge



Truncated
tetrahedron
(Figure)
tetrahedron t01 ae.png

(Figure)
tetrahedron t01 af36.png

(Figure)
3-simplex t01 A2.svg

(Figure)
3-simplex t01.svg




Triakis
 tetrahedron
(Figure)
Dual tetrahedron t01 ae.png

(Figure)
Dual tetrahedron t01 af36.png

(Figure)
Dual tetrahedron t01 A2.png

(Figure)
Dual tetrahedron t01.png




Projective
 symmetry

[1]

[1]

[3]

[4]



Variations
A triakis tetrahedron with equilateral triangle faces represents a net of the four-dimensional regular polytope known as the 5-cell.




Stellations




This chiral figure is one of thirteen stellations allowed by Miller's rules.
Related polyhedra
 The triakis tetrahedron is a part of a sequence of polyhedra and tilings, extending into the hyperbolic plane. These face-transitive figures have (*n32) reflectional symmetry.
See also

Truncated triakis tetrahedron

References


(Section 3-9)

(The thirteen semiregular convex polyhedra and their duals, Page 14, Triakistetrahedron)
The Symmetries of Things 2008, John H. Conway, Heidi Burgiel, Chaim Goodman-Strass, ISBN 978-1-56881-220-5 1 (Chapter 21, Naming the Archimedean and Catalan polyhedra and tilings, page 284, Triakis tetrahedron )

External links



"
Category:Catalan solids



Conway, Symmetries of things, p.284




