


Abstract simplicial complex




Abstract simplicial complex

(Figure)
A geometrical representation of an abstract simplicial complex that is not a valid simplicial complex.

In mathematics, an abstract simplicial complex is a purely combinatorial description of the geometric notion of a simplicial complex, consisting of a family of non-empty finite sets closed under the operation of taking non-empty subsets.1 In the context of matroids and greedoids, abstract simplicial complexes are also called independence systems.2
Definitions
A family

 
  of non-empty finite subsets of a universal set S is an abstract simplicial complex if, for every set 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , and every non-empty subset 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  also belongs to 
 
 
 
 .
The finite sets that belong to 
 
 
 
  are called faces of the complex, and a face 
 
 
 
  is said to belong to another face 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 , so the definition of an abstract simplicial complex can be restated as saying that every face of a face of a complex 
 
 
 
  is itself a face of 
 
 
 
 . The vertex set of 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 
 
 , the union of all faces of 
 
 
 
 . The elements of the vertex set are called the vertices of the complex. So for every vertex v of 
 
 
 
 , the set {v} is a face of the complex. The maximal faces of 
 
 
 
  (i.e., faces that are not subsets of any other faces) are called facets of the complex. The dimension of a face

 
  in 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 
 
 : faces consisting of a single element are zero-dimensional, faces consisting of two elements are one-dimensional, etc. The dimension of the complex

 
  is defined as the largest dimension of any of its faces, or infinity if there is no finite bound on the dimension of the faces.
The complex 
 
 
 
  is said to be finite if it has finitely many faces, or equivalently if its vertex set is finite. Also, 
 
 
 
  is said to be pure if it is finite-dimensional (but not necessarily finite) and every facet has the same dimension. In other words, 
 
 
 
  is pure if 
 
 
 
  is finite and every face is contained in a facet of dimension 
 
 
 
 .
One-dimensional abstract simplicial complexes are mathematically equivalent to simple undirected graphs: the vertex set of the complex can be viewed as the vertex set of a graph, and the two-element facets of the complex correspond to undirected edges of a graph. In this view, one-element facets of a complex correspond to isolated vertices that do not have any incident edges.
A subcomplex of 
 
 
 
  is a simplicial complex L such that every face of L belongs to 
 
 
 
 ; that is, 
 
 
 
  and L is a simplicial complex. A subcomplex that consists of all of the subsets of a single face of 
 
 
 
  is often called a simplex of 
 
 
 
 . (However, some authors use the term "simplex" for a face or, rather ambiguously, for both a face and the subcomplex associated with a face, by analogy with the non-abstract (geometric) simplicial complex terminology. To avoid ambiguity, we do not use in this article the term "simplex" for a face in the context of abstract complexes.)
The d-skeleton of 
 
 
 
  is the subcomplex of 
 
 
 
  consisting of all of the faces of 
 
 
 
  that have dimension at most d. In particular, the 1-skeleton is called the underlying graph of 
 
 
 
 . The 0-skeleton of 
 
 
 
  can be identified with its vertex set, although formally it is not quite the same thing (the vertex set is a single set of all of the vertices, while the 0-skeleton is a family of single-element sets).
The link of a face 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , often denoted 
 
 
 
  or , is the subcomplex of 
 
 
 
  defined by



Note that the link of the empty set is 
 
 
 
  itself.
Given two abstract simplicial complexes, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , a simplicial map is a function 
 
 
 
  that maps the vertices of 
 
 
 
  to the vertices of Γ and that has the property that for any face 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the image set 
 
 
 
  is a face of 
 
 
 
 .
Geometric realization
We can associate to an abstract simplicial complex K a topological space |K|, called its geometric realization, which is a simplicial complex. The construction goes as follows.
First, define |K| as a subset of  consisting of functions 
 
 
 
  satisfying the two conditions:





 
  Now think of  as the direct limit of  where A ranges over finite subsets of S, and give  the induced topology. Now give |K| the subspace topology.
Alternatively, let 
 
 
 
  denote the category whose objects are the faces of 
 
 
 
  and whose morphisms are inclusions. Next choose a total order on the vertex set of 
 
 
 
  and define a functor F from 
 
 
 
  to the category of topological spaces as follows. For any face 
 
 
 
  of dimension n, let  Δn}} be the standard n-simplex. The order on the vertex set then specifies a unique bijection between the elements of 
 
 
 
  and vertices of , ordered in the usual way . If 
 
 
 
  is a face of dimension 
 
 

We can then define the geometric realization |K| as the colimit of the functor F. More specifically |K| is the quotient space of the disjoint union



by the equivalence relation which identifies a point 
 
 
 
  with its image under the map 
 
 
 
 , for every inclusion 
 
 
 
 .
If K is finite, then we can describe |K| more simply. Choose an embedding of the vertex set of K as an affinely independent subset of some Euclidean space  of sufficiently high dimension N. Then any face 
 
 
 
  can be identified with the geometric simplex in  spanned by the corresponding embedded vertices. Take |K| to be the union of all such simplices.
If K is the standard combinatorial n-simplex, then |K| can be naturally identified with .
Examples

As an example, let V be a finite subset of S of cardinality 
 
 
 
  and let K be the power set of V. Then K is called a combinatorial n-simplex with vertex set V. If  K is called the standard combinatorial n-simplex.


The clique complex of an undirected graph has a simplex for each clique (complete subgraph) of the given graph. Clique complexes form the prototypical example of flag complexes, complexes with the property that every set of elements that pairwise belong to simplexes of the complex is itself a simplex.


In the theory of partially ordered sets ("posets"), the order complex of a poset is the set of all finite chains. Its homology groups and other topological invariants contain important information about the poset.


The Vietoris–Rips complex is defined from any metric space M and distance δ by forming a simplex for every finite subset of M with diameter at most δ. It has applications in homology theory, hyperbolic groups, image processing, and mobile ad hoc networking. It is another example of a flag complex.

Enumeration
The number of abstract simplicial complexes on up to n elements is one less than the nth Dedekind number. These numbers grow very rapidly, and are known only for 
 
 
 
 ; they are (starting with n = 0):

1, 2, 5, 19, 167, 7580, 7828353, 2414682040997, 56130437228687557907787 . This corresponds to the number of nonempty antichains of subsets of an $n$ set.
 

The number of abstract simplicial complexes on exactly n labeled elements is given by the sequence "1, 2, 9, 114, 6894, 7785062, 2414627396434, 56130437209370320359966" , starting at n = 1. This corresponds to the number of antichain covers of a labeled n-set; there is a clear bijection between antichain covers of an n-set and simplicial complexes on n elements described in terms of their maximal faces.
The number of abstract simplicial complexes on exactly n unlabeled elements is given by the sequence "1, 2, 5, 20, 180, 16143"  , starting at n = 1.
See also

Kruskal–Katona theorem

References
"
Category:Algebraic topology Category:Set families Category:Simplicial sets



Lee, JM, Introduction to Topological Manifolds, Springer 2011, ISBN 1-4419-7939-5, p153





