


Atwood machine




Atwood machine

(Figure)
Illustration of Atwood machine, 1905.

The Atwood machine (or Atwood's machine) was invented in 1784 by the English mathematician George Atwood as a laboratory experiment to verify the mechanical laws of motion with constant acceleration. Atwood's machine is a common classroom demonstration used to illustrate principles of classical mechanics.
The ideal Atwood Machine consists of two objects of mass m1 and m2, connected by an inextensible massless string over an ideal massless pulley. 1
When m1 = m2, the machine is in neutral equilibrium regardless of the position of the weights.
When m1 ≠ m2 both masses experience uniform acceleration.
Equation for constant acceleration
(Figure)
The free body diagrams of the two hanging masses of the Atwood machine. Our sign convention, depicted by the acceleration vectors is that m1 accelerates downward and that m2 accelerates upward, as would be the case if m1 > m2

We are able to derive an equation for the acceleration by using force analysis. If we consider a massless, inextensible string and an ideal massless pulley, the only forces we have to consider are: tension force (T), and the weight of the two masses (W1 and W2). To find an acceleration we need to consider the forces affecting each individual mass. Using Newton's second law (with a sign convention of  we can derive a system of equations for the acceleration (a).
As a sign convention, we assume that a is positive when downward for 
 
 
 
 , and that a is positive when upward for 
 
 
 
 . Weight of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is simply 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively.
Forces affecting m1:



Forces affecting m2:



and adding the two previous equations we obtain


 
 ,
and our concluding formula for acceleration



Conversely, the acceleration due to gravity, g, can be found by timing the movement of the weights, and calculating a value for the uniform acceleration a

 
 .
The Atwood machine is sometimes used to illustrate the  Lagrangian method of deriving equations of motion. 2
Equation for tension
It can be useful to know an equation for the tension in the string. To evaluate tension we substitute the equation for acceleration in either of the 2 force equations.



For example substituting into 
 
 
 
 , we get



Equations for a pulley with inertia and friction
For very small mass differences between m1 and m2, the rotational inertia I of the pulley of radius r cannot be neglected. The angular acceleration of the pulley is given by the no-slip condition:



where 
 
 
 
  is the angular acceleration. The net torque is then:



Combining with Newton's second law for the hanging masses, and solving for T1, T2, and a, we get:
Acceleration:



Tension in string segment nearest m1:



Tension in string segment nearest m2:



Should bearing friction be negligible (but not the inertia of the pulley and not the traction of the string on the pulley rim), these equations simplify as the following results:
Acceleration:



Tension in string segment nearest m1:



Tension in string segment nearest m2:



Practical implementations
Atwood's original illustrations show the main pulley's axle resting on the rims of another four wheels, to minimize friction forces from the bearings. Many historical implementations of the machine follow this design.
An elevator with a counterbalance approximates an ideal Atwood machine and thereby relieves the driving motor from the load of holding the elevator cab — it has to overcome only weight difference and inertia of the two masses. The same principle is used for funicular railways with two connected railway cars on inclined tracks, and for the elevators on the Eiffel Tower which counterbalance each other.
See also

Frictionless plane
Kater's pendulum
Spherical cow
Swinging Atwood's machine

Notes


External links

Professor Greenslade's account on the Atwood Machine
"Atwood's Machine" by Enrique Zeleny, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project.

"
Category:Mechanics Category:Physics experiments



 Chapter 6, example 6-13, page 160.
 Section 1-6, example 2, pages 26-27.




