


Goddard–Thorn theorem




Goddard–Thorn theorem

In mathematics, and in particular, in the mathematical background of string theory, the Goddard–Thorn theorem (also called the no-ghost theorem) is a theorem about certain vector spaces. It is named after Peter Goddard and Charles Thorn.
The name "no-ghost theorem" stems from the fact that in the original statement of the theorem, the vector space inner product is positive definite. Thus, there were no vectors of negative norm for r ≠ 0. The name "no-ghost theorem" is also a word play on the phrase no-go theorem.
Formalism
Suppose that V is a vector space with a nondegenerate bilinear form (·,·).
Further suppose that V is acted on by the Virasoro algebra in such a way that the adjoint of the operator Li is L-i, that the central element of the Virasoro algebra acts as multiplication by 24, that any vector of V is the sum of eigenvectors of L0 with non-negative integral eigenvalues, and that all eigenspaces of L0 are finite-dimensional.
Let Vi be the subspace of V on which L0 has eigenvalue i. Assume that V is acted on by a group G which preserves all of its structure.
Now let 
 
 
 
  be the vertex algebra of the double cover

 
  of the two-dimensional even unimodular Lorentzian lattice

 
  (so that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -graded, has a bilinear form (·,·) and is acted on by the Virasoro algebra).
Furthermore, let P1 be the subspace of the vertex algebra 
 
 
 
  of vectors v with L0(v) = v, Li(v) = 0 for i > 0, and let 
 
 
 
  be the subspace of P1 of degree r ∈ 
 
 
 
 . (All these spaces inherit an action of G from the action of G on V and the trivial action of G on 
 
 
 
  and R2).
Then, the quotient of 
 
 
 
  by the nullspace of its bilinear form is naturally isomorphic (as a G-module with an invariant bilinear form) to 
 
 
 
  if r ≠ 0, and to 
 
 
 
  if r = 0.
Applications
The theorem can be used to construct some generalized Kac–Moody algebras, in particular the monster Lie algebra.
References

P. Goddard and C. B. Thorn, [http://preprints.cern.ch/cgi-bin/setlink?base=preprint&categ;;=CM-P&id;=CM-P00058839 Compatibility of the dual Pomeron with unitarity and the absence of ghosts in the dual resonance model], Phys. Lett., B 40, No. 2 (1972), 235-238.

"
Category:Theorems in abstract algebra Category:String theory Category:Theorems in mathematical physics


