


Inverse Galois problem




Inverse Galois problem

In Galois theory, the inverse Galois problem concerns whether or not every finite group appears as the Galois group of some Galois extension of the rational numbers

 
 . This problem, first posed in the 19th century,1 is unsolved.
There are some permutation groups for which generic polynomials are known, which define all algebraic extensions of 
 
 
 
  having a particular group as Galois group. These groups include all of degree no greater than 
 
 
 
 . There also are groups known not to have generic polynomials, such as the cyclic group of order 
 
 
 
 .
More generally, let 
 
 
 
  be a given finite group, and let 
 
 
 
  be a field. Then the question is this: is there a Galois extension field 
 
 
 
  such that the Galois group of the extension is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 ? One says that 

 
  is realizable over 
 
 
 if such a field 
 
 
 
  exists.
Partial results
There is a great deal of detailed information in particular cases. It is known that every finite group is realizable over any function field in one variable over the complex numbers

 
 , and more generally over function fields in one variable over any algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. Shafarevich showed that every finite solvable group is realizable over 
 
 
 
 .2 It is also known that every sporadic group, except possibly the Mathieu group , is realizable over 
 
 
 
 .3
Hilbert had shown that this question is related to a rationality question for 
 
 
 
 :

If 
 
 
 
  is any extension of 
 
 
 
 , on which 
 
 
 
  acts as an automorphism group and the invariant field  is rational over 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is realizable over 
 
 
 
 .
 

Here rational means that it is a purely transcendental extension of 
 
 
 
 , generated by an algebraically independent set. This criterion can for example be used to show that all the symmetric groups are realizable.
Much detailed work has been carried out on the question, which is in no sense solved in general. Some of this is based on constructing 
 
 
 
  geometrically as a Galois covering of the projective line: in algebraic terms, starting with an extension of the field 
 
 
 
  of rational functions in an indeterminate 
 
 
 
 . After that, one applies Hilbert's irreducibility theorem to specialise 
 
 
 
 , in such a way as to preserve the Galois group.
A simple example: cyclic groups
It is possible, using classical results, to construct explicitly a polynomial whose Galois group over 
 
 
 
  is the cyclic group

 
  for any positive integer 
 
 
 
 . To do this, choose a prime 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 ; this is possible by Dirichlet's theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  be the cyclotomic extension of 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a primitive  root of unity; the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  is cyclic of order 
 
 
 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
  divides 
 
 
 
 , the Galois group has a cyclic subgroup 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
 . The fundamental theorem of Galois theory implies that the corresponding fixed field,  Q(μ)H}}, has Galois group 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . By taking appropriate sums of conjugates of 
 
 
 
 , following the construction of Gaussian periods, one can find an element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  that generates 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 , and compute its minimal polynomial.
This method can be extended to cover all finite abelian groups, since every such group appears in fact as a quotient of the Galois group of some cyclotomic extension of 
 
 
 
 . (This statement should not though be confused with the Kronecker–Weber theorem, which lies significantly deeper.)
Worked example: the cyclic group of order three
For 
 
 
 
 , we may take 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is cyclic of order six. Let us take the generator 
 
 
 
  of this group which sends 
 
 
 
  to . We are interested in the subgroup of order two. Consider the element  μ + η3(μ)}}. By construction, 
 
 
 
  is fixed by 
 
 
 
 , and only has three conjugates over 
 
 
 
 :

 η0(α) {{=}} μ + μ6}},
 
 η1(α) {{=}} μ3 + μ4}},
 
 η2(α) {{=}} μ2 + μ5}}.
 

Using the identity:

 0}},
 

one finds that



 
 ,
 


 
 ,
 


 
 .
 

Therefore 
 
 
 
  is a root of the polynomial

 x3 + x2 − 2x − 1}},
 

which consequently has Galois group 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 .
Symmetric and alternating groups
Hilbert showed that all symmetric and alternating groups are represented as Galois groups of polynomials with rational coefficients.
The polynomial  has discriminant



We take the special case

 xn − sx − s}}.
 

Substituting a prime integer for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  gives a polynomial (called a specialization of 
 
 
 
 ) that by Eisenstein's criterion is irreducible. Then 
 
 
 
  must be irreducible over 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  can be written



and 
 
 
 
  can be factored to:



whose second factor is irreducible by Eisenstein's criterion. We have now shown that the group 
 
 
 
  is doubly transitive.
We can then find that this Galois group has a transposition. Use the scaling 
 
 
 
  to get



and with



we arrive at:

 yn − nty + (n − 1)t}}


which can be arranged to

.
 

Then 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  as a double zero and its other 
 
 
 
  zeros are simple, and a transposition in 
 
 
 
  is implied. Any finite doubly transitive permutation group containing a transposition is a full symmetric group.
Hilbert's irreducibility theorem then implies that an infinite set of rational numbers give specializations of 
 
 
 
  whose Galois groups are  over the rational field 
 
 
 
 . In fact this set of rational numbers is dense in 
 
 
 
 .
The discriminant of 
 
 
 
  equals



and this is not in general a perfect square.
Alternating groups
Solutions for alternating groups must be handled differently for odd and even degrees.
Odd Degree
Let



Under this substitution the discriminant of 
 
 
 
  equals



which is a perfect square when 
 
 
 
 
  is odd.
Even Degree
Let:



Under this substitution the discriminant of 
 
 
 
  equals:



which is a perfect square when 
 
 
 
  is even.
Again, Hilbert's irreducibility theorem implies the existence of infinitely many specializations whose Galois groups are alternating groups.
Rigid groups
Suppose that  are conjugacy classes of a finite group 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  be the set of 
 
 
 
 -tuples  of 
 
 
 
  such that  is in  and the product  is trivial. Then 
 
 
 
  is called rigid if it is nonempty, 
 
 
 
  acts transitively on it by conjugation, and each element of 
 
 
 
  generates 
 
 
 
 .
showed that if a finite group 
 
 
 
  has a rigid set then it can often be realized as a Galois group over a cyclotomic extension of the rationals. (More precisely, over the cyclotomic extension of the rationals generated by the values of the irreducible characters of 
 
 
 
  on the conjugacy classes .)
This can be used to show that many finite simple groups, including the monster group, are Galois groups of extensions of the rationals. The monster group is generated by a triad of elements of orders 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . All such triads are conjugate.
The prototype for rigidity is the symmetric group , which is generated by an 
 
 
 
 -cycle and a transposition whose product is an 
 
 
 
 -cycle. The construction in the preceding section used these generators to establish a polynomial's Galois group.
A construction with an elliptic modular function
Let 
 
 
 
  be any integer. A lattice 
 
 
 
  in the complex plane with period ratio 
 
 
 
  has a sublattice 
 
 
 
  with period ratio 
 
 
 
 . The latter lattice is one of a finite set of sublattices permuted by the modular group

 
 , which is based on changes of basis for 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the elliptic modular function of Klein. Define the polynomial  as the product of the differences  over the conjugate sublattices. As a polynomial in 
 
 
 
 ,  has coefficients that are polynomials over 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
On the conjugate lattices, the modular group acts as 
 
 
 
 . It follows that  has Galois group isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 .
Use of Hilbert's irreducibility theorem gives an infinite (and dense) set of rational numbers specializing  to polynomials with Galois group 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . The groups 
 
 
 
  include infinitely many non-solvable groups.
Notes


References

Alexander M. Macbeath, Extensions of the Rationals with Galois Group PGL(2,Zn), Bull. London Math. Soc., 1 (1969),332-338.

Helmut Völklein, Groups as Galois Groups, an Introduction, Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Gunter Malle, Heinrich Matzat, Inverse Galois Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1999, ISBN 3-540-62890-8.
Alexander Schmidt, Kay Wingberg, Safarevic's Theorem on Solvable Groups as Galois Groups (see also )
Christian U. Jensen, Arne Ledet, and Noriko Yui, Generic Polynomials, Constructive Aspects of the Inverse Galois Problem, Cambridge University Press, 2002.

"
Category:Galois theory Category:Unsolved problems in mathematics



http://udini.proquest.com/view/the-inverse-galois-problem-and-pqid:2439411211↩
I.R. Shafarevich, The imbedding problem for splitting extensions, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 120 (1958), 1217-1219.↩
p. 5 of Jensen et al., 2002↩




