


Second derivative test




Second derivative test

In calculus, the second derivative test is a criterion for determining whether a given critical point of a real function of one variable is a local maximum or a local minimum using the value of the second derivative at the point.
The test states: if the function f is twice differentiable at a critical point x (i.e. f'(x) = 0), then:

If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  has a local maximum at 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  has a local minimum at 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
 , the test is inconclusive.

In the latter case, Taylor's Theorem may be used to determine the behavior of f near x using higher derivatives.
Multivariable case
For a function of more than one variable, the second derivative test generalizes to a test based on the eigenvalues of the function's Hessian matrix at the critical point. In particular, assuming that all second order partial derivatives of f are continuous on a neighbourhood of a critical point x, then if the eigenvalues of the Hessian at x are all positive, then x is a local minimum. If the eigenvalues are all negative, then x is a local maximum, and if some are positive and some negative, then the point is a saddle point. If the Hessian matrix is singular, then the second derivative test is inconclusive.
Proof of the second derivative test
Suppose we have 
 
 
 
  (the proof for 
 
 
 
 
  is analogous). By assumption, 
 
 
 
 . Then



Thus, for h sufficiently small we get


 
  which means that 
 
 
 
  if h f'(x+h) > 0 if h > 0 (intuitively, f is increasing as we go right from x). Now, by the first derivative test, 
 
 
 
 
  has a local minimum at 
 
 
 
 .
Concavity test
A related but distinct use of second derivatives is to determine whether a function is concave up or concave down at a point. It does not, however, provide information about inflection points. Specifically, a twice-differentiable function f is concave up if 
 
 
 
  and concave down if 
 
 
 
 . Note that if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 
  has zero second derivative, yet is not an inflection point, so the second derivative alone does not give enough information to determine if a given point is an inflection point.
See also

Bordered Hessian
First derivative test
Optimization (mathematics)
Fermat's theorem
Higher-order derivative test
Differentiability
Extreme value
Convex function

References

"Second Derivative Test" at Mathworld
Concavity and the Second Derivative Test
[http://mathdl.maa.org/convergence/1/?pa=content&sa;;=viewDocument&nodeId;=606&bodyId;=948 Thomas Simpson's use of Second Derivative Test to Find Maxima and Minima] at Convergence

"
Category:Differential calculus


