


Stone–von Neumann theorem




Stone–von Neumann theorem

In mathematics and in theoretical physics, the Stone–von Neumann theorem is any one of a number of different formulations of the uniqueness of the canonical commutation relations between position and momentum operators. The name is for Marshall Stone and John .1 234
Representation issues of the commutation relations
In quantum mechanics, physical observables are represented mathematically by linear operators on Hilbert spaces.
For a single particle moving on the real line

 
 , there are two important observables: position and momentum. In the quantum-mechanical description of such a particle, the position operator

 
  and momentum operator

 
  are respectively given by





 
  on the domain 
 
 
 
  of infinitely differentiable functions of compact support on 
 
 
 
 . Assume 
 
 
 
  to be a fixed non-zero real number — in quantum theory 
 
 
 
  is (up to a factor of 
 
 
 
 ) Planck's constant, which is not dimensionless; it takes a small numerical value in terms of units of the macroscopic world.
The operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  satisfy the canonical commutation relation Lie algebra,



Already in his classic book,5 Hermann Weyl observed that this commutation law was impossible to satisfy for linear operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  acting on finite-dimensional spaces unless 
 
 
 
  vanishes. This is apparent from taking the trace over both sides of the latter equation and using the relation 
 
 
 
 ; the left-hand side is zero, the right-hand side is non-zero. Further analysis6 shows that, in fact, any two self-adjoint operators satisfying the above commutation relation cannot be both bounded. For notational convenience, the nonvanishing square root of 
 
 
 
  may be absorbed into the normalization of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , so that, effectively, it is replaced by 1. We assume this normalization in what follows.
The idea of the Stone—von Neumann theorem is that any two irreducible representations of the canonical commutation relations are unitarily equivalent. Since, however, the operators involved are necessarily unbounded (as noted above), there are tricky domain issues that allow for counter-examples.7 To obtain a rigorous result, one must require that the operators satisfy the exponentiated form of the canonical commutation relations, known as the Weyl relations. Although, as noted below, these relations are formally equivalent to the standard canonical commutation relations, this equivalence is not rigorous, because (again) of the unbounded nature of the operators. There is also a discrete analog of the Weyl relations, which can hold in on a finite-dimensional space,8 namely Sylvester's clock and shift matrices in the finite Heisenberg group, discussed below.
Uniqueness of representation
One would like to classify representations of the canonical commutation relation by two self-adjoint operators acting on separable Hilbert spaces, up to unitary equivalence. By Stone's theorem, there is a one-to-one correspondence between self-adjoint operators and (strongly continuous) one-parameter unitary groups.
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two self-adjoint operators satisfying the canonical commutation relation, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  two real parameters. Introduce  and , the corresponding unitary groups given by functional calculus. (For the explicit operators x and p defined above, these are multiplication by exp(isx) and pullback by translation x → x+t.) A formal computation9 (using a special case of the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula) readily yields



Conversely, given two one-parameter unitary groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfying the braiding relation  formally differentiating at 0 shows that the two infinitesimal generators satisfy the above canonical commutation relation. With care, these formal calculations can be made rigorous.
Therefore, there is a one-to-one correspondence between representations of the canonical commutation relation and two one-parameter unitary groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfying (). This braiding formulation of the canonical commutation relations (CCR) for one-parameter unitary groups is called the Weyl form of the CCR.
The problem thus becomes classifying two jointly irreducible one-parameter unitary groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which satisfy the Weyl relation on separable Hilbert spaces. The answer is the content of the Stone–von Neumann theorem: all such pairs of one-parameter unitary groups are unitarily equivalent. In other words, for any two such 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  acting jointly irreducibly on a Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 , there is a unitary operator  so that


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the explicit position and momentum operators from earlier. When 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  in this equation, so, then, in the 
 
 
 
 -representation, it is evident that 
 
 
 
  is unitarily equivalent to  P + t}}, and the spectrum of 
 
 
 
  must range along the entire real line. The analog argument holds for 
 
 
 
 .
There is also a straightforward extension of the Stone–von Neumann theorem to 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom.10  Historically, this result was significant, because it was a key step in proving that Heisenberg's matrix mechanics, which presents quantum mechanical observables and dynamics in terms of infinite matrices, is unitarily equivalent to Schrödinger's wave mechanical formulation (see Schrödinger picture).
Representation theory formulation
In terms of representation theory, the Stone–von Neumann theorem classifies certain unitary representations of the Heisenberg group. This is discussed in more detail in the Heisenberg group section, below.
Informally stated, with certain technical assumptions, every representation of the Heisenberg group  is equivalent to the position operators and momentum operators on . Alternatively, that they are all equivalent to the Weyl algebra (or CCR algebra) on a symplectic space of dimension 
 
 
 
 .
More formally, there is a unique (up to scale) non-trivial central strongly continuous unitary representation.
This was later generalized by Mackey theory – and was the motivation for the introduction of the Heisenberg group in quantum physics.
In detail:

The continuous Heisenberg group is a central extension of the abelian Lie group  by a copy of 
 
 
 
 ,
the corresponding Heisenberg algebra is a central extension of the abelian Lie algebra  (with trivial bracket) by a copy of 
 
 
 
 ,
the discrete Heisenberg group is a central extension of the free abelian group  by a copy of 
 
 
 
 , and
the discrete Heisenberg group modulo 
 
 
 
  is a central extension of the free abelian 
 
 
 
 -group  by a copy of 
 
 
 
 . These are thus all semidirect product, and hence relatively easily understood.

In all cases, if one has a representation , where A is an algebra and the center maps to zero, then one simply has a representation of the corresponding abelian group or algebra, which is Fourier theory.
If the center does not map to zero, one has a more interesting theory, particularly if one restricts oneself to central representations.
Concretely, by a central representation one means a representation such that the center of the Heisenberg group maps into the center of the algebra: for example, if one is studying matrix representations or representations by operators on a Hilbert space, then the center of the matrix algebra or the operator algebra is the scalar matrices. Thus the representation of the center of the Heisenberg group is determined by a scale value, called the quantization value (in physics terms, Planck's constant), and if this goes to zero, one gets a representation of the abelian group (in physics terms, this is the classical limit).
More formally, the group algebra of the Heisenberg group over its field of scalars K, written 
 
 
 
 , has center 
 
 
 
 , so rather than simply thinking of the group algebra as an algebra over the field 
 
 
 
 , one may think of it as an algebra over the commutative algebra 
 
 
 
 . As the center of a matrix algebra or operator algebra is the scalar matrices, a 
 
 
 
 -structure on the matrix algebra is a choice of scalar matrix – a choice of scale. Given such a choice of scale, a central representation of the Heisenberg group is a map of 
 
 
 
 -algebras 
 
 
 
 , which is the formal way of saying that it sends the center to a chosen scale.
Then the Stone–von Neumann theorem is that, given the standard quantum mechanical scale (effectively, the value of ħ), every strongly continuous unitary representation is unitarily equivalent to the standard representation with position and momentum.
Reformulation via Fourier transform
Let 
 
 
 
  be a locally compact abelian group and  be the Pontryagin dual of 
 
 
 
 . The Fourier–Plancherel transform defined by


 
  extends to a C*-isomorphism from the group C*-algebra

 
  of 
 
 
 
  and , i.e. the spectrum of 
 
 
 
  is precisely . When 
 
 
 
  is the real line 
 
 
 
 , this is Stone's theorem characterizing one parameter unitary groups. The theorem of Stone–von Neumann can also be restated using similar language.
The group 
 
 
 
  acts on the 
 
 
 
 *-algebra  by right translation 
 
 
 
 : for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in ,



Under the isomorphism given above, this action becomes the natural action of 
 
 
 
  on :



So a covariant representation corresponding to the 
 
 
 
 *-crossed product



is a unitary representation 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of  such that



It is a general fact that covariant representations are in one-to-one correspondence with *-representation of the corresponding crossed product. On the other hand, all irreducible representations of


 
  are unitarily equivalent to the 
 
 
 
 , the compact operators on . Therefore all pairs  are unitarily equivalent. Specializing to the case where 
 
 
 
  yields the Stone–von Neumann theorem.
The Heisenberg group
The above canonical commutation relations for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are identical to the commutation relations that specify the Lie algebra of the general Heisenberg group  for 
 
 
 
  a positive integer. This is the Lie group of 
 
 
 
  square matrices of the form



In fact, using the Heisenberg group, one can formulate a far-reaching generalization of the Stone von Neumann theorem. Note that the center of  consists of matrices 
 
 
 
 .
However, this center is not the identity operator in Heisenberg's original CCRs. The Heisenberg group Lie algebra generators, e.g. for 
 
 
 
 , are



and the central generator 
 
 
 
  is not the identity.

Theorem. For each non-zero real number 
 
 
 
  there is an irreducible representation  acting on the Hilbert space  by
 
 




All these representations are unitarily inequivalent; and any irreducible representation which is not trivial on the center of  is unitarily equivalent to exactly one of these.
Note that  is a unitary operator because it is the composition of two operators which are easily seen to be unitary: the translation to the left by 
 
 
 
  and multiplication by a function of absolute value 1. To show  is multiplicative is a straightforward calculation. The hard part of the theorem is showing the uniqueness which is beyond the scope of the article. However, below we sketch a proof of the corresponding Stone–von Neumann theorem for certain finite Heisenberg groups.
In particular, irreducible representations 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  of the Heisenberg group  which are non-trivial on the center of  are unitarily equivalent if and only if 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
  in the center of .
One representation of the Heisenberg group which is important in number theory and the theory of modular forms is the theta representation, so named because the Jacobi theta function is invariant under the action of the discrete subgroup of the Heisenberg group.
Relation to the Fourier transform
For any non-zero 
 
 
 
 , the mapping



is an automorphism of  which is the identity on the center of . In particular, the representations  and  are unitarily equivalent. This means that there is a unitary operator 
 
 
 
  on  such that, for any 
 
 
 
  in ,



Moreover, by irreducibility of the representations , it follows that up to a scalar, such an operator 
 
 
 
  is unique (cf. Schur's lemma). Since 
 
 
 
  is unitary, this scalar multiple is uniquely determined and hence such an operator 
 
 
 
  is unique.
Theorem. The operator 
 
 
 
  is the Fourier transform on .
This means that, ignoring the factor of  in the definition of the Fourier transform,



This theorem has the immediate implication that the Fourier transform is unitary, also known as the Plancherel theorem. Moreover,



Theorem. The operator  such that


 
  is the reflection operator



From this fact the Fourier inversion formula easily follows.
Example: The Segal–Bargmann space
The Segal–Bargmann space is the space of holomorphic functions on  that are square-integrable with respect to a Gaussian measure. Fock observed in 1920s that the operators



acting on holomorphic functions, satisfy the same commutation relations as the usual annihilation and creation operators, namely,



In 1961, Bargmann showed that 
 
 
 
  is actually the adjoint of  with respect to the inner product coming from the Gaussian measure. By taking appropriate linear combinations of  and 
 
 
 
 , one can then obtain "position" and "momentum" operators satisfying the canonical commutation relations. It is not hard to show that the exponentials of these operators satisfy the Weyl relations and that the exponentiated operators act irreducibly.11 The Stone–von Neumann theorem therefore applies and implies the existence of a unitary map from  to the Segal–Bargmann space that intertwines the usual annihilation and creation operators with the operators  and 
 
 
 
 . This unitary map is the Segal–Bargmann transform.
Representations of finite Heisenberg groups
The Heisenberg group  is defined for any commutative ring 
 
 
 
 . In this section let us specialize to the field 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  a prime. This field has the property that there is an embedding 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  as an additive group into the circle group 
 
 
 
 . Note that  is finite with cardinality K{{!}}2n + 1}}. For finite Heisenberg group  one can give a simple proof of the Stone–von Neumann theorem using simple properties of character functions of representations. These properties follow from the orthogonality relations for characters of representations of finite groups.
For any non-zero 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  define the representation  on the finite-dimensional inner product space  by




Theorem. For a fixed non-zero 
 
 
 
 , the character function 
 
 
 
  of  is given by:
 
 




It follows that


 
  By the orthogonality relations for characters of representations of finite groups this fact implies the corresponding Stone–von Neumann theorem for Heisenberg groups , particularly:

Irreducibility of 
Pairwise inequivalence of all the representations .

Generalizations
The Stone–von Neumann theorem admits numerous generalizations. Much of the early work of George Mackey was directed at obtaining a formulation12 of the theory of induced representations developed originally by Frobenius for finite groups to the context of unitary representations of locally compact topological groups.
See also

Oscillator representation
Wigner-Weyl transform
CCR algebra
Segal–Bargmann space
Moyal product
Weyl algebra
Stone's theorem on one-parameter unitary groups
Hille–Yosida theorem
C0-semigroup

References


Rosenberg, Jonathan (2004) "A Selective History of the Stone-von Neumann Theorem" Contemporary Mathematics 365. American Mathematical Society.


"
Category:Mathematical quantization Category:Theorems in functional analysis Category:Theorems in mathematical physics







Weyl, H. (1927), "Quantenmechanik und Gruppentheorie", Zeitschrift für Physik, 46 (1927) pp. 1–46, ; Weyl, H., The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics, Dover Publications, 1950, ISBN 978-1-163-18343-4.
Note , hence p{{!!}} {{!!}}x{{!!}}n ≥ n ℏ {{!!}}x{{!!}}n − 1}}, so that, 
 
 
 
 .




Hall, B. C. (2013). Quantum Theory for Mathematicians, Springer, Section 14.4.
Mackey, G. W. (1976). The Theory of Unitary Group Representations, The University of Chicago Press, 1976.




