


Stein's lemma




Stein's lemma

Stein's lemma,1 named in honor of Charles Stein, is a theorem of probability theory that is of interest primarily because of its applications to statistical inference — in particular, to James–Stein estimation and empirical Bayes methods — and its applications to portfolio choice theory. The theorem gives a formula for the covariance of one random variable with the value of a function of another, when the two random variables are jointly normally distributed.
Statement of the lemma
Suppose X is a normally distributed random variable with expectation μ and variance σ2. Further suppose g is a function for which the two expectations E(g(X) (X − μ) ) and E( g ′(X) ) both exist (the existence of the expectation of any random variable is equivalent to the finiteness of the expectation of its absolute value). Then



In general, suppose X and Y are jointly normally distributed. Then



Proof
In order to prove the univariate version of this lemma, recall that the probability density function for the normal distribution with expectation 0 and variance 1 is



and that for a normal distribution with expectation μ and variance σ2 is



Then use integration by parts.
More general statement
Suppose X is in an exponential family, that is, X has the density



Suppose this density has support 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  could be 
 
 
 
  and as 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is any differentiable function such that 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  finite. Then



The derivation is same as the special case, namely, integration by parts.
If we only know 
 
 
 
  has support 
 
 
 
 , then it could be the case that 
 
 
 
  but 
 
 
 
 . To see this, simply put 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with infinitely spikes towards infinity but still integrable. One such example could be adapted from 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is smooth.
Extensions to elliptically-contoured distributions also exist.23
See also

Taylor expansions for the moments of functions of random variables

References


"
Category:Statistical theorems Category:Probability theorems



Ingersoll, J., Theory of Financial Decision Making, Rowman and Littlefield, 1987: 13-14.↩
↩
↩




