


Complexification




Complexification

In mathematics, the complexification of a real vector space V is a vector space VC over the complex number field obtained by formally extending scalar multiplication to include multiplication by complex numbers. Any basis for V over the real numbers serves as a basis for VC over the complex numbers.
Formal definition
Let V be a real vector space. The complexification of V is defined by taking the tensor product of V with the complex numbers (thought of as a two-dimensional vector space over the reals):



The subscript R on the tensor product indicates that the tensor product is taken over the real numbers (since V is a real vector space this is the only sensible option anyway, so the subscript can safely be omitted). As it stands, VC is only a real vector space. However, we can make VC into a complex vector space by defining complex multiplication as follows:



More generally, complexification is an example of extension of scalars – here extending scalars from the real numbers to the complex numbers – which can be done for any field extension, or indeed for any morphism of rings.
Formally, complexification is a functor VectR → VectC, from the category of real vector spaces to the category of complex vector spaces. This is the adjoint functor – specifically the left adjoint – to the forgetful functor VectC → VectR from forgetting the complex structure.
Basic properties
By the nature of the tensor product, every vector v in VC can be written uniquely in the form


 
  where v1 and v2 are vectors in V. It is a common practice to drop the tensor product symbol and just write


 
  Multiplication by the complex number  is then given by the usual rule


 
  We can then regard VC as the direct sum of two copies of V:


 
  with the above rule for multiplication by complex numbers.
There is a natural embedding of V into VC given by


 
  The vector space V may then be regarded as a real subspace of VC. If V has a basis {ei} (over the field R) then a corresponding basis for VC is given by  over the field C. The complex dimension of VC is therefore equal to the real dimension of V:



Alternatively, rather than using tensor products, one can use this direct sum as the definition of the complexification:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is given a linear complex structure by the operator J defined as 
 
 
 
  where J encodes the data of "multiplication by i". In matrix form, J is given by:


 
  This yields the identical space – a real vector space with linear complex structure is identical data to a complex vector space – though it constructs the space differently. Accordingly, 
 
 
 
  can be written as 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  identifying V with the first direct summand. This approach is more concrete, and has the advantage of avoiding the use of the technically involved tensor product, but is ad hoc.
Examples

The complexification of real coordinate space Rn is complex coordinate space Cn.
Likewise, if V consists of the m×n matrices with real entries, VC would consist of m×n matrices with complex entries.
The complexification of quaternions is the biquaternions.
The complexification of the split-complex numbers is the tessarines.

Complex conjugation
The complexified vector space VC has more structure than an ordinary complex vector space. It comes with a canonical complex conjugation map:


 
  defined by


 
  The map χ may either be regarded as a conjugate-linear map from VC to itself or as a complex linear isomorphism from VC to its complex conjugate

 
 .
Conversely, given a complex vector space W with a complex conjugation χ, W is isomorphic as a complex vector space to the complexification VC of the real subspace


 
  In other words, all complex vector spaces with complex conjugation are the complexification of a real vector space.
For example, when W = Cn with the standard complex conjugation


 
  the invariant subspace V is just the real subspace Rn.
Linear transformations
Given a real linear transformation f : V → W between two real vector spaces there is a natural complex linear transformation


 
  given by


 
  The map fC is naturally called the complexification of f. The complexification of linear transformations satisfies the following properties














In the language of category theory one says that complexification defines an (additive) functor from the category of real vector spaces to the category of complex vector spaces.
The map fC commutes with conjugation and so maps the real subspace of VC to the real subspace of WC (via the map f). Moreover, a complex linear map g : VC → WC is the complexification of a real linear map if and only if it commutes with conjugation.
As an example consider a linear transformation from Rn to Rm thought of as an m × n matrix. The complexification of that transformation is exactly the same matrix, but now thought of as a linear map from Cn to Cm.
Dual spaces and tensor products
The dual of a real vector space V is the space V* of all real linear maps from V to R. The complexification of V* can naturally be thought of as the space of all real linear maps from V to C (denoted HomR(V,C)). That is,



The isomorphism is given by



where φ1 and φ2 are elements of V*. Complex conjugation is then given by the usual operation



Given a real linear map φ : V → C we may extend by linearity to obtain a complex linear map φ : VC → C. That is,


 
  This extension gives an isomorphism from HomR(V,C)) to HomC(VC,C). The latter is just the complex dual space to VC, so we have a natural isomorphism:



More generally, given real vector spaces V and W there is a natural isomorphism



Complexification also commutes with the operations of taking tensor products, exterior powers and symmetric powers. For example, if V and W are real vector spaces there is a natural isomorphism


 
  Note the left-hand tensor product is taken over the reals while the right-hand one is taken over the complexes. The same pattern is true in general. For instance, one has


 
  In all cases, the isomorphisms are the “obvious” ones.
See also

Extension of scalars – general process
Linear complex structure

References

Paul Halmos (1958, 1974) Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces, p 41 and §77 Complexification, pp 150–153, Springer, ISBN 0-387-90093-4 .
Ronald Shaw (1982) Linear Algebra and Group Representations, v. 1, §1.5.4 Complexification and realification, pp 40–2 & §5.5.2 Complexification p 196, Academic Press ISBN 0-12-639201-3 .


"
Category:Complex manifolds Category:Vector spaces


