


Industrial noise




Industrial noise

Industrial noise is often a term used in relation to environmental health and safety, rather than nuisance, as sustained exposure can cause permanent hearing damage. Traditionally, occupational noise has been a hazard linked to heavy industries such as ship-building and associated only with noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL). Modern thinking in occupational safety and health identifies noise as hazardous to worker safety and health in many places of employment and by a variety of means.
Noise can not only cause hearing impairment (at long-term exposures of over 85 decibels (dB), known as an exposure action value), but it also acts as a causal factor for stress and raises systolic blood pressure.
Additionally, it can be a causal factor in work accidents, both by masking hazards and warning signals, and by impeding concentration.
Noise also acts synergistically with other hazards to increase the risk of harm to workers. In particular, noise and dangerous substances (e.g. some solvents) that have some tendencies towards ototoxicity may give rise to rapid ear damage.
A-weighted measurements are commonly used to determine noise levels that can cause harm to the human ear, and special exposure meters are available that integrate noise over a period of time to give an Leq value (equivalent sound pressure level), defined by standards.
Reduction
Acoustic quieting is the process of making machinery quieter by damping vibrations to prevent them from reaching the observer.
When two identical industrial noise sources are side by side producing a recorded noise at 100 dB(A) the reduction in noise from shutting off one of the noise sources is about 3 dB resulting in 97 dB(A).
When one doubles the distance from a noise source the recorded noise level is reduced by 6 dB. This is also called the Rule of 6. This is based on the fact that the equation to calculate noise attenuation at a distance 
 
 
 
 , knowing the SPL at distance 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
 , where d is the distance. If the distance is doubled, the equation simplifies to 
 
 
 
  which equals 6.02 (or approx. 6)
In recent years, Buy Quiet programs and initiatives have arisen in an effort to combat occupational noise exposures. These programs promote the purchase of quieter tools and equipment and encourage manufacturers to design quieter equipment.1
Regulation
Industrial noise can also be combated with legislation. A 2012 Cochrane review found low-quality evidence that legislation reduced industrial noise both immediately and in the long-term.2
See also

Buy Quiet
Earplug
Earmuffs
Protective clothing
A-weighting
ITU-R 468 noise weighting
Weighting filter
Equal-loudness contour
Safe-In-Sound Award Excellence in Hearing Loss Prevention

General:

Health effects from noise
Noise control
Noise mitigation
Noise pollution
Noise regulation

References
External links

Occupational Safety & Health Administration
NIOSH Buy Quiet Topic Page

"
Category:Noise Category:Noise pollution Category:Occupational safety and health Category:Industrial hygiene



http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/buyquiet/default.html↩
↩




