


Astroid




Astroid

 
An astroid is a particular mathematical curve: a hypocycloid with four cusps. Specifically, it is the locus of a point on a circle as it rolls inside a fixed circle with four times the radius.1 By double generation, it is also the locus of a point on a circle as it rolls inside a fixed circle with 4/3 times the radius. It can also be defined as the envelope of a line segment with an end point on each of the axes. It is therefore the envelope of the moving bar in the Trammel of Archimedes.
Its modern name comes from the Greek word for "star". The curve had a variety of names, including tetracuspid (still used), cubocycloid, and paracycle. It is nearly identical in form to the evolute of an ellipse.
Equations
If the radius of the fixed circle is a then the equation is given by2


 
  This implies that an astroid is also a superellipse.
Parametric equations are






The pedal equation with respect to the origin is



the Whewell equation is



and the Cesàro equation is



The polar equation is3



The astroid is a real locus of a plane algebraic curve of genus zero. It has the equation



The astroid is therefore a real algebraic curve of degree six.
Metric properties

Area enclosed4





Length of curve





Volume of the surface of revolution of the enclose area about the x-axis.





Area of surface of revolution about the x-axis




Properties
The astroid has four cusp singularities in the real plane, the points on the star. It has two more complex cusp singularities at infinity, and four complex double points, for a total of ten singularities.
The dual curve to the astroid is the cruciform curve with equation 
 
 
 
  The evolute of an astroid is an astroid twice as large.
See also

Cardioid (epicycloid with one cusp)
Nephroid (epicycloid with two cusps)
Deltoid (hypocycloid with three cusps)
Stoner–Wohlfarth astroid a use of this curve in magnetics.

References





External links



"Astroid" at The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive
"Astroïde" at Encyclopédie des Formes Mathématiques Remarquables (in French)
Article on 2dcurves.com
Visual Dictionary Of Special Plane Curves, Xah Lee
Bars of an Astroid by Sándor Kabai, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project.

"
Category:Sextic curves Category:Curves



Yates↩
Yates, for section↩
Mathworld↩
Yates, for section↩




