


Polynomial remainder theorem




Polynomial remainder theorem

In algebra, the polynomial remainder theorem or little Bézout's theorem1 is an application of Euclidean division of polynomials. It states that the remainder of the division of a polynomial

 
  by a linear polynomial

 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
  In particular, 
 
 
 
 
  is a divisor of 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
2
Examples
Example 1
Let 
 
 
 
 . Polynomial division of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 
  gives the quotient 
 
 
 
  and the remainder 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, 
 
 
 
 .
Example 2
Show that the polynomial remainder theorem holds for an arbitrary second degree polynomial 
 
 
 
  by using algebraic manipulation:



Multiplying both sides by (x − r) gives


 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
  is our remainder, we have indeed shown that 
 
 
 
 .
Proof
The polynomial remainder theorem follows from the definition of Euclidean division, which, given two polynomials f(x) (the dividend) and g(x) (the divisor), asserts the existence and the unicity of a quotient q(x) and a remainder r(x) such that



If we take 
 
 
 
  as the divisor, either r = 0 or its degree is zero; in both cases, r is a constant that is independent of x; that is



Setting 
 
 
 
  in this formula, we obtain:



Applications
The polynomial remainder theorem may be used to evaluate 
 
 
 
  by calculating the remainder, 
 
 
 
 . Although polynomial long division is more difficult than evaluating the function itself, synthetic division is computationally easier. Thus, the function may be more "cheaply" evaluated using synthetic division and the polynomial remainder theorem.
The factor theorem is another application of the remainder theorem: if the remainder is zero, then the linear divisor is a factor. Repeated application of the factor theorem may be used to factorize the polynomial.3
References
"
Category:Polynomials Category:Theorems in algebra



↩
Larson, Ron (2014), College Algebra, Cengage Learning↩
Larson, Ron (2011), Precalculus with Limits, Cengage Learning↩




