


Cone (topology)




Cone (topology)

 In topology, especially algebraic topology, the cone CX of a topological space X is the quotient space:



of the product of X with the unit interval I = [0, 1]. Intuitively we make X into a cylinder and collapse one end of the cylinder to a point.
If X sits inside Euclidean space, the cone on X is homeomorphic to the union of lines from X to another point. That is, the topological cone agrees with the geometric cone when defined. However, the topological cone construction is more general.
Examples

The cone over a point p of the real line is the interval {p} x [0,1].
The cone over two points {0,1} is a "V" shape with endpoints at {0} and {1}.
The cone over an interval I of the real line is a filled-in triangle, otherwise known as a 2-simplex (see the final example).
The cone over a polygon P is a pyramid with base P.
The cone over a disk is the solid cone of classical geometry (hence the concept's name).
The cone over a circle is the curved surface of the solid cone:








This in turn is homeomorphic to the closed disc.
 


In general, the cone over an n-sphere is homeomorphic to the closed (n+1)-ball.
The cone over an n-simplex is an (n+1)-simplex.

Properties
All cones are path-connected since every point can be connected to the vertex point. Furthermore, every cone is contractible to the vertex point by the homotopy

ht(x,s) = (x, (1−t)s).
 

The cone is used in algebraic topology precisely because it embeds a space as a subspace of a contractible space.
When X is compact and Hausdorff (essentially, when X can be embedded in Euclidean space), then the cone CX can be visualized as the collection of lines joining every point of X to a single point. However, this picture fails when X is not compact or not Hausdorff, as generally the quotient topology on CX will be finer than the set of lines joining X to a point.
Reduced cone
If 
 
 
 
  is a pointed space, there is a related construction, the reduced cone, given by



With this definition, the natural inclusion 
 
 
 
  becomes a based map, where we take 
 
 
 
  to be the basepoint of the reduced cone.
Cone functor
The map 
 
 
 
  induces a functor

 
  on the category of topological spaces Top.
See also

Cone (disambiguation)
Suspension (topology)
Desuspension
Mapping cone
Join (topology)

References

Allen Hatcher, Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. xii+544 pp. ISBN 0-521-79160-X and ISBN 0-521-79540-0


"
Category:Topology Category:Algebraic topology


