


Factorial moment




Factorial moment

In probability theory, the factorial moment is a mathematical quantity defined as the expectation or average of the falling factorial of a random variable. Factorial moments are useful for studying non-negative integer-valued random variables.1 and arise in the use of probability-generating functions to derive the moments of discrete random variables.
Factorial moments serve as analytic tools in the mathematical field of combinatorics, which is the study of discrete mathematical structures.2
Definition
For a natural number 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 -th factorial moment of a probability distribution on the real or complex numbers, or, in other words, a random variable

 
  with that probability distribution, is3



where the 
 
 
 
  is the expectation (operator) and



is the falling factorial, which gives rise to the name, although the notation  varies depending on the mathematical field.  Of course, the definition requires that the expectation is meaningful, which is the case if  or .
Examples
Poisson distribution
If a random variable 
 
 
 
  has a Poisson distribution with parameter or expected value

 
 , then the factorial moments of 
 
 
 
 
  are



The Poisson distribution has a factorial moments with straightforward form compared to its moments, which involve Stirling numbers of the second kind.
Binomial distribution
If a random variable 
 
 
 
  has a binomial distribution with success probability 
 
 

 
  and number of trails 
 
 
 
 
 , then the factorial moments of 
 
 
 
  are4



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the factorial of a non-negative integer. For all 
 
 
 
 , the factorial moments are zero.
Hypergeometric distribution
If a random variable 
 
 
 
 
  has a hypergeometric distribution with population size 
 
 
 
 , number of success states } in the population, and draws }, then the factorial moments of 
 
 
 
  are 5



For all larger 
 
 
 
 , the factorial moments are zero.
Beta-binomial distribution
If a random variable 
 
 
 
 
  has a beta-binomial distribution with parameters 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and number of trails 
 
 
 
 , then the factorial moments of 
 
 
 
  are



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the beta function. For all 
 
 
 
 , the factorial moments are zero.
Calculation of moments
In the examples above, the 
 
 
 
 -th moment of the random variable 
 
 
 
  can be calculated by the formula



where the curly braces denote Stirling numbers of the second kind.
See also

Factorial moment measure
Moment (mathematics)
Cumulant
Factorial moment generating function

Notes
References
"
Category:Theory of probability distributions Category:Factorial and binomial topics



D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. I. Probability and its Applications (New York). Springer, New York, second edition, 2003.








