


Helmholtz decomposition




Helmholtz decomposition
In [[physics]] and [[mathematics]], in the area of [[vector calculus]], '''Helmholtz's theorem''',On Helmholtz's Theorem in Finite Regions. By [[Jean Bladel]]. Midwestern Universities Research Association, 1958.Hermann von Helmholtz. Clarendon Press, 1906. By [[Leo Koenigsberger]]. p357 also known as the '''fundamental theorem of vector calculus''',An Elementary Course in the Integral Calculus. By [[Daniel Alexander Murray]]. American Book Company, 1898. p8.[[J. W. Gibbs]] & [[Edwin Bidwell Wilson]] (1901) [https://archive.org/stream/117714283#page/236/mode/2up Vector Analysis], page 237, link from [[Internet Archive]]Electromagnetic theory, Volume 1. By [[Oliver Heaviside]]. "The Electrician" printing and publishing 
 company, limited, 1893.1234 states that any sufficiently smooth, rapidly decaying vector field in three dimensions can be resolved into the sum of an irrotational (curl-free) vector field and a solenoidal (divergence-free) vector field; this is known as the Helmholtz decomposition. It is named after Hermann von Helmholtz.See:

H. Helmholtz (1858) [http://books.google.com/books?id=6gwPAAAAIAAJ&pg;;=PA25#v=onepage&q;&f;=false "Über Integrale der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen, welcher der Wirbelbewegungen entsprechen"] (On integrals of the hydrodynamic equations which correspond to vortex motions), Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 55: 25-55. On page 38, the components of the fluid's velocity (u, v, w) are expressed in terms of the gradient of a scalar potential P and the curl of a vector potential (L, M, N).
However, Helmholtz was largely anticipated by George Stokes in his paper: G. G. Stokes (presented: 1849 ; published: 1856) [http://books.google.com/books?id=L_NYAAAAYAAJ&pg;;=PA1#v=onepage&q;&f;=false "On the dynamical theory of diffraction,"] Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 9, part I, pages 1-62; see pages 9-10.

Because an irrotational vector field has a scalar potential and a solenoidal vector field has a vector potential, the Helmholtz decomposition states that a vector field (satisfying appropriate smoothness and decay conditions) can be decomposed as the sum of the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a scalar field, called scalar potential, and 
 
 
 
  is a vector field called a vector potential.
Statement of the theorem
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a vector field on a bounded domain , which is twice continuously differentiable, and let 
 
 
 
  be the surface that encloses the domain 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed into a curl-free component and a divergence-free component:5



where






If  R3}} and is therefore unbounded, and 
 
 
 
  vanishes faster than 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , then the second component of both scalar and vector potential are zero. That is,6






Derivation
Suppose we have a vector function 
 
 
 
  of which we know the curl, 
 
 
 
 , and the divergence, 
 
 
 
 , in the domain and the fields on the boundary. Writing the function using delta function in the form






Then using the vectorial identities



we get



Take advantage of the divergence theorem, the equation can be rewritten as



with outward surface normal 
 
 
 
 .
Define






Hence



Another derivation from the Fourier transform
Write 
 
 
 
  as a Fourier transform :



The Fourier transform of a scalar field is a scalar field, and the Fourier transform of a vector field is a vector field of same dimension.
Now consider the following scalar and vector fields :



Hence



Fields with prescribed divergence and curl
The term "Helmholtz Theorem" can also refer to the following. Let 
 
 
 
  be a solenoidal vector field and d a scalar field on  which are sufficiently smooth and which vanish faster than 1/r2 at infinity. Then there exists a vector field 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  and 
 
 

if additionally the vector field 
 
 
 
  vanishes as 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is unique.7
In other words, a vector field can be constructed with both a specified divergence and a specified curl, and if it also vanishes at infinity, it is uniquely specified by its divergence and curl. This theorem is of great importance in electrostatics, since Maxwell's equations for the electric and magnetic fields in the static case are of exactly this type.8 The proof is by a construction generalizing the one given above: we set



where 
 
 
 
  represents the Newtonian potential operator. (When acting on a vector field, such as 
 
 
 
 , it is defined to act on each component.)
Differential forms
The Hodge decomposition is closely related to the Helmholtz decomposition, generalizing from vector fields on R3 to differential forms on a Riemannian manifold M. Most formulations of the Hodge decomposition require M to be compact.9 Since this is not true of R3, the Hodge decomposition theorem is not strictly a generalization of the Helmholtz theorem. However, the compactness restriction in the usual formulation of the Hodge decomposition can be replaced by suitable decay assumptions at infinity on the differential forms involved, giving a proper generalization of the Helmholtz theorem.
Weak formulation
The Helmholtz decomposition can also be generalized by reducing the regularity assumptions (the need for the existence of strong derivatives). Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a bounded, simply-connected, Lipschitz domain. Every square-integrable vector field  has an orthogonal decomposition:



where 
 
 
 
  is in the Sobolev space  of square-integrable functions on 
 
 
 
  whose partial derivatives defined in the distribution sense are square integrable, and 
 
 
 
 , the Sobolev space of vector fields consisting of square integrable vector fields with square integrable curl.
For a slightly smoother vector field 
 
 
 
 , a similar decomposition holds:



where .
Longitudinal and transverse fields
A terminology often used in physics refers to the curl-free component of a vector field as the longitudinal component and the divergence-free component as the transverse component.10 This terminology comes from the following construction: Compute the three-dimensional Fourier transform of the vector field F. Then decompose this field, at each point k, into two components, one of which points longitudinally, i.e. parallel to k, the other of which points in the transverse direction, i.e. perpendicular to k. So far, we have









Now we apply an inverse Fourier transform to each of these components. Using properties of Fourier transforms, we derive:









Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,
we can get






so this is indeed the Helmholtz decomposition.11
See also

Darwin Lagrangian for an application
Poloidal–toroidal decomposition for a further decomposition of the divergence-free component 
 
 
 
 .
Scalar-vector-tensor decomposition

Notes
References
General references

George B. Arfken and Hans J. Weber, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 4th edition, Academic Press: San Diego (1995) pp. 92–93
George B. Arfken and Hans J. Weber, Mathematical Methods for Physicists International Edition, 6th edition, Academic Press: San Diego (2005) pp. 95–101

References for the weak formulation

C. Amrouche, C. Bernardi, M. Dauge, and V. Girault. "Vector potentials in three dimensional non-smooth domains." Mathematical Methods in the Applied Sciences, 21, 823–864, 1998.
R. Dautray and J.-L. Lions. Spectral Theory and Applications, volume 3 of Mathematical Analysis and Numerical Methods for Science and Technology. Springer-Verlag, 1990.
V. Girault and P.A. Raviart. Finite Element Methods for Navier–Stokes Equations: Theory and Algorithms. Springer Series in Computational Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1986.

External links

Helmholtz theorem on MathWorld

"
Category:Vector calculus Category:Theorems in analysis *Helmholtz decomposition Category:Analytic geometry Category:Hermann von Helmholtz



Elements of the differential calculus. By Wesley Stoker Barker Woolhouse. Weale, 1854.
An Elementary Treatise on the Integral Calculus: Founded on the Method of Rates Or Fluxions. By William Woolsey Johnson. John Wiley & Sons, 1881.
 See also: Method of Fluxions.
Vector Calculus: With Applications to Physics. By James Byrnie Shaw. D. Van Nostrand, 1922. p205.
 See also: Green's Theorem.
A Treatise on the Integral Calculus, Volume 2. By Joseph Edwards. Chelsea Publishing Company, 1922.

David J. Griffiths, Introduction to Electrodynamics, Prentice-Hall, 1999, p. 556.



Stewart, A. M.; Longitudinal and transverse components of a vector field, Sri Lankan Journal of Physics 12, 33-42 (2011)
Online lecture notes by Robert Littlejohn




