


Birkhoff's axioms




Birkhoff's axioms

In 1932, G. D. Birkhoff created a set of four postulates of Euclidean geometry sometimes referred to as Birkhoff's axioms. These postulates are all based on basic geometry that can be confirmed experimentally with a scale and protractor. Since the postulates build upon the real numbers, the approach is similar to a model-based introduction to Euclidean geometry. Other often-used axiomizations of plane geometry are Hilbert's axioms and Tarski's axioms.
Birkhoff's axiom system was utilized in the secondary-school text Basic Geometry (first edition, 1940; see References). Birkhoff's axioms were also modified by the School Mathematics Study Group to provide a new standard for teaching high school geometry, known as SMSG axioms.
Postulates
Postulate I: Postulate of Line Measure. A set of points {A, B, ...} on any line can be put into a 1:1 correspondence with the real numbers {a, b, ...} so that |b − a| = d(A, B) for all points A and B.
Postulate II: Point-Line Postulate. There is one and only one line, ℓ, that contains any two given distinct points P and Q.
Postulate III: Postulate of Angle Measure. A set of rays {ℓ, m, n, ...} through any point O can be put into 1:1 correspondence with the real numbers a (mod 2π) so that if A and B are points (not equal to O) of ℓ and m, respectively, the difference am − aℓ (mod 2π) of the numbers associated with the lines ℓ and m is 
 
 
AOB. Furthermore, if the point B on m varies continuously in a line r not containing the vertex O, the number am varies continuously also.
Postulate IV: Postulate of Similarity. Given two triangles ABC and A'B'C'  and some constant k > 0, d(''A', B' ) = kd(A, B''), d(A', C' ) = kd(A, C) and 
 
 
B'A'C'  = ±
 
 
BAC, then d(B', C' ) = kd(B, C), 
 
 
C'B'A'  = ±
 
 
CBA, and 
 
 
A'C'B'  = ±
 
 
ACB.
See also

Euclidean geometry
Euclidean space
Foundations of geometry

References

Birkhoff, George David. 1932. "A Set of Postulates for Plane Geometry (Based on Scale and Protractors)," Annals of Mathematics 33.
Birkhoff, George David and Ralph Beatley. 1959. Basic Geometry 3rd ed. Chelsea Publishing Co. [Reprint: American Mathematical Society, 2000. ISBN 978-0-8218-2101-5]

"
Category:Foundations of geometry Category:Elementary geometry


