


Pontryagin's minimum principle




Pontryagin's minimum principle

Pontryagin's maximum (or minimum) principle is used in optimal control theory to find the best possible control for taking a dynamical system from one state to another, especially in the presence of constraints for the state or input controls. It was formulated in 1956 by the Russian mathematician Lev Pontryagin and his students.1 It has as a special case the Euler–Lagrange equation of the calculus of variations.
The principle states informally that the control Hamiltonian must take an extreme value over controls in , the set of all permissible controls. Whether the extreme value is maximum or minimum depends both on the problem and on the sign convention used for defining the Hamiltonian. The normal convention, which is the one used in Hamiltonian, leads to a maximum hence maximum principle but the sign convention used in this article, which apparently comes from,2 makes the extreme value a minimum, hence the unusual name minimum principle.
If 
 
 
 
  is the set of values of permissible controls then the principle states that the optimal control u* must satisfy:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the optimal state trajectory and 
 
 
 
  is the optimal costate trajectory.3
The result was first successfully applied to minimum time problems where the input control is constrained, but it can also be useful in studying state-constrained problems.
Special conditions for the Hamiltonian can also be derived. When the final time 
 
 
 
  is fixed and the Hamiltonian does not depend explicitly on time 
 
 
 
 , then:


 
  and if the final time is free, then:


 
  More general conditions on the optimal control are given below.
When satisfied along a trajectory, Pontryagin's minimum principle is a necessary condition for an optimum. The Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation provides a necessary and sufficient condition for an optimum, but this condition must be satisfied over the whole of the state space.
Maximization and minimization
The principle was first known as Pontryagin's maximum principle and its proof is historically based on maximizing the Hamiltonian. The initial application of this principle was to the maximization of the terminal speed of a rocket. However as it was subsequently mostly used for minimization of a performance index it has here been referred to as the minimum principle. Pontryagin's book solved the problem of minimizing a performance index.4
Notation
In what follows we will be making use of the following notation.















Formal statement of necessary conditions for minimization problem
Here the necessary conditions are shown for minimization of a functional. Take 
 
 
 
  to be the state of the dynamical system with input 
 
 
 
 , such that


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the set of admissible controls and 
 
 
 
  is the terminal (i.e., final) time of the system. The control 
 
 
 
  must be chosen for all 
 
 
 
  to minimize the objective functional 
 
 
 
  which is defined by the application and can be abstracted as



The constraints on the system dynamics can be adjoined to the Lagrangian

 
  by introducing time-varying Lagrange multiplier vector 
 
 
 
 , whose elements are called the costates of the system. This motivates the construction of the Hamiltonian

 
  defined for all 
 
 
 
  by:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the transpose of 
 
 
 
 .
Pontryagin's minimum principle states that the optimal state trajectory 
 
 
 
 , optimal control 
 
 
 
 , and corresponding Lagrange multiplier vector 
 
 
 
  must minimize the Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
  so that



for all time 
 
 
 
  and for all permissible control inputs 
 
 
 
 . It must also be the case that



Additionally, the costate equations



must be satisfied. If the final state 
 
 
 
  is not fixed (i.e., its differential variation is not zero), it must also be that the terminal costates are such that



These four conditions in (1)-(4) are the necessary conditions for an optimal control. Note that (4) only applies when 
 
 
 
  is free. If it is fixed, then this condition is not necessary for an optimum.
See also

Lagrange multipliers on Banach spaces, Lagrangian method in calculus of variations

Notes
References






Slides are available at 1




External links


Pontryagin's Principle Illustrated with Examples

fr:Commande optimale#Principe du maximum ru:Оптимальное управление#Принцип максимума Понтрягина"
Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Optimal control Category:Principles Category:Calculus of variations



See ref. below for first published work.↩
↩
More info on C1 and BV spaces↩
See p.13 of the 1962 book of Pontryagin et al. referenced below.↩




