


Superparticular ratio




Superparticular ratio

__NOTOC__ In mathematics, a superparticular ratio, also called a superparticular number or epimoric ratio, is a ratio of the form



Thus: 
Superparticular ratios were written about by Nicomachus in his treatise "Introduction to Arithmetic". Although these numbers have applications in modern pure mathematics, the areas of study that most frequently refer to the superparticular ratios by this name are music theory1 and the history of mathematics.2
Mathematical properties
As Euler observed, the superparticular numbers (including also the multiply superparticular ratios, numbers formed by adding an integer other than one to a unit fraction) are exactly the rational numbers whose continued fraction terminates after two terms. The numbers whose continued fraction terminates in one term are the integers, while the remaining numbers, with three or more terms in their continued fractions, are superpartient.3
The Wallis product


 
  represents the irrational number 

 in several ways as a product of superparticular ratios and their inverses. It is also possible to convert the Leibniz formula for π into an Euler product of superparticular ratios in which each term has a prime number as its numerator and the nearest multiple of four as its denominator:4



In graph theory, superparticular numbers (or rather, their reciprocals, 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, etc.) arise via the Erdős–Stone theorem as the possible values of the upper density of an infinite graph.5
Other applications
In the study of harmony, many musical intervals can be expressed as a superparticular ratio. Indeed, whether a ratio was superparticular was the most important criterion in Ptolemy's formulation of musical harmony.6 In this application, Størmer's theorem can be used to list all possible superparticular numbers for a given limit; that is, all ratios of this type in which both the numerator and denominator are smooth numbers.7
These ratios are also important in visual harmony. Aspect ratios of 4:3 and 3:2 are common in digital photography,8 and aspect ratios of 7:6 and 5:4 are used in medium format and large format photography respectively.9
Ratio names and related intervals
Every pair of adjacent positive integers represent a superparticular ratio, and similarly every pair of adjacent harmonics in the harmonic series (music) represent a superparticular ratio. Many individual superparticular ratios have their own names, either in historical mathematics or in music theory. These include the following:




Examples

Ratio

Name

Related musical interval

Audio



2:1

duplex

octave




3:2

sesquialterum

perfect fifth




4:3

sesquitertium

perfect fourth




5:4

sesquiquartum

major third




6:5

sesquiquintum

minor third




7:6


septimal minor third




8:7


septimal major second




9:8

sesquioctavum

major second




10:9

sesquinona

minor tone




11:10


greater undecimal neutral second




12:11


lesser undecimal neutral second




15:14


septimal diatonic semitone




16:15


just diatonic semitone




21:20


Septimal chromatic semitone




25:24


just chromatic semitone




28:27


septimal third-tone




49:48


septimal diesis




50:49


Septimal sixth-tone




81:80


syntonic comma




126:125


septimal semicomma




225:224


septimal kleisma




4375:4374


ragisma




The root of some of these terms comes from Latin sesqui- "one and a half" (from semis "a half" + -que "and") describing the ratio 3:2.
Sources
External links

Superparticular numbers applied to construct pentatonic scales by David Canright.
De Institutione Arithmetica, liber II by Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius

"
Category:Rational numbers *




. On pp. 123–124 the book discusses the classification of ratios into various types including the superparticular ratios, and the tradition by which this classification was handed down from Nichomachus to Boethius, Campanus, Oresme, and Clavius.
. See in particular p. 304.
.

.

. Ang also notes the 16:9 (widescreen) aspect ratio as another common choice for digital photography, but unlike 4:3 and 3:2 this ratio is not superparticular.
The 7:6 medium format aspect ratio is one of several ratios possible using medium-format 120 film, and the 5:4 ratio is achieved by two common sizes for large format film, 4×5 inches and 8×10 inches. See e.g. .




