


Pullback (category theory)




Pullback (category theory)

In category theory, a branch of mathematics, a pullback (also called a fiber product, fibre product, fibered product or Cartesian square) is the limit of a diagram consisting of two morphisms

 
  and 
 
 
 
  with a common codomain; it is the limit of the cospan

 
 . The pullback is often written

 X ×Z Y}}.
 

The categorical dual of a pullback is a called a pushout. Remarks opposite to the above apply: the pushout is a coproduct with additional structure.
Universal property
Explicitly, the pullback of the morphisms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  consists of an object 
 
 
 
  and two morphisms  and  for which the diagram




commutes. Moreover, the pullback  must be universal with respect to this diagram. That is, for any other such triple  for which the following diagram commutes, there must exist a unique 
 
 
 
  (called a mediating morphism) such that







As with all universal constructions, the pullback, if it exists, is unique up to isomorphism. In fact, given two pullbacks  and  of the same cospan, there is a unique isomorphism between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respecting the pullback structure.
Weak pullbacks
A weak pullback of a cospan

 
  is a cone over the cospan that is only weakly universal, that is, the mediating morphism 
 
 
 
  above is not required to be unique.
Pullback and product
The pullback is similar to the product, but not the same. One may obtain the product by "forgetting" that the morphisms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  exist, and forgetting that the object 
 
 
 
  exists. One is then left with a discrete category containing only the two objects 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and no arrows between them. This discrete category may be used as the index set to construct the ordinary binary product. Thus, the pullback can be thought of as the ordinary (Cartesian) product, but with additional structure. Instead of "forgetting" 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , one can also "trivialize" them by specializing 
 
 
 
  to be the terminal object (assuming it exists). 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are then uniquely determined and thus carry no information, and the pullback of this cospan can be seen to be the product of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
Commutative rings
 In the category of commutative rings (with identity), denoted 
 
 
 
 , the pullback is called the fibered product. Let



 
 ,
 


 
 ,
 


 
 .
 

So 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are commutative rings with identity and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are ring homomorphisms. Then the pullback of this diagram is the subring of the Cartesian product 
 
 
 
  defined by



along with the morphisms



given by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , for which



Sets
In the category of sets, a pullback of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is given by the set



together with the restrictions of the projection maps  and  to .
Alternatively one may view the pullback in 
 
 
 
  asymmetrically:



where 
 
 
 
  is the disjoint (tagged) union of sets (the involved sets are not disjoint on their own unless 
 
 
 
  resp. 
 
 
 
  is injective). In the first case, the projection  extracts the 
 
 
 
  index while  forgets the index, leaving elements of 
 
 
 
 .
This example motivates another way of characterizing the pullback: as the equalizer of the morphisms  where 
 
 
 
  is the binary product of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and  and  are the natural projections. This shows that pullbacks exist in any category with binary products and equalizers. In fact, by the existence theorem for limits, all finite limits exist in a category with a terminal object, binary products and equalizers.
Fiber bundles
Another example of a pullback comes from the theory of fiber bundles: given a bundle map 
 
 
 
  and a continuous map

 
 , the pullback  is a fiber bundle over 
 
 
 
  called the pullback bundle. The associated commutative diagram is a morphism of fiber bundles.
Categories with a terminal object
In any category with a terminal object

 
 , the pullback  is just the ordinary product

 
 .1
Preimages
Preimages of sets under functions can be described as pullbacks as follows:
Suppose 
 
 
 
 , . Let 
 
 
 
  be the inclusion map . Then a pullback of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (in 
 
 
 
 ) is given by the preimage  together with the inclusion of the preimage in 
 
 





and the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 

.
 

Properties

Whenever  exists, then so does  and there is an isomorphism .
Monomorphisms are stable under pullback: if the arrow 
 
 
 
  above is monic, then so is the arrow . For example, in the category of sets, if 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 , then, for any 
 
 
 
 , the pullback  is the inverse image of 
 
 
 
  under .
Isomorphisms are also stable, and hence, for example,  for any map 
 
 
 
 .
Any category with pullbacks and products has equalizers.

See also

Pullbacks in differential geometry
Equijoin in relational algebra.
Pullback

Notes
References

Adámek, Jiří, Herrlich, Horst, & Strecker, George E.; (1990). Abstract and Concrete Categories (4.2MB PDF). Originally publ. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-60922-6. (now free on-line edition).
Cohn, Paul M.; Universal Algebra (1981), D.Reidel Publishing, Holland, ISBN 90-277-1213-1 (Originally published in 1965, by Harper & Row).

External links

Interactive web page which generates examples of pullbacks in the category of finite sets. Written by Jocelyn Paine.
pullbacks on the N-Category Lab.

"
Category:Limits (category theory)



Adámek, p. 197.




