


Roulette (curve)




Roulette (curve)

In the differential geometry of curves, a roulette is a kind of curve, generalizing cycloids, epicycloids, hypocycloids, trochoids, and involutes.
Definition
Informal definition
 Roughly speaking, a roulette is the curve described by a point (called the generator or pole) attached to a given curve as that curve rolls without slipping, along a second given curve that is fixed. More precisely, given a curve attached to a plane which is moving so that the curve rolls, without slipping, along a given curve attached to a fixed plane occupying the same space, then a point attached to the moving plane describes a curve, in the fixed plane called a roulette.
In the illustration, the fixed curve (blue) is a parabola, the rolling curve (green) is an equal parabola, and the generator is the vertex of the rolling parabola which describes the roulette (red). In this case the roulette is the cissoid of Diocles.1
Special cases and related concepts
In the case where the rolling curve is a line and the generator is a point on the line, the roulette is called an involute of the fixed curve. If the rolling curve is a circle and the fixed curve is a line then the roulette is a trochoid. If, in this case, the point lies on the circle then the roulette is a cycloid.
A related concept is a glissette, the curve described by a point attached to a given curve as it slides along two (or more) given curves.
Formal definition
Formally speaking, the curves must be differentiable curves in the Euclidean plane. The fixed curve is kept invariant; the rolling curve is subjected to a continuous congruence transformation such that at all times the curves are tangent at a point of contact that moves with the same speed when taken along either curve (another way to express this constraint is that the point of contact of the two curves is the instant centre of rotation of the congruence transformation). The resulting roulette is formed by the locus of the generator subjected to the same set of congruence transformations.
Modeling the original curves as curves in the complex plane, let 
 
 
 
  be the two natural parameterizations of the rolling (
 
 
 
 ) and fixed (
 
 
 
 ) curves, such that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . The roulette of generator 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  is rolled on 
 
 
 
  is then given by the mapping:



Generalizations
If, instead of a single point being attached to the rolling curve, another given curve is carried along the moving plane, a family of congruent curves is produced. The envelope of this family may also be called a roulette.
Roulettes in higher spaces can certainly be imagined but one needs to align more than just the tangents.
Example
If the fixed curve is a catenary and the rolling curve is a line, we have:






The parameterization of the line is chosen so that






Applying the formula above we obtain:



If p = −i the expression has a constant imaginary part (namely −i) and the roulette is a horizontal line. An interesting application of this is that a square wheel could roll without bouncing on a road that is a matched series of catenary arcs.
List of roulettes




Fixed curve

Rolling curve

Generating point

Roulette





Any curve

Line

Point on the line

Involute of the curve



Line

Circle

Any

Trochoid



Line

Circle

Point on the circle

Cycloid



Line

Conic section

Center of the conic

Sturm roulette2



Line

Conic section

Focus of the conic

Delaunay roulette3



Line

Parabola

Focus of the parabola

Catenary4



Line

Ellipse

Focus of the ellipse

Elliptic catenary5



Line

Hyperbola

Focus of the hyperbola

Hyperbolic catenary6



Line

Hyperbola

Center of the hyperbola

Rectangular elastica7



Line

Epicycloid or Hypocycloid

Center

Ellipse8



Circle

Circle

Any

Centered trochoid9



Parabola

Equal parabola parameterized in opposite direction

Vertex of the parabola

Cissoid of Diocles10



Catenary

Line

See example above

Line



See also

Spirograph

Notes
References

W. H. Besant (1890) Notes on Roulettes and Glissettes from Cornell University Historical Math Monographs, originally published by Deighton, Bell & Co.


Further reading

Roulette at 2dcurves.com
Base, roulante et roulettes d'un mouvement plan sur plan 
Eine einheitliche Darstellung von ebenen, verallgemeinerten Rollbewegungen und deren Anwendungen 

"
Category:Curves




"Sturm's roulette" on www.mathcurve.com↩
"Delaunay's roulette" on www.mathcurve.com↩
"Delaunay's roulette" on www.2dcurves.com↩



"Roulette with straight fixed curve" on www.mathcurve.com↩
"Centered trochoid" on mathcurve.com↩
"Cissoid" on www.2dcurves.com↩




