


G2 manifold




G2 manifold

 In differential geometry, a G2 manifold is a seven-dimensional Riemannian manifold with holonomy group contained in G2. The group

 
  is one of the five exceptional simple Lie groups. It can be described as the automorphism group of the octonions, or equivalently, as a proper subgroup of special orthogonal group SO(7) that preserves a spinor in the eight-dimensional spinor representation or lastly as the subgroup of the general linear group GL(7) which preserves the non-degenerate 3-form 
 
 
 
 , the associative form. The Hodge dual, 
 
 
 
  is then a parallel 4-form, the coassociative form. These forms are calibrations in the sense of Harvey–Lawson, and thus define special classes of 3- and 4-dimensional submanifolds.
Properties
If M is a 
 
 
 
 -manifold, then M is:

Ricci-flat,
orientable,
a spin manifold.

History
Manifold with holonomy 
 
 
 
  was firstly introduced by Edmond Bonan in 1966, who constructed the parallel 3-form, the parallel 4-form and showed that this manifold was Ricci-flat. The first complete, but noncompact 7-manifolds with holonomy 
 
 
 
  were constructed by Robert Bryant and Salamon in 1989. The first compact 7-manifolds with holonomy 
 
 
 
  were constructed by Dominic Joyce in 1994, and compact 
 
 
 
  manifolds are sometimes known as "Joyce manifolds", especially in the physics literature.
Connections to physics
These manifolds are important in string theory. They break the original supersymmetry to 1/8 of the original amount. For example, M-theory compactified on a 
 
 
 
  manifold leads to a realistic four-dimensional (11-7=4) theory with N=1 supersymmetry. The resulting low energy effective supergravity contains a single supergravity supermultiplet, a number of chiral supermultiplets equal to the third Betti number of the 
 
 
 
  manifold and a number of U(1) vector supermultiplets equal to the second Betti number.
See also

Spin(7)-manifold
Calabi–Yau manifold

References


.

.

.

.

.

.
.

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Structures on manifolds


