


Exterior covariant derivative




Exterior covariant derivative

In mathematics, the exterior covariant derivative is an analog of an exterior derivative that takes into account the presence of a connection.
Definition
Let G be a Lie group and P → M be a principal G-bundle on a smooth manifold M. Suppose there is a connection on P so that it gives a natural direct sum decomposition of each tangent space 
 
 
 
  into the horizontal and vertical subspaces. Let 
 
 
 
  be the projection.
If ϕ is a k-form on P with values in a vector space V, then its exterior covariant derivative Dϕ is a form defined by


 
  where vi are tangent vectors to P at u.
Suppose V is a representation of G; i.e., there is a Lie group homomorphism ρ: G →GL(V). If φ is equivariant in the sense:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , then Dϕ is a tensorial (k + 1)-form on P of the type ρ: it is equivariant and horizontal (a form ψ is horizontal if ψ(v0, …, vk) = ψ(hv0, …, hvk).)

Example: if ω is the connection form on P, then Ω = Dω is called the curvature form of ω. Bianchi's second identity says the exterior covariant derivative of Ω is zero; i.e., DΩ = 0.

We also denote the differential of ρ at the identity element by ρ:


 
  If φ is a tensorial k-form of type ρ, then


If k = 0, then, writing 
 
 
 
  for the fundamental vector field (i.e., vertical vector field) generated by X in 
 
 
 
  on P, we have:


 
 , since φ(gu) = ρ(g−1)φ(u). On the other hand, Dφ(X#) = 0. If X is a horizontal vector field, then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In general, by the invariant formula for exterior derivative, we have: for any vector fields Xi's, since φ takes the same values at hXi's and Xi's,


 
 
  where the hat means the term is omitted. This equals 
 
 
 
 . where 
 
 
 
  is a 

 
 -valued form, and




Example: Bianchi's second identity (DΩ = 0) can be stated as
 
 
 
 .

Unlike the usual exterior derivative, which squares to 0 (that is d2 = 0), we have:


Proof: We have:


 
  (cf. the example at Lie algebra-valued differential form#Operations), which is 
 
 
 
  by E. Cartan's structure equation. where F = ρ(Ω). In particular D2 vanishes for a flat connection (i.e., Ω = 0).
If ρ: G →GL(Rn), then one can write


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the matrix with 1 at the (i, j)-th entry and zero on the other entries. The matrix 
 
 
 
  whose entries are 2-forms on P is called the curvature matrix.
Exterior covariant derivative for vector bundles
When ρ: G →GL(V) is a representation, one can form the associated bundle E = P ⊗ρ V. Then the exterior covariant differentiation D given by a connection on P defines


 
  through the correspondence between E-valued forms and tensorial forms of type ρ (see tensorial forms on principal bundles.) Requiring ∇ to satisfy Leibniz's rule, ∇ also acts on any E-valued forms. This ∇ is called the exterior covariant differentiation on E. One also sets: for a section s of E,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the contraction by X. Explicitly,


 
  since 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, given a vector bundle E, one can take its frame bundle, which is a principal bundle, and so gets an exterior covariant differentiation on E (depending on a connection). Identifying tensorial forms and E-valued forms, there is, for example,


 
 .
See also

Exterior connections

Notes
References



"
Category:Connection (mathematics) Category:Differential geometry Category:Fiber bundles


