


Ramanujan graph




Ramanujan graph

In spectral graph theory, a Ramanujan graph, named after Srinivasa Ramanujan, is a regular graph whose spectral gap is almost as large as possible (see extremal graph theory). Such graphs are excellent spectral expanders.
Examples of Ramanujan graphs include the clique, the biclique

 
 , and the Petersen graph. As Murty's survey paper notes, Ramanujan graphs "fuse diverse branches of pure mathematics, namely, number theory, representation theory, and algebraic geometry". As observed by Toshikazu Sunada, a regular graph is Ramanujan if and only if its Ihara zeta function satisfies an analog of the Riemann hypothesis.1
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a connected 
 
 
 
 -regular graph with 
 
 
 
 
  vertices, and let 
 
 
 
  be the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix of 
 
 
 
 . Because 
 
 
 
  is connected and 
 
 
 
 -regular, its eigenvalues satisfy 
 
 

 
 . Whenever there exists 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , define



A 
 
 
 
 
 -regular graph 
 
 
 
  is a Ramanujan graph if 
 
 
 
 .
A Ramanujan graph is characterized as a regular graph whose Ihara zeta function satisfies an analogue of the Riemann Hypothesis.
Extremality of Ramanujan graphs
For a fixed 
 
 
 
  and large 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
 
 
 -regular, 
 
 
 
 -vertex Ramanujan graphs nearly minimize 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -regular graph with diameter

 
 
 , a theorem due to Nilli2 states



Whenever 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -regular and connected on at least three vertices, 
 
 
 
 , and therefore 
 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of all connected 
 
 
 
 -regular graphs 
 
 
 
  with at least 
 
 
 
  vertices. Because the minimum diameter of graphs in 
 
 
 
 
  approaches infinity for fixed 
 
 
 
  and increasing 
 
 
 
 , Nilli's theorem implies an earlier theorem of Alon and Boppana which states



Constructions
Constructions of Ramanujan graphs are often algebraic. Lubotzky, Phillips and Sarnak show how to construct an infinite family of p +1-regular Ramanujan graphs, whenever p ≡ 1 (mod 4) is a prime. Their proof uses the Ramanujan conjecture, which led to the name of Ramanujan graphs. Morgenstern extended the construction of Lubotzky, Phillips and Sarnak to all prime powers. Adam Marcus, Daniel Spielman and Nikhil Srivastava showed an explicit construction of 
 
 
 
 -regular Ramanujan graphs for any 
 
 
 
 
 .
References







External links

Survey paper by M. Ram Murty

"
Category:Graph families Category:Algebraic graph theory Category:Spectral theory Category:Regular graphs Category:Srinivasa Ramanujan



Audrey Terras, Zeta Functions of Graphs: A Stroll through the Garden, volume 128, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, Cambridge University Press, (2010).
A Nilli, On the second eigenualue of a graph, Discrete Mathematics 91 (1991) pp. 207-210.




