


Čech cohomology




Čech cohomology

(Figure)
A Penrose triangle depicts a nontrivial element of the first cohomology of an annulus with values in the group of distances from the observer1

In mathematics, specifically algebraic topology, Čech cohomology is a cohomology theory based on the intersection properties of open covers of a topological space. It is named for the mathematician Eduard Čech.
Motivation
Let X be a topological space, and let 
 
 
 
  be an open cover of X. Define a simplicial complex

 
 , called the nerve of the covering, as follows:

There is one vertex for each element of 
 
 
 
 .
There is one edge for each pair 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
In general, there is one k-simplex for each k+1-element subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
 .

Geometrically, the nerve 
 
 
 
  is essentially a "dual complex" (in the sense of a dual graph, or Poincaré duality) for the covering 
 
 
 
 .
The idea of Čech cohomology is that, if we choose a "nice" cover 
 
 
 
  consisting of sufficiently small open sets, the resulting simplicial complex 
 
 
 
  should be a good combinatorial model for the space X. For such a cover, the Čech cohomology of X is defined to be the simplicial cohomology of the nerve.
This idea can be formalized by the notion of a good cover, for which every open set and every finite intersection of open sets is contractible. However, a more general approach is to take the direct limit of the cohomology groups of the nerve over the system of all possible open covers of X, ordered by refinement. This is the approach adopted below.
Construction
Let 
 
 
 
  be a topological space, and let 
 
 
 
  be a presheaf of abelian groups on 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be an open cover of 
 
 
 
 .
Simplex
A q-simplex

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is an ordered collection of 
 
 
 
  sets chosen from 
 
 
 
 , such that the intersection of all these sets is non-empty. This intersection is called the support of 
 
 
 
  and is denoted 
 
 
 
 .
Now let 
 
 
 
  be such a q-simplex. The j-th partial boundary of 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the (q-1)-simplex obtained by removing the j-th set from 
 
 
 
 , that is:


 
  The boundary of 
 
 
 
  is defined as the alternating sum of the partial boundaries:



Cochain
A q-cochain of 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in 
 
 
 
  is a map which associates to each q-simplex σ an element of 
 
 
 
  and we denote the set of all q-cochains of 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is an abelian group by pointwise addition.
Differential
The cochain groups can be made into a cochain complex

 
  by defining the coboundary operator

 
  by


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the restriction morphism

 
 
  to 
 
 

A calculation shows that 
 
 
 
 .
The coboundary operator is also sometimes called the codifferential.
Cocycle
A q-cochain is called a q-cocycle if it is in the kernel of δ, hence 
 
 
 
  is the set of all q-cocycles.
Thus a (q-1)-cochain f is a cocycle if for all q-simplices σ the cocycle condition 
 
 
 
  holds. In particular, a 1-cochain f is a 1-cocycle if



Coboundary
A q-cochain is called a q-coboundary if it is in the image of δ and 
 
 
 
  is the set of all q-coboundaries.
For example, a 1-cochain f is a 1-coboundary if there exists a 0-cochain h such that 
 
 

Cohomology
The Čech cohomology of 
 
 
 
  with values in 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the cohomology of the cochain complex 
 
 
 
 
 . Thus the qth Čech cohomology is given by


 
 .
The Čech cohomology of X is defined by considering refinements of open covers. If 
 
 
 
  is a refinement of 
 
 
 
  then there is a map in cohomology 
 
 
 
  The open covers of X form a directed set under refinement, so the above map leads to a direct system of abelian groups. The Čech cohomology of X with values in 

 is defined as the direct limit

 
  of this system.
The Čech cohomology of X with coefficients in a fixed abelian group A, denoted 
 
 
 
 , is defined as 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the constant sheaf on X determined by A.
A variant of Čech cohomology, called numerable Čech cohomology, is defined as above, except that all open covers considered are required to be numerable: that is, there is a partition of unity {ρi} such that each support 
 
 
 
 
  is contained in some element of the cover. If X is paracompact and Hausdorff, then numerable Čech cohomology agrees with the usual Čech cohomology.
Relation to other cohomology theories
If X is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex, then the Čech cohomology 
 
 
 
  is naturally isomorphic to the singular cohomology

 
 . If X is a differentiable manifold, then 
 
 
 
  is also naturally isomorphic to the de Rham cohomology; the article on de Rham cohomology provides a brief review of this isomorphism. For less well-behaved spaces, Čech cohomology differs from singular cohomology. For example if X is the closed topologist's sine curve, then 
 
 
 
  whereas 
 
 

If X is a differentiable manifold and the cover 
 
 
 
  of X is a "good cover" (i.e. all the sets Uα are contractible to a point, and all finite intersections of sets in 
 
 
 
  are either empty or contractible to a point), then 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the de Rham cohomology.
If X is compact Hausdorff, then Čech cohomology (with coefficients in a discrete group) is isomorphic to Alexander-Spanier cohomology.
In algebraic geometry
Čech cohomology can be defined more generally for objects in a site C endowed with a topology. This applies, for example, to the Zariski site or the etale site of a scheme X. The Čech cohomology with values in some sheaf F is defined as


 
  where the colimit runs over all coverings (with respect to the chosen topology) of X. Here 
 
 
 
 
  is defined as above, except that the r-fold intersections of open subsets inside the ambient topological space are replaced by the r-fold fiber product



As in the classical situation of topological spaces, there is always a map


 
  from sheaf cohomology to Čech cohomology. It is always an isomorphism in degrees n = 0 and 1, but may fail to be so in general. For the Zariski topology on a Noetherian separated scheme, Čech and sheaf cohomology agree for any quasi-coherent sheaf. For the etale topology, the two cohomologies agree for any sheaf, provided that any finite set of points in the base scheme X are contained in some open affine subscheme. This is satisfied, for example, if X is quasi-projective over an affine scheme.2
The possible difference between Cech cohomology and sheaf cohomology is a motivation for the use of hypercoverings: these are more general objects than the Cech nerve


 
  A hypercovering K∗ of X is a simplicial object in C, i.e., a collection of objects Kn together with boundary and degeneracy maps. Applying a sheaf F to K∗ yields a simplicial abelian group F(K∗) whose n-th cohomology group is denoted Hn(F(K∗)). (This group is the same as 
 
 
 
  in case K equals 
 
 
 
 
 .) Then, it can be shown that there is a canonical isomorphism


 
  where the colimit now runs over all hypercoverings.3
References






ISBN 0-387-90419-0. ISBN 3-540-90419-0. Chapter 2 Appendix A

"
Category:Cohomology theories



. Reprinted from 
, section III.2
, Theorem 8.16




