


Mean arterial pressure




Mean arterial pressure

The mean arterial pressure (MAP) is a term used in medicine to describe an average blood pressure in an individual.1 It is defined as the average arterial pressure during a single cardiac cycle.
Calculation
Total Peripheral Resistance (TPR) is represented mathematically by the formula:
R = ΔP/Q2
R is TPR. ΔP is the change in pressure across the systemic circulation from its beginning to its end. Q is the flow through the vasculature (equal to cardiac output)
In other words:
Total Peripheral Resistance = (Mean Arterial Pressure - Mean Venous Pressure) / Cardiac Output
Therefore, Mean arterial pressure can be determined from:3


 
  where:



 
  is cardiac output


 
  is systemic vascular resistance


 
  is central venous pressure and usually small enough to be neglected in this formula.

Estimation
At normal resting heart rates 
 
 
 
  can be approximated using the more easily measured systolic and diastolic pressures, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :456


 
  or equivalently



or equivalently


 
  or equivalently


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the pulse pressure, 
 
 

At high heart rates 
 
 
 
  is more closely approximated by the arithmetic mean of systolic and diastolic pressures because of the change in shape of the arterial pressure pulse.
Clinical significance


 
  is considered to be the perfusion pressure seen by organs in the body.
It is believed that a 
 
 
 
  that is greater than 60 mmHg is enough to sustain the organs of the average person. 
 
 
 
  is normally between 70 and 110 mmHg.7 MAP may be used similarly to Systolic blood pressure in for target blood pressure. Both have been shown advantageous targets for sepsis, trauma, stroke, intracranial bleed, and hypertensive emergencies.8
If the 
 
 
 
  falls below this number for an appreciable time, vital organs will not get enough Oxygen perfusion, and will become hypoxic, a condition called ischemia.
See also

Blood pressure
Hypertension
Pulse pressure

References
External links

Mean Arterial Pressure Calculator
More Information on usage of the Mean Arterial Pressure

it:Pressione arteriosa differenziale"
Category:Medical signs Category:Blood pressure



↩
Total peripheral resistance, Wikipedia↩
Cardiovascular Physiology Concepts: Mean Arterial Pressure, Richard E. Klabunde, Ph.D↩
↩
Cardiovascular Physiology (page 3)↩
http://www.clinicalreview.com Physiology Review↩
↩
↩




