


Exponential integral




Exponential integral

(Figure)
 Plot of E1 function (top) and Ei function (bottom).

In mathematics, the exponential integral  Ei is a special function on the complex plane. It is defined as one particular definite integral of the ratio between an exponential function and its argument.
Definitions
For real nonzero values of x, the exponential integral Ei(x) is defined as



The Risch algorithm shows that Ei is not an elementary function. The definition above can be used for positive values of x, but the integral has to be understood in terms of the Cauchy principal value due to the singularity of the integrand at zero.
For complex values of the argument, the definition becomes ambiguous due to branch points at 0 and 
 
 
 
 .1 Instead of Ei, the following notation is used,2



In general, a branch cut is taken on the negative real axis and E1 can be defined by analytic continuation elsewhere on the complex plane.
For positive values of the real part of 
 
 
 
 , this can be written3



The behaviour of E1 near the branch cut can be seen by the following relation:4



Properties
Several properties of the exponential integral below, in certain cases, allow one to avoid its explicit evaluation through the definition above.
Convergent series
Integrating the Taylor series for 
 
 
 
 , and extracting the logarithmic singularity, we can derive the following series representation for 
 
 
 
  for real 
 
 
 
 :5



For complex arguments off the negative real axis, this generalises to6



where 
 
 
 
  is the Euler–Mascheroni constant. The sum converges for all complex 
 
 
 
 , and we take the usual value of the complex logarithm having a branch cut along the negative real axis.
This formula can be used to compute 
 
 
 
  with floating point operations for real 
 
 
 
  between 0 and 2.5. For 
 
 
 
 , the result is inaccurate due to cancellation.
A faster converging series was found by Ramanujan:



Asymptotic (divergent) series
(Figure)
 Relative error of the asymptotic approximation for different number 
 
 
 
  of terms in the truncated sum

Unfortunately, the convergence of the series above is slow for arguments of larger modulus. For example, for x = 10 more than 40 terms are required to get an answer correct to three significant figures.7 However, there is a divergent series approximation that can be obtained by integrating 
 
 
 
  by parts:8


 
  which has error of order 
 
 
 
  and is valid for large values of 
 
 
 
 . The relative error of the approximation above is plotted on the figure to the right for various values of 
 
 
 
 , the number of terms in the truncated sum (
 
 
 
  in red, 
 
 
 
  in pink).
Exponential and logarithmic behavior: bracketing
(Figure)
Bracketing of 
 
 
 
  by elementary functions

From the two series suggested in previous subsections, it follows that 
 
 
 
  behaves like a negative exponential for large values of the argument and like a logarithm for small values. For positive real values of the argument, 
 
 
 
  can be bracketed by elementary functions as follows:9



The left-hand side of this inequality is shown in the graph to the left in blue; the central part 
 
 
 
  is shown in black and the right-hand side is shown in red.
Definition by Ein
Both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be written more simply using the entire function

10 defined as


 
  (note that this is just the alternating series in the above definition of 
 
 
 
 ). Then we have






Relation with other functions
The exponential integral is closely related to the logarithmic integral function li(x) by the formula


 
  for positive real values of 
 
 

The exponential integral may also be generalized to



which can be written as a special case of the incomplete gamma function:11



The generalized form is sometimes called the Misra function12

 
 , defined as



Including a logarithm defines the generalized integro-exponential function13


 
 .
The indefinite integral:


 
  is similar in form to the ordinary generating function for 
 
 
 
 , the number of divisors of 
 
 
 
 :



Derivatives
The derivatives of the generalised functions 
 
 
 
  can be calculated by means of the formula 14


 
  Note that the function 
 
 
 
  is easy to evaluate (making this recursion useful), since it is just 
 
 
 
 .15
Exponential integral of imaginary argument
(Figure)


 
  against 
 
 
 
 ; real part black, imaginary part red.

If 
 
 
 
  is imaginary, it has a nonnegative real part, so we can use the formula


 
  to get a relation with the trigonometric integrals

 
  and 
 
 
 
 :


 
  The real and imaginary parts of 
 
 
 
  are plotted in the figure to the right with black and red curves.
Applications

Time-dependent heat transfer
Nonequilibrium groundwater flow in the Theis solution (called a well function)
Radiative transfer in stellar atmospheres
Radial diffusivity equation for transient or unsteady state flow with line sources and sinks
Solutions to the neutron transport equation in simplified 1-D geometries.16

See also
Goodwin–Staton integral
Notes
References


, Chapter 5.
















External links


NIST documentation on the Generalized Exponential Integral



Exponential, Logarithmic, Sine, and Cosine Integrals in DLMF.

"
Category:Exponentials Category:Special functions Category:Special hypergeometric functions Category:Integrals



Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 228↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 228, 5.1.1↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 228, 5.1.4 with n = 1↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 228, 5.1.7↩
For a derivation, see Bender and Orszag, p253↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 229, 5.1.11↩
Bleistein and Handelsman, p. 2↩
Bleistein and Handelsman, p. 3↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 229, 5.1.20↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 228, see footnote 3.↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 230, 5.1.45↩
After Misra (1940), p. 178↩
Milgram (1985)↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 230, 5.1.26↩
Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 229, 5.1.24↩
↩




