


Borrowed chord




Borrowed chord

(Figure)
A I chord, C major, followed by a VII chord, B major, borrowed from the parallel minor, C minor. Shown first in C major then minor.

A borrowed chord (also called mode mixture and1 modal interchange) is a chord borrowed from the parallel key (minor or major scale with the same tonic). Borrowed chords are typically used as "color chords", providing variety through contrasting scale forms, major and the three forms of minor.Benward & Saker (2009). Music in Theory and Practice, Vol II, p.71. ISBN 978-0-07-310188-0. Similarly chords may be borrowed from the parallel modes, the various modes beginning on the same tonic, for example Dorian or Phrygian.2
Six chords borrowed from the parallel minor key are commonly found in the Baroque, Classical and Romantic eras (shown here in C major):
(Figure)
Borrowed chords 1b.gif

Diminished supertonic triad (iio):             D  - F  - A
Half-diminished supertonic seventh (iiØ7):     D  - F  - A - C
"Flat three" (III):                          E - G  - B
Minor subdominant (iv):                        F  - A - C
"Flat six" (VI):                             A - C  - E
Fully diminished leading-tone seventh (viio7): B  - D  - F  - A
The following three chords are also found in Romantic era, albeit rarely:
(Figure)
Borrowed chords 2.gif

Minor subdominant seventh (iv7):       F  - A - C  - E
Major-minor subdominant seventh (IV7): F  - A  - C  - E
Dominant flat ninth (V9):              G  - B  - D  - F  - A
The major-minor subdominant seventh, which contains an A, is borrowed from the parallel ascending melodic minor scale.
If the root of the borrowed chord is not in the original key, then the chord is named by the accidental. For instance, in a major key, a chord built on the parallel minor's sixth degree is a "flat six chord" written VI.
 Chord progressions may be constructed with borrowed chords, including two progressions common in rock music, I - VII - VI - VII, common everywhere, and I - VI - IV, used a lot by bands including Genesis, Yes and Nirvana.3 VII is from Mixolydian and VI is found in both Aeolian and Phrygian.4 The VII-I cadence with VII substituting for V is common, as well as II-I, III-I, and VI-I.5 In popular music, the major triad on the lowered third scale degree (III), the major triad on the lowered sixth scale degree (VI) and the major triad on the lowered seventh scale degree, or "flat seven" (VII, in C major: B, D, F) are common.
A common borrowed chord from a parallel major key is the Picardy third.
(Figure)
"Backdoor progression ii-V" in C: ii-VII7-I . VII7 is borrowed from the parallel minor rather than Mixolydian as VII may be.

In major the typical chords borrowed from minor are iv, VI, VII, and in jazz, the ii.6 The VII is also known as the subtonic. The lowered-sixth occurs in many of the chords borrowed from minor and is a, "distinctive characteristic," of borrowed chords. Borrowed chords have typical inversions or common positions, for example ii6 and ii
 
 
 
 , and progress in the same manner as the diatonic chords they replace except for VI, which progresses to V(7).
See also

Aeolian harmony
Diatonic function
Harmonic major

Sources
External links

"Mode Mixture", Robert J. Frank, Theory on the Web.
"Glossary: Terms Used in Writing Skills", Berklee.
Mike Campese. Guest Column: "Modal Interchange", Guitar Nine Records.
"Altered Chords in Jazz: Modal Interchange - Altered Chords", Taming the Saxophone.

"
Category:Chord progressions Category:Chords Category:Chromaticism



Romeo, Sheila (1999). Complete Rock Keyboard Method: Mastering Rock Keyboard, p.42. ISBN 0-88284-982-4.



Romeo (1999), p.43.
Schonbrun, Marc (2006). The Everything Music Theory Book, p.138. ISBN 1-59337-652-9.




