


Sesquilinear form




Sesquilinear form

In mathematics, a sesquilinear form is a generalization of a bilinear form that, in turn, is a generalization of the concept of the dot product of Euclidean space. A bilinear form is linear in each of its arguments, but a sesquilinear form allows one of the arguments to be "twisted" in a semilinear manner, thus the name; which originates from the Latin numerical prefix sesqui- meaning "one and a half". The basic concept of the dot product – producing a scalar from a pair of vectors – can be generalized by allowing a broader range of scalar values and, perhaps simultaneously, by widening the definition of what a vector is.
A motivating special case is a sesquilinear form on a complex vector space, 
 
 
 
 . This is a map 
 
 
 
  that is linear in one argument and "twists" the linearity of other argument by complex conjugation (referred to as being antilinear in the other argument). This case arises naturally in mathematical physics applications. Another important case allows the scalars to come from any field and the twist is provided by a field automorphism. Many authors assume that this automorphism is an involution (has order two) to stay in analogy with the complex case, but others prove this property when introducing Hermitian forms.
An application in projective geometry requires that the scalars come from a division ring (skewfield), 
 
 
 
 , and this means that the "vectors" should be replaced by elements of a 

 
 -module. In a very general setting, sesquilinear forms can be defined over 
 
 
 
 -modules for arbitrary rings

 
 .
Convention
Conventions differ as to which argument should be linear. We shall take the first to be linear, as is common in the mathematical literature, except in the section devoted to sesquilinear forms on complex vector spaces. There we use the other convention and take the first argument to be conjugate-linear (i.e. antilinear) and the second to be linear. This is the convention used mostly by mathematical physicists1 and originates in Dirac's bra–ket notation in quantum mechanics.
Complex vector spaces
Over a complex vector space

 
  a map 
 
 
 
  is sesquilinear if


 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is the complex conjugate of 
 
 
 
 .
A complex sesquilinear form can also be viewed as a complex bilinear map


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the complex conjugate vector space to 
 
 
 
 . By the universal property of tensor products these are in one-to-one correspondence with complex linear maps



For a fixed 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  the map 
 
 
 
  is a linear functional on 
 
 
 
  (i.e. an element of the dual space ). Likewise, the 
 
 
 
  is a conjugate-linear functional on 
 
 
 
 .
Given any complex sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  we can define a second complex sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
  via the conjugate transpose:


 
  In general, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  will be different. If they are the same then 
 
 
 
  is said to be Hermitian. If they are negatives of one another, then 
 
 
 
  is said to be skew-Hermitian. Every sesquilinear form can be written as a sum of a Hermitian form and a skew-Hermitian form.
Geometric motivation
Bilinear forms are to squaring (), what complex sesquilinear forms are to the squared magnitude (). Regarding the complex plane geometrically as a two-dimensional real vector space, the latter corresponds with the square of the Euclidean norm.
The norm associated to a complex sesquilinear form is invariant under multiplication by complex numbers of unit norm (elements of the complex unit circle), while the norm associated to a bilinear form is equivariant (with respect to squaring). Bilinear forms are ''algebraically '' more natural, while sesquilinear forms are geometrically more natural.
If 
 
 
 
  is a bilinear form on a complex vector space and  is the associated norm, then .
By contrast, if 
 
 
 
  is a sesquilinear form on a complex vector space and  is the associated norm, then .
Hermitian form

The term Hermitian form may also refer to a different concept than that explained below: it may refer to a certain differential form on a Hermitian manifold.


A complex Hermitian form (also called a symmetric sesquilinear form), is a sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  The standard Hermitian form on  is given (again, using the "physics" convention of linearity in the second and conjugate linearity in the first variable) by


 
  More generally, the inner product on any complex Hilbert space is a Hermitian form.
A vector space with a Hermitian form 
 
 
 
  is called a Hermitian space.
If 
 
 
 
  is a finite-dimensional complex vector space, then relative to any basis  of 
 
 
 
 , a complex Hermitian form is represented by a Hermitian matrix

 
 , 
 
 
 
  by the column vector 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  by the column vector 
 
 
 
 :


 
  The components of 
 
 
 
  are given by .
The quadratic form associated to a complex Hermitian form


 
  is always real. Actually, one can show that a complex sesquilinear form is Hermitian iff the associated quadratic form is real for all 
 
 
 
 .
Skew-Hermitian form
A complex skew-Hermitian form (also called an antisymmetric sesquilinear form), is a complex sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  Every complex skew-Hermitian form can be written as 

 times a Hermitian form.
If 
 
 
 
  is a finite-dimensional complex vector space, then relative to any basis  of 
 
 
 
 , a complex skew-Hermitian form 
 
 
 
  is represented by a skew-Hermitian matrix

 
 , 
 
 
 
  by the column vector 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  by the column vector 
 
 
 
 :



The quadratic form associated to a complex skew-Hermitian form


 
  is always pure imaginary.
Over arbitrary fields
On a vector space

 
  defined over an arbitrary field

 
  having a distinguished automorphism

 
  of order two (an involution known as the companion automorphism), a map 
 
 
 
  is sesquilinear if


 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
 . Recall the convention of having the first argument linear and notice the use of the "transformation exponential notation" .
If the automorphism 
 
 
 
 
  then the sesquilinear form is a bilinear form.
A sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
  is reflexive if for every pair 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
 .
A sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
 
  is said to be 
 
 
 
 -Hermitian (sometimes referred to as being conjugate-symmetric) if


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . It follows from this definition that 
 
 
 
  always lies in the fixed field of 
 
 
 
 
 . In the bilinear case (
 
 
 
 ) these forms are called symmetric.
Reflexive sesquilinear forms are either bilinear or Hermitian.2
Given an ordered basis } of the vector space 
 
 
 
 , a sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  uniquely determines the matrix  by:



A sesquilinear form can also be viewed as an 
 
 
 
 -bilinear map


 
  where  is the dual space of 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  be the three dimensional vector space over the finite field , where 
 
 
 
 
  is a prime power. With respect to the standard basis we can write  and  and define the map 
 
 
 
  by:


 
  The map  is an involutory automorphism of 
 
 
 
 . The map 
 
 
 
  is then a 
 
 
 
 
 -sesquilinear form. The matrix  associated to this form is the identity matrix. This is a Hermitian form.
In projective geometry
In a projective geometry

 
  a permutation

 
  of the subspaces which inverts inclusion, i.e.

 for all subspaces 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 ,
 

is called a correlation. A result of Birkhoff and von Neumann (1936)3 shows that the correlations of Desarguesian projective geometries correspond exactly to the nondegenerate sesquilinear forms on the underlying vector space.4 A sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
 
  is nondegenerate if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  (if and) only if 
 
 
 
 .
To achieve full generality of this statement Reinhold Baer extended the definition of sesquilinear form to skewfields (division rings) which, in turn, requires replacing vector spaces by R-modules,5 (in the geometric literature these are still referred to as either left or right vector spaces over skewfields.)6
Over arbitrary rings
The specialization of the above section to skewfields was a consequence of the application to projective geometry, and not intrinsic to the nature of sesquilinear forms. Only the minor modifications needed to take into account the non-commutativity of multiplication are required to generalize the arbitrary field version of the definition to arbitrary rings.
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a ring, 
 
 
 
  an 
 
 
 
 -module and 
 
 
 
  an antiautomorphism of 
 
 
 
  of order two. A map 
 
 
 
 
  is sesquilinear if


 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 
 
 .
Since for an antiautomorphism 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  must be commutative and 
 
 
 
  is a bilinear form. In particular, if, in this case, 
 
 
 
  is a skewfield, then 
 
 
 
  is a field and 
 
 
 
  is a vector space with a bilinear form.
An antiautomorphism 
 
 
 
  can also be viewed as an isomorphism of , the opposite ring based on the same set with the same addition, but whose multiplication operation (∗) is defined by 
 
 
 
 , where the product on the right is the product in 
 
 
 
 . It follows from this that a right (left) 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
  can be turned into a left (right) , .7 Thus, the sesquilinear form 
 
 
 
  can be viewed as a bilinear form .
See also
*-ring
Notes
References





External links



"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Functional analysis



footnote 1 in [https://books.google.com/books?id=NSXCaGSVaX4C&pg;;=PA255&lpg;=PA255&dq;=sesquilinear+forms+over+general+fields&source;=bl&ots;=B_PjJ3RSB5&sig;=EEtESPgb5udp1igvinnmjhPGQUA&hl;=en&sa;=X&ei;=i8M_VZn_LIWNsAWW6YHwCA&ved;=0CD0Q6AEwBQ Anthony Knapp Basic Algebra (2007) pg. 255]




Baer's terminology gives a third way to refer to these ideas, so he must be read with caution.





