


Reductive Lie algebra




Reductive Lie algebra

In mathematics, a Lie algebra is reductive if its adjoint representation is completely reducible, whence the name. More concretely, a Lie algebra is reductive if it is a direct sum of a semisimple Lie algebra and an abelian Lie algebra

 
  there are alternative characterizations, given below.
Examples
The most basic example is the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  matrices with the commutator as Lie bracket, or more abstractly as the endomorphism algebra of an n-dimensional vector space, 
 
 
 
 
  This is the Lie algebra of the general linear group GL(n), and is reductive as it decomposes as 
 
 
 
  corresponding to traceless matrices and scalar matrices.
Any semisimple Lie algebra or abelian Lie algebra is a fortiori reductive.
Over the real numbers, compact Lie algebras are reductive.
Definitions
A Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  over a field of characteristic 0 is called reductive if any of the following equivalent conditions are satisfied:

The adjoint representation (the action by bracketing) of 
 
 
 
  is completely reducible (a direct sum of irreducible representations).


 
  admits a faithful, completely reducible, finite-dimensional representation.
The radical of 
 
 
 
 
  equals the center
 
 

The radical always contains the center, but need not equal it.
 



 
  is the direct sum of a semisimple ideal 
 
 
 
  and its center 
 
 


Compare to the Levi decomposition, which decomposes a Lie algebra as its radical (which is solvable, not abelian in general) and a Levi subalgebra (which is semisimple).
 



 
  is a direct sum of a semisimple Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  and an abelian Lie algebra 
 
 




 
 
  is a direct sum of prime ideals
 
 


Some of these equivalences are easily seen. For example, the center and radical of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  while if the radical equals the center the Levi decomposition yields a decomposition 
 
 
 
  Further, simple Lie algebras and the trivial 1-dimensional Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 
  are prime ideals.
Properties
Reductive Lie algebras are a generalization of semisimple Lie algebras, and share many properties with them: many properties of semisimple Lie algebras depend only on the fact that they are reductive. Notably, the unitarian trick of Hermann Weyl works for reductive Lie algebras.
The associated reductive Lie groups are of significant interest: the Langlands program is based on the premise that what is done for one reductive Lie group should be done for all.
The intersection of reductive Lie algebras and solvable Lie algebras is exactly abelian Lie algebras (contrast with the intersection of semisimple and solvable Lie algebras being trivial).
External links

Lie algebra, reductive, A.L. Onishchik, in Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, ISBN 1-4020-0609-8, SpringerLink

"
Category:Properties of Lie algebras


