


Fisher transformation




Fisher transformation

In statistics, hypotheses about the value of the population correlation coefficient ρ between variables X and Y can be tested using the Fisher transformation12 (aka Fisher z-transformation) applied to the sample correlation coefficient.
Definition
Given a set of N bivariate sample pairs (Xi, Yi), i = 1, ..., N, the sample correlation coefficient r is given by



Fisher's z-transformation of r is defined as



where "ln" is the natural logarithm function and "arctanh" is the inverse hyperbolic tangent function.
If (X, Y) has a bivariate normal distribution, and if the pairs (Xi, Yi) are independent, then z is approximately normally distributed with mean



and standard error



where N is the sample size, and ρ is the true correlation coefficient.
This transformation, and its inverse



can be used to construct a confidence interval for ρ.
Discussion
The Fisher transformation is an approximate variance-stabilizing transformation for r when X and Y follow a bivariate normal distribution. This means that the variance of z is approximately constant for all values of the population correlation coefficient ρ. Without the Fisher transformation, the variance of r grows smaller as |ρ| gets closer to 1. Since the Fisher transformation is approximately the identity function when |r|  determined the exact distribution of z for data from a bivariate Type A Edgeworth distribution. Hotelling in 1953 calculated the Taylor series expressions for the moments of z and several related statistics3 and Hawkins in 1989 discovered the asymptotic distribution of z for data from a distribution with bounded fourth moments.4
Other uses
While the Fisher transformation is mainly associated with the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient for bivariate normal observations, it can also be applied to Spearman's rank correlation coefficient in more general cases. A similar result for the asymptotic distribution applies, but with a minor adjustment factor: see the latter article for details.
References


"
Category:Statistical theory Category:Transforms



↩
↩
↩
↩




