


Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings




Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings

This article describes periodic points of some complex quadratic maps. A map is a formula for computing a value of a variable based on its own previous value or values; a quadratic map is one that involves the previous value raised to the powers one and two; and a complex map is one in which the variable is a complex number. A periodic point of a map is a value of the variable that occurs repeatedly after intervals of a fixed length.
This theory is applied in relation with the theories of Fatou and Julia sets.
Definitions
Let



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are complex-valued. (This 
 
 
 
  is the complex quadratic mapping mentioned in the title.) This article explores the periodic points of this mapping - that is, the points that form a periodic cycle when 
 
 
 
  is repeatedly applied to them.


 
  is the 
 
 
 
  -fold compositions of 
 
 
 
  with itself = iteration of function

 
  or,



Periodic points of a complex quadratic mapping of period

 
  are points 
 
 
 
  of the dynamical plane such that :



where 
 
 
 
  is the smallest positive integer.
We can introduce a new function:



so periodic points are zeros of function 
 
 
 
  :



which is a polynomial of degree 
 
 

Stability of periodic points (orbit) - multiplier
 
The multiplier ( or eigenvalue, derivative ) 
 
 
 
  of rational map 
 
 
 
  at fixed point 
 
 
 
  is defined as :



where 
 
 
 
  is first derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 .
Because the multiplier is the same at all periodic points, it can be called a multiplier of the periodic orbit.
The multiplier is:

a complex number,
invariant under conjugation of any rational map at its fixed point1
used to check stability of periodic (also fixed) points with stability index



A periodic point is :2

attracting when 
 
 

super-attracting when 
 
 

attracting but not super-attracting when 
 
 


indifferent when 
 
 

rationally indifferent or parabolic if 
 
 
 
  is a root of unity
irrationally indifferent if 
 
 
 
  but multiplier is not a root of unity

repelling when 
 
 


Where do periodic points belong?

attracting is always in Fatou set
repelling is in the Julia set
Indifferent fixed points may be in one or the other.3 Parabolic periodic point is in Julia set.

Period-1 points (fixed points)
Finite fixed points
Let us begin by finding all finite points left unchanged by 1 application of 
 
 
 
 . These are the points that satisfy 
 
 
 
 . That is, we wish to solve



which can be rewritten



Since this is an ordinary quadratic equation in 1 unknown, we can apply the standard quadratic solution formula. Look in any standard mathematics textbook, and you will find that there are two solutions of 
 
 
 
  are given by



In our case, we have 
 
 
 
 , so we will write


 
  and 
 
 
 
  So for 
 
 
 
  we have two finite fixed points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Since


 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 

then 
 
 
 
 .
It means that fixed points are symmetrical around 
 
 
 
 .
(Figure)
This image shows fixed points (both repelling)

Complex dynamics
 
Here different notation is commonly used:4


 
  with multiplier 
 
 

and


 
  with multiplier 
 
 

Using Viète's formulas one can show that:



Since derivative with respect to z is :



then



It implies that 
 
 
 
  can have at most one attractive fixed point.
This points are distinguished by the facts that:



 
  is :
 
the landing point of external ray for angle=0 for 
 
 

the most repelling fixed point, belongs to Julia set,
the one on the right ( whenever fixed point are not symmetrical around the real axis), it is the extreme right point for connected Julia sets (except for cauliflower).5



 
  is:
 
landing point of several rays
is :
 
attracting when c is in main cardioid of Mandelbrot set, then it is in interior of Filled-in Julia set, it means belongs to Fatou set ( strictly to basin of attraction of finite fixed point )
parabolic at the root point of the limb of Mandelbrot set
repelling for other c values



Special cases
An important case of the quadratic mapping is 
 
 
 
 . In this case, we get 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In this case, 0 is a superattractive fixed point, and 1 belongs to the Julia set.
Only one fixed point
We might wonder what value 
 
 
 
  should have to cause 
 
 
 
 . The answer is that this will happen exactly when 
 
 
 
 . This equation has 1 solution
 
 
 
  (in which case, 
 
 
 
 ). This is interesting, since 
 
 
 
  is the largest positive, purely real value for which a finite attractor exists.
Infinite fixed point
We can extend complex plane

 
  to Riemann sphere (extended complex plane)

 
  by adding infinity



and extend polynomial

 
  such that 
 
 

Then infinity is :

superattracting
fixed point of polynomial

6




Period-2 cycles
(Figure)
Bifurcation from period 1 to 2 for complex quadratic map

Suppose next that we wish to look at period-2 cycles. That is, we want to find two points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
Let us start by writing 
 
 
 
 , and see where trying to solve this leads.



Thus, the equation we wish to solve is actually 
 
 
 
 .
This equation is a polynomial of degree 4, and so has 4 (possibly non-distinct) solutions. However, actually, we already know 2 of the solutions. They are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , computed above. It is simple to see why this is; if these points are left unchanged by 1 application of 
 
 
 
 , then clearly they will be unchanged by 2 applications (or more).
Our 4th-order polynomial can therefore be factored in 2 ways :
First method



This expands directly as 
 
 
 
  (note the alternating signs), where












We already have 2 solutions, and only need the other 2. This is as difficult as solving a quadratic polynomial. In particular, note that



and



Adding these to the above, we get 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Matching these against the coefficients from expanding 
 
 
 
 , we get


 
  and 
 
 

From this, we easily get : 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
From here, we construct a quadratic equation with 
 
 
 
  and apply the standard solution formula to get


 
  and 
 
 

Closer examination shows (the formulas are a tad messy) that :


 
  and 
 
 

meaning these two points are the two halves of a single period-2 cycle.
Second method of factorization



The roots of the first factor are the two fixed points 
 
 
 
  . They are repelling outside the main cardioid.
The second factor has two roots



These two roots form period-2 orbit.7
Special cases
Again, let us look at 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  and 
 
 

both of which are complex numbers. By doing a little algebra, we find 
 
 
 
 . Thus, both these points are "hiding" in the Julia set. Another special case is 
 
 
 
 , which gives 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This gives the well-known superattractive cycle found in the largest period-2 lobe of the quadratic Mandelbrot set.
Cycles for period>2
There is no general solution in radicals to polynomial equations of degree five or higher, so it must be computed using numerical methods.
References
Further reading

Alan F. Beardon, Iteration of Rational Functions, Springer 1991, ISBN 0-387-95151-2
Michael F. Barnsley (Author), Stephen G. Demko (Editor), Chaotic Dynamics and Fractals (Notes and Reports in Mathematics in Science and Engineering Series) Academic Pr (April 1986), ISBN 0-12-079060-2
Wolf Jung : Homeomorphisms on Edges of the Mandelbrot Set. Ph.D. thesis of 2002
The permutations of periodic points in quadratic polynominials by J Leahy

External links

Algebraic solution of Mandelbrot orbital boundaries by Donald D. Cross
Brown Method by Robert P. Munafo
arXiv:hep-th/0501235v2 V.Dolotin, A.Morozov: Algebraic Geometry of Discrete Dynamics. The case of one variable.
Gvozden Rukavina : Quadratic recurrence equations - exact explicit solution of period four fixed points functions in bifurcation diagram

"
Category:Complex dynamics Category:Fractals Category:Limit sets



Alan F. Beardon, Iteration of Rational Functions, Springer 1991, ISBN 0-387-95151-2, p. 41
Alan F. Beardon, Iteration of Rational Functions, Springer 1991, ISBN 0-387-95151-2, page 99
Some Julia sets by Michael Becker
On the regular leaf space of the cauliflower by Tomoki Kawahira Source: Kodai Math. J. Volume 26, Number 2 (2003), 167-178.
Periodic attractor by Evgeny Demidov
R L Devaney, L Keen (Editor): Chaos and Fractals: The Mathematics Behind the Computer Graphics. Publisher: Amer Mathematical Society July 1989, ISBN 0-8218-0137-6 , ISBN 978-0-8218-0137-6
Period 2 orbit by Evgeny Demidov




