


Observability




Observability

In control theory, observability is a measure for how well internal states of a system can be inferred by knowledge of its external outputs. The observability and controllability of a system are mathematical duals. The concept of observability was introduced by American-Hungarian engineer Rudolf E. Kalman for linear dynamic systems.12
Definition
Formally, a system is said to be observable if, for any possible sequence of state and control vectors, the current state can be determined in finite time using only the outputs (this definition is slanted towards the state space representation). Less formally, this means that from the system's outputs it is possible to determine the behaviour of the entire system. If a system is not observable, this means the current values of some of its states cannot be determined through output sensors. This implies that their value is unknown to the controller (although they can be estimated through various means).
For time-invariant linear systems in the state space representation, there is a convenient test to check if a system is observable. Consider a SISO system with 
 
 
 
  states (see state space for details about MIMO systems), if the row rank of the following observability matrix



is equal to 
 
 
 
 , then the system is observable. The rationale for this test is that if 
 
 
 
  rows are linearly independent, then each of the 
 
 
 
  states is viewable through linear combinations of the output variables 
 
 
 
 .
A module designed to estimate the state of a system from measurements of the outputs is called a state observer or simply an observer for that system.

Observability index

The Observability index 
 
 
 
  of a linear time-invariant discrete system is the smallest natural number for which is satisfied that 
 
 
 
 , where




Detectability

A slightly weaker notion than observability is detectability. A system is detectable if and only if all of its unobservable modes are asymptotically stable. Thus even though not all system modes are observable, the ones that are not observable do not require stabilization.
Continuous time-varying system
Consider the continuous linear time-variant system






Suppose that the matrices 
 
 
 
  are given as well as inputs and outputs 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  then it is possible to determine 
 
 
 
  to within an additive constant vector which lies in the null space of 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the state-transition matrix.
It is possible to determine a unique 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is nonsingular. In fact, it is not possible to distinguish the initial state for 
 
 
 
  from that of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is in the null space of 
 
 
 
 .
Note that the matrix 
 
 
 
  defined as above has the following properties:



 
  is symmetric


 
  is positive semidefinite for 
 
 



 
  satisfies the linear matrix differential equation












 
  satisfies the equation





3




Nonlinear case
Given the system 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . Where 
 
 
 
  the state vector, 
 
 
 
  the input vector and 
 
 
 
  the output vector. 
 
 
 
  are to be smooth vectorfields.
Now define the observation space 
 
 
 
  to be the space containing all repeated Lie derivatives. Now the system is observable in 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
Note
 
 
4
Early criteria for observability in nonlinear dynamic systems were discovered by Griffith and Kumar,5 Kou, Elliot and Tarn,6 and Singh.7
Static systems and general topological spaces
Observability may also be characterized for steady state systems (systems typically defined in terms of algebraic equations and inequalities), or more generally, for sets in 
 
 
 
  ,.89 Just as observability criteria are used to predict the behavior of Kalman filters or other observers in the dynamic system case, observability criteria for sets in 
 
 
 
  are used to predict the behavior of data reconciliation and other static estimators. In the nonlinear case, observability can be characterized for individual variables, and also for local estimator behavior rather than just global behavior.
See also

Controllability
State observer
State space (controls)

References
External links


MATLAB function for checking observability of a system
Mathematica function for checking observability of a system

fr:Représentation d'état#Observabilité et détectabilité"
Category:Control theory



Kalman R. E., "On the General Theory of Control Systems", Proc. 1st Int. Cong. of IFAC, Moscow 1960 1 481, Butterworth, London 1961.↩
Kalman R. E., "Mathematical Description of Linear Dynamical Systems", SIAM J. Contr. 1963 1 152↩
↩
Lecture notes for Nonlinear Systems Theory by prof. dr. D.Jeltsema, prof dr. J.M.A.Scherpen and prof dr. A.J.van der Schaft.↩
Griffith E. W. and Kumar K. S. P., "On the Observability of Nonlinear Systems I, J. Math. Anal. Appl. 1971 35 135↩
Kou S. R., Elliott D. L. and Tarn T. J., Inf. Contr. 1973 22 89↩
Singh S.N., "Observability in Non-linear Systems with immeasurable Inputs, Int. J. Syst. Sci., 6 723, 1975↩
Stanley G.M. and Mah, R.S.H., "Observability and Redundancy in Process Data Estimation, Chem. Engng. Sci. 36, 259 (1981)↩
Stanley G.M., and Mah R.S.H., "Observability and Redundancy Classification in Process Networks", Chem. Engng. Sci. 36, 1941 (1981)↩




