


Poincaré map




Poincaré map

 In mathematics, particularly in dynamical systems, a first recurrence map or Poincaré map, named after Henri Poincaré, is the intersection of a periodic orbit in the state space of a continuous dynamical system with a certain lower-dimensional subspace, called the Poincaré section, transversal to the flow of the system. More precisely, one considers a periodic orbit with initial conditions within a section of the space, which leaves that section afterwards, and observes the point at which this orbit first returns to the section. One then creates a map to send the first point to the second, hence the name first recurrence map. The transversality of the Poincaré section means that periodic orbits starting on the subspace flow through it and not parallel to it.
A Poincaré map can be interpreted as a discrete dynamical system with a state space that is one dimension smaller than the original continuous dynamical system. Because it preserves many properties of periodic and quasiperiodic orbits of the original system and has a lower-dimensional state space it is often used for analyzing the original system. In practice this is not always possible as there is no general method to construct a Poincaré map.
A Poincaré map differs from a recurrence plot in that space, not time, determines when to plot a point. For instance, the locus of the moon when the earth is at perihelion is a recurrence plot; the locus of the moon when it passes through the plane perpendicular to the Earth's orbit and passing through the sun and the earth at perihelion is a Poincaré map. It was used by Michel Hénon to study the motion of stars in a galaxy, because the path of a star projected onto a plane looks like a tangled mess, while the Poincaré map shows the structure more clearly.
Definition
 Let (R, M, φ) be a global dynamical system, with R the real numbers, M the phase space and φ the evolution function. Let γ be a periodic orbit through a point p and S be a local differentiable and transversal section of φ through p, called Poincaré section through p.
Given an open and connected neighborhood

 
  of p, a function


 
  is called Poincaré map for orbit γ on the Poincaré section S through point p if

P(p) = p
P(U) is a neighborhood of p and P:U → P(U) is a diffeomorphism
for every point x in U, the positive semi-orbit of x intersects S for the first time at P(x)

Poincaré maps and stability analysis
Poincaré maps can be interpreted as a discrete dynamical system. The stability of a periodic orbit of the original system is closely related to the stability of the fixed point of the corresponding Poincaré map.
Let (R, M, φ) be a differentiable dynamical system with periodic orbit γ through p. Let


 
  be the corresponding Poincaré map through p. We define








 
  and


 
  then (Z, U, P) is a discrete dynamical system with state space U and evolution function


 
  Per definition this system has a fixed point at p.
The periodic orbit γ of the continuous dynamical system is stable if and only if the fixed point p of the discrete dynamical system is stable.
The periodic orbit γ of the continuous dynamical system is asymptotically stable if and only if the fixed point p of the discrete dynamical system is asymptotically stable.
See also

Poincaré recurrence
Stroboscopic map
Hénon map
Recurrence plot
Mironenko reflecting function

References



External links

Shivakumar Jolad, Poincare Map and its application to 'Spinning Magnet' problem, (2005)

"
Category:Dynamical systems


