


Poisson manifold




Poisson manifold

A Poisson structure on a smooth manifold

 
  is a Lie bracket

 
  (called a Poisson bracket in this special case) on the algebra 
 
 
 
  of smooth functions on 
 
 
 
 , subject to the Leibniz Rule


 
 .
Said in another manner, it is a Lie-algebra structure on the vector space of smooth functions on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a vector field for each smooth function 
 
 
 
 , which we call the Hamiltonian vector field associated to 
 
 
 
 . These vector fields span a completely integrable singular foliation, each of whose maximal integral sub-manifolds inherits a symplectic structure. One may thus informally view a Poisson structure on a smooth manifold as a smooth partition of the ambient manifold into even-dimensional symplectic leaves, which are not necessarily of the same dimension.
Poisson structures are one instance of Jacobi structures, introduced by André Lichnerowicz in 1977.1 They were further studied in the classical paper of Alan Weinstein,2 where many basic structure theorems were first proved, and which exerted a huge influence on the development of Poisson geometry — which today is deeply entangled with non-commutative geometry, integrable systems, topological field theories and representation theory, to name a few.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth manifold. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the real algebra of smooth real-valued functions on 
 
 
 
 , where multiplication is defined pointwise. A Poisson bracket (or Poisson structure) on 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -bilinear map



satisfying the following three conditions:

Skew symmetry

 
 .
Jacobi identity

 
 .
Leibniz's Rule

 
 .

The first two conditions ensure that 
 
 
 
  defines a Lie-algebra structure on 
 
 
 
 , while the third guarantees that for each 
 
 
 
 , the adjoint 
 
 
 
  is a derivation of the commutative product on 
 
 
 
 , i.e., is a vector field 
 
 
 
 . It follows that the bracket 
 
 
 
  of functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a smooth bi-vector field.
Conversely, given any smooth bi-vector field 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , the formula 
 
 
 
  defines a bilinear skew-symmetric bracket 
 
 
 
  that automatically obeys Leibniz's rule. The condition that the ensuing 
 
 
 
  be a Poisson bracket — i.e., satisfy the Jacobi identity — can be characterized by the non-linear partial differential equation 
 
 
 
 , where



denotes the Schouten–Nijenhuis bracket on multi-vector fields. It is customary and convenient to switch between the bracket and the bi-vector points of view, and we shall do so below.
Symplectic Leaves
A Poisson manifold is naturally partitioned into regularly immersed symplectic manifolds, called its symplectic leaves.
Note that a bi-vector field can be regarded as a skew homomorphism 
 
 
 
 . The rank of 
 
 
 
  at a point 
 
 
 
  is then the rank of the induced linear mapping 
 
 
 
 . Its image consists of the values 
 
 
 
  of all Hamiltonian vector fields evaluated at 
 
 
 
 . A point 
 
 
 
  is called regular for a Poisson structure 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  if and only if the rank of 
 
 
 
  is constant on an open neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 ; otherwise, it is called a singular point. Regular points form an open dense subspace 
 
 
 
 ; when 
 
 
 
 , we call the Poisson structure itself regular.
An integral sub-manifold for the (singular) distribution 
 
 
 
  is a path-connected sub-manifold 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Integral sub-manifolds of 
 
 
 
  are automatically regularly immersed manifolds, and maximal integral sub-manifolds of 
 
 
 
  are called the leaves of 
 
 
 
 . Each leaf 
 
 
 
  carries a natural symplectic form 
 
 
 
  determined by the condition 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Correspondingly, one speaks of the symplectic leaves of 
 
 
 
 .3 Moreover, both the space 
 
 
 
  of regular points and its complement are saturated by symplectic leaves, so symplectic leaves may be either regular or singular.
Examples

Every manifold 
 
 
 
  carries the trivial Poisson structure 
 
 
 
 .
Every symplectic manifold 
 
 
 
  is Poisson, with the Poisson bi-vector 
 
 
 
  equal to the inverse 
 
 
 
  of the symplectic form 
 
 
 
 .
The dual 
 
 
 
  of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is a Poisson manifold. A coordinate-free description can be given as follows
 
 
 
  naturally sits inside 
 
 
 
 , and the rule 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
  induces a linear Poisson structure on 
 
 
 
 , i.e., one for which the bracket of linear functions is again linear. Conversely, any linear Poisson structure must be of this form.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a (regular) foliation of dimension 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  a closed foliation two-form for which 
 
 
 
  is nowhere-vanishing. This uniquely determines a regular Poisson structure on 
 
 
 
  by requiring that the symplectic leaves of 
 
 
 
  be the leaves 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  equipped with the induced symplectic form 
 
 
 
 .

Poisson Maps
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two Poisson manifolds, then a smooth mapping 
 
 
 
  is called a Poisson map if it respects the Poisson structures, namely, if for all 
 
 
 
  and smooth functions 
 
 
 
 , we have:



In terms of Poisson bi-vectors, the condition that a map be Poisson is tantamount to requiring that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be 
 
 
 
 -related.
Poisson manifolds are the objects of a category 
 
 
 
 , with Poisson maps as morphisms.
Examples of Poisson maps:

The Cartesian product 
 
 
 
  of two Poisson manifolds 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is again a Poisson manifold, and the canonical projections 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
 , are Poisson maps.
The inclusion mapping of a symplectic leaf, or of an open subspace, is a Poisson map.

It must be highlighted that the notion of a Poisson map is fundamentally different from that of a symplectic map. For instance, with their standard symplectic structures, there do not exist Poisson maps 
 
 
 
 , whereas symplectic maps abound.
One interesting, and somewhat surprising, fact is that any Poisson manifold is the codomain/image of a surjective, submersive Poisson map from a symplectic manifold. 456
See also

Nambu-Poisson manifold
Poisson–Lie group
Poisson supermanifold

References






2






Available at thesis

See also the review by Ping Xu in the Bulletin of the AMS.



"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Symplectic geometry Category:Smooth manifolds



↩
↩
1↩
↩
↩
↩




