


Arbelos




Arbelos

 In geometry, an arbelos is a plane region bounded by three semicircles connected at the corners, all on the same side of a straight line (the baseline) that contains their diameters.1
The earliest known reference to this figure is in the Book of Lemmas by Archimedes, where some of its mathematical properties are stated as Propositions 4 through 8.2
Etymology
 The name "arbelos", used by Archimedes, comes from Greek ἡ ἄρβηλος he arbelos or ἄρβυλος arbylos, meaning "shoemaker's knife", a knife used by cobblers from antiquity to the current day, whose blade is said to resemble the geometric figure.
Properties
Two of the semicircles are necessarily concave, with arbitrary diameters a and b; the third semicircle is convex, with diameter a+b.3
 In the following sections, the corners of the arbelos are labeled 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , such that the diameter of the outer semicircle is 
 
 
 
 
 , assumed to have unit length; and the diameters of the inner semicircles are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , assumed to have lengths r and 1−r, respectively. The letter 
 
 
 
  denotes the point where the outer semicircle intercepts the line that is perpendicular to the diameter 
 
 
 
  through the point 
 
 
 
 
 .
Area
The area of the arbelos is equal to the area of a circle with diameter 
 
 
 
 .
Proof
If BC = 1 and BA = r, then

In triangle BHA


In triangle CHA


In triangle BHC



By substitution
 
 
 
 . By expansion
 
 
 
 . By substituting for y2 into the equation for triangle BHC and solving for x:


 
  By substituting this, solve for y and h





 
  The radius of the circle with center O is:


 
  Therefore, the area is:





 
  The area of the arbelos is the area of the large semicircle minus the area of the two smaller semicircles. Therefore the area of the arbelos is:








Q.E.D.4
Rectangle
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the points where the segments 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  intersect the semicircles 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. The quadrilateral

 
  is actually a rectangle.

Proof: The angles 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  are right angles because they are inscribed in semicircles (by Thales' theorem). The quadrilateral 
 
 
 
  therefore has three right angles, so it is a rectangle. Q.E.D.


Tangents
The line 
 
 
 
  is tangent to semicircle 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  and semicircle 
 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 .

Proof: Since angle BDA is a right angle, angle DBA equals π/2 minus angle DAB. However, angle DAH also equals π/2 minus angle DAB (since angle HAB is a right angle). Therefore triangles DBA and DAH are similar. Therefore angle DIA equals angle DOH, where I is the midpoint of BA and O is the midpoint of AH. But AOH is a straight line, so angle DOH and DOA are supplementary angles. Therefore the sum of angles DIA and DOA is π. Angle IAO is a right angle. The sum of the angles in any quadrilateral is 2π, so in quadrilateral IDOA, angle IDO must be a right angle. But ADHE is a rectangle, so the midpoint O of AH (the rectangle's diagonal) is also the midpoint of DE (the rectangle's other diagonal). As I (defined as the midpoint of BA) is the center of semicircle BA, and angle IDE is a right angle, then DE is tangent to semicircle BA at D. By analogous reasoning DE is tangent to semicircle AC at E. Q.E.D.


Archimedes' circles
The altitude 
 
 
 
  divides the arbelos into two regions, each bounded by a semicircle, a straight line segment, and an arc of the outer semicircle. The circles inscribed in each of these regions, known as the Archimedes' circles of the arbelos, have the same size.
See also
(Figure)
Arbelos skulpture in Kaatsheuvel, Netherlands


Archimedes' quadruplets
Bankoff circle
Ideal triangle
Schoch circles
Schoch line
Woo circles
Pappus chain
Salinon

References

5 67

Bibliography




American Mathematical Monthly, 120 (2013), 929-935.


External links



Arbelos – Amazing Properties (an interactive diagram illustrating many Arbelos properties) at www.retas.de
Arbelos at cut-the-knot
Arbelos and Parbelos at PlanetMath
L’arbelos. Partie I and Partie II by Hamza Khelif at www.images.math.cnrs.fr of CNRS
Review of Jonathan Sondow's "The parbelos, a parabolic analog of the arbelos" by Mowaffaq Hajja in Zentralblatt MATH

"
Category:Arbelos Category:Geometric shapes








Thomas Little Heath (1897), The Works of Archimedes. Cambridge University Press. Proposition 4 in the Book of Lemmas. Quote: If AB be the diameter of a semicircle and N any point on AB, and if semicircles be described within the first semicircle and having AN, BN as diameters respectively, the figure included between the circumferences of the three semicircles is "what Archimedes called arbelos"; and its area is equal to the circle on PN as diameter, where PN is perpendicular to AB and meets the original semicircle in P. ("Arbelos - the Shoemaker's Knife")





