


Circulant matrix




Circulant matrix

In linear algebra, a circulant matrix is a special kind of Toeplitz matrix where each row vector is rotated one element to the right relative to the preceding row vector. In numerical analysis, circulant matrices are important because they are diagonalized by a discrete Fourier transform, and hence linear equations that contain them may be quickly solved using a fast Fourier transform.1 They can be interpreted analytically as the integral kernel of a convolution operator on the cyclic group

 
  and hence frequently appear in formal descriptions of spatially invariant linear operations. In cryptography, a circulant matrix is used in the MixColumns step of the Advanced Encryption Standard.
Definition
An 
 
 
 
  circulant matrix 
 
 
 
  takes the form



A circulant matrix is fully specified by one vector, 
 
 
 
 , which appears as the first column of 
 
 
 
 . The remaining columns of 
 
 
 
  are each cyclic permutations of the vector 
 
 
 
  with offset equal to the column index. The last row of 
 
 
 
  is the vector 
 
 
 
  in reverse order, and the remaining rows are each cyclic permutations of the last row. Note that different sources define the circulant matrix in different ways, for example with the coefficients corresponding to the first row rather than the first column of the matrix, or with a different direction of shift.
The polynomial 
 
 
 
  is called the associated polynomial of matrix 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
Eigenvectors and eigenvalues
The normalized eigenvectors of a circulant matrix are given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the n-th roots of unity and 
 
 
 
  is the imaginary unit.
The corresponding eigenvalues are then given by



Determinant
As a consequence of the explicit formula for the eigenvalues above, the determinant of circulant matrix can be computed as:


 
  Since taking transpose does not change the eigenvalues of a matrix, an equivalent formulation is



Rank
The rank of circulant matrix 
 
 
 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is the degree of 
 
 
 
 .2
Other properties

We have








where P is the 'cyclic permutation' matrix, a specific permutation matrix given by
 
 :


\begin{bmatrix}
0&0&\ldots&0&1\\
1&0&\ldots&0&0\\
0&\ddots&\ddots&\vdots&\vdots\\
\vdots&\ddots&\ddots&0&0\\
0&\ldots&0&1&0
\end{bmatrix}.

The set of 
 
 
 
  circulant matrices forms an n-dimensional vector space; this can be interpreted as the space of functions on the cyclic group of order n, 
 
 
 
  or equivalently the group ring.


Circulant matrices form a commutative algebra, since for any two given circulant matrices 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the sum 
 
 
 
  is circulant, the product 
 
 
 
  is circulant, and 
 
 
 
 .


The matrix U that is composed of the eigenvectors of a circulant matrix is related to the Discrete Fourier transform and its Inverse transform:






Thus, the matrix 
 
 
diagonalizes C. In fact, we have
 
 



where 
 
 
 
  is the first column of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  are given by the product 
 
 
 
 
 . This product can be readily calculated by a Fast Fourier transform.3


Analytic interpretation
Circulant matrices can be interpreted geometrically, which explains the connection with the discrete Fourier transform.
Consider vectors in 
 
 
 
  as functions on the integers with period n, (i.e., as periodic bi-infinite sequences
 
 
 
 ) or equivalently, as functions on the cyclic group of order n, (
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 ) geometrically, on (the vertices of) the regular n-gon: this is a discrete analog to periodic functions on the real line or circle.
Then, from the perspective of operator theory, a circulant matrix is the kernel of a discrete integral transform, namely the convolution operator for the function 
 
 
 
 
  this is a discrete circular convolution. The formula for the convolution of the functions 
 
 
 
  is


 
  (recall that the sequences are periodic) which is the product of the vector of 
 
 
 
  by the circulant matrix.
The discrete Fourier transform then converts convolution into multiplication, which in the matrix setting corresponds to diagonalization.
Applications
In linear equations
Given a matrix equation


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is a circulant square matrix of size 
 
 
 
  we can write the equation as the circular convolution


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the first column of 
 
 
 
 , and the vectors 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are cyclically extended in each direction. Using the results of the circular convolution theorem, we can use the discrete Fourier transform to transform the cyclic convolution into component-wise multiplication



so that



This algorithm is much faster than the standard Gaussian elimination, especially if a fast Fourier transform is used.
In graph theory
In graph theory, a graph or digraph whose adjacency matrix is circulant is called a circulant graph (or digraph). Equivalently, a graph is circulant if its automorphism group contains a full-length cycle. The Möbius ladders are examples of circulant graphs, as are the Paley graphs for fields of prime order.
References
External links

R. M. Gray, Toeplitz and Circulant Matrices: A Review


"
Category:Numerical linear algebra Category:Matrices Category:Latin squares Category:Determinants



Davis, Philip J., Circulant Matrices, Wiley, New York, 1970 ISBN 0471057711↩
↩
↩




