


Carathéodory's theorem (convex hull)




Carathéodory's theorem (convex hull)

(Figure)
An illustration of Carathéodory's theorem for a square in R2


See also Carathéodory's theorem (disambiguation) for other meanings


In convex geometry Carathéodory's theorem states that if a point x of Rd lies in the convex hull of a set P, there is a subset ′ of P consisting of d + 1 or fewer points such that x lies in the convex hull of ′. Equivalently, x lies in an r-simplex with vertices in P, where 
 
 
 
 . The result is named for Constantin Carathéodory, who proved the theorem in 1911 for the case when P is compact. In 1914 Ernst Steinitz expanded Carathéodory's theorem for any sets P in Rd.
For example, consider a set P = {(0,0), (0,1), (1,0), (1,1)} which is a subset of R2. The convex hull of this set is a square. Consider now a point x = (1/4, 1/4), which is in the convex hull of P. We can then construct a set {(0,0),(0,1),(1,0)} = ′, the convex hull of which is a triangle and encloses x, and thus the theorem works for this instance, since |′| = 3. It may help to visualise Carathéodory's theorem in 2 dimensions, as saying that we can construct a triangle consisting of points from P that encloses any point in P.
Proof
Let x be a point in the convex hull of P. Then, x is a convex combination of a finite number of points in P :



where every xj is in P, every λj is non-negative, and 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose k > d + 1 (otherwise, there is nothing to prove). Then, the points x2 − x1, ..., x''k'' − x1 are linearly dependent,
so there are real scalars μ2, ..., μk, not all zero, such that



If μ1 is defined as



then






and not all of the μj are equal to zero. Therefore, at least one μj > 0. Then,



for any real α. In particular, the equality will hold if α is defined as



Note that α>0, and for every j between 1 and k,



In particular, λi − αμi = 0 by definition of α. Therefore,



where every 
 
 
 
  is nonnegative, their sum is one , and furthermore, 
 
 
 
 . In other words, x is represented as a convex combination of at most k-1 points of P. This process can be repeated until x is represented as a convex combination of at most d + 1 points in P.
An alternative proof uses Helly's theorem.
See also

Shapley–Folkman lemma
Helly's theorem
Krein–Milman theorem
Choquet theory

References


.

.

.


External links

Concise statement of theorem in terms of convex hulls (at PlanetMath)

"
Category:Theorems in convex geometry Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Convex hulls Category:Geometric transversal theory Category:Theorems in discrete geometry


