


Stone's theorem on one-parameter unitary groups




Stone's theorem on one-parameter unitary groups

In mathematics, Stone's theorem on one-parameter unitary groups is a basic theorem of functional analysis that establishes a one-to-one correspondence between self-adjoint operators on a Hilbert space

 
  and one-parameter families



of unitary operators that are strongly continuous, i.e.,



and are homomorphisms, i.e.,



Such one-parameter families are ordinarily referred to as strongly continuous one-parameter unitary groups.
The theorem was proved by , and  showed that the requirement that 
 
 
 
  be strongly continuous can be relaxed to say that it is merely weakly measurable, at least when the Hilbert space is separable.
This is a very stunning theorem, as it allows to define the derivative of the mapping , which is only supposed to be continuous. It is also related to the theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras.
Formal statement
Let 
 
 
 
  be a strongly continuous one-parameter unitary group. Then there exists a unique (not necessarily bounded) self-adjoint operator 
 
 
 
  such that



Conversely, let 
 
 
 
 
  be a (not necessarily bounded) self-adjoint operator on a Hilbert space 
 
 
 
 . Then the one-parameter family 
 
 
 
  of unitary operators defined by (using the Spectral Theorem for Self-Adjoint Operators)



is a strongly continuous one-parameter group.
The infinitesimal generator of 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the operator 
 
 
 
 
 . This mapping is a bijective correspondence. Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  will be a bounded operator if and only if the operator-valued mapping  is norm-continuous.
Stone's Theorem can be recast using the language of the Fourier transform. The real line 
 
 
 
  is a locally compact abelian group. Non-degenerate *-representations of the group C*-algebra  are in one-to-one correspondence with strongly continuous unitary representations of 
 
 
 
 , i.e., strongly continuous one-parameter unitary groups. On the other hand, the Fourier transform is a *-isomorphism from  to , the C*-algebra of complex-valued continuous functions on the real line that vanish at infinity. Hence, there is a one-to-one correspondence between strongly continuous one-parameter unitary groups and *-representations of . As every *-representation of  corresponds uniquely to a self-adjoint operator, Stone's Theorem holds.
Therefore, the procedure for obtaining the infinitesimal generator of a strongly continuous one-parameter unitary group is as follows.

Let 
 
 
 
  be a strongly continuous unitary representation of 
 
 
 
 
  on a Hilbert space

 
 .
Integrate this unitary representation to yield a non-degenerate *-representation 
 
 
 
  of  on 
 
 
 
  by first defining








and then extending 
 
 
 
 
  to all of  by continuity.
 


Use the Fourier transform to obtain a non-degenerate *-representation 
 
 
 
  of  on 
 
 
 
 .
By the Riesz-Markov Theorem, 
 
 
 
  gives rise to a projection-valued measure on 
 
 
 
  that is the resolution of the identity of a unique self-adjoint operator

 
 
 , which may be unbounded.
Then 
 
 
 
  is the infinitesimal generator of 
 
 
 
 .

The precise definition of  is as follows. Consider the *-algebra , the complex-valued continuous functions on 
 
 
 
  with compact support, where the multiplication is given by convolution. The completion of this *-algebra with respect to the -norm is a Banach *-algebra, denoted by 
 
 
 
 . Then  is defined to be the enveloping C*-algebra of 
 
 
 
 
 , i.e., its completion with respect to the largest possible C*-norm. It is a non-trivial fact that, via the Fourier transform,  is isomorphic to . A result in this direction is the Riemann-Lebesgue Lemma, which says that the Fourier transform maps  to .
Example
The family of translation operators



is a one-parameter unitary group of unitary operators; the infinitesimal generator of this family is an extension of the differential operator



defined on the space of complex-valued continuously differentiable functions of compact support on 
 
 
 
 . Thus



In other words, motion on the line is generated by the momentum operator.
Applications
Stone's theorem has numerous applications in quantum mechanics. For instance, given an isolated quantum mechanical system, with Hilbert space of states 
 
 
 
 
 , time evolution is a strongly continuous one-parameter unitary group on 
 
 
 
 . The infinitesimal generator of this group is the system Hamiltonian.
Generalizations
The Stone–von Neumann theorem generalizes Stone's theorem to a pair of self-adjoint operators, 
 
 
 
  satisfying the canonical commutation relation, and shows that these are all unitarily equivalent to the position operator and momentum operator on .
The Hille–Yosida theorem generalizes Stone's theorem to strongly continuous one-parameter semigroups of contractions on Banach spaces.
References




K. Yosida, Functional Analysis, Springer-Verlag, (1968)

"
Category:Theorems in functional analysis


