


Fractional Brownian motion




Fractional Brownian motion

In probability theory, fractional Brownian motion (fBm), also called a fractal Brownian motion, is a generalization of Brownian motion. Unlike classical Brownian motion, the increments of fBm need not be independent. fBm is a continuous-time Gaussian process BH(t) on [0, T], which starts at zero, has expectation zero for all t in [0, T], and has the following covariance function:



where H is a real number in (0, 1), called the Hurst index or Hurst parameter associated with the fractional Brownian motion. The Hurst exponent describes the raggedness of the resultant motion, with a higher value leading to a smoother motion. It was introduced by .
The value of H determines what kind of process the fBm is:

if H = 1/2 then the process is in fact a Brownian motion or Wiener process;
if H > 1/2 then the increments of the process are positively correlated;
if H < 1/2 then the increments of the process are negatively correlated.

The increment process, X(t) = BH(t+1) − BH(t), is known as fractional Gaussian noise.
There is also a generalization of fractional Brownian motion: n-th order fractional Brownian motion, abbreviated as n-fBm.1 n-fBm is a Gaussian, self-similar, non-stationary process whose increments of order n are stationary. For n = 1, n-fBm is classical fBm.
Like the Brownian motion that it generalizes, fractional Brownian motion is named after 19th century biologist Robert Brown; fractional Gaussian noise is named after mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss.
Background and definition
Prior to the introduction of the fractional Brownian motion,  used the Riemann–Liouville fractional integral to define the process


 
  where integration is with respect to the white noise measure dB(s). This integral turns out to be ill-suited to applications of fractional Brownian motion because of its over-emphasis of the origin .
The idea instead is to use a different fractional integral of white noise to define the process: the Weyl integral


 
  for t > 0 (and similarly for t  1/2.)
Properties
Self-similarity
The process is self-similar, since in terms of probability distributions:



This property is due to the fact that the covariance function is homogeneous of order 2H and can be considered as a fractal property. Fractional Brownian motion is the only self-similar Gaussian process.
Stationary increments
It has stationary increments:



Long-range dependence
For H > ½ the process exhibits long-range dependence,



Regularity
Sample-paths are almost nowhere differentiable. However, almost-all trajectories are Hölder continuous of any order strictly less than H: for each such trajectory, there exists a constant c such that








for every ε > 0.
Dimension
With probability 1, the graph of BH(t) has both Hausdorff dimension and box dimension of 2−H.
Integration
As for regular Brownian motion, one can define stochastic integrals with respect to fractional Brownian motion, usually called "fractional stochastic integrals". In general though, unlike integrals with respect to regular Brownian motion, fractional stochastic integrals are not semimartingales.
Sample paths
Practical computer realisations of an fBm can be generated, although they are only a finite approximation. The sample paths chosen can be thought of as showing discrete sampled points on an fBm process. Three realisations are shown below, each with 1000 points of an fBm with Hurst parameter 0.75.



(Figure)
"H" = 0.75 realisation 1

(Figure)
"H" = 0.75 realisation 2

(Figure)
"H" = 0.75 realisation 3




Two realisations are shown below, each showing 1000 points of an fBm, the first with Hurst parameter 0.95 and the second with Hurst parameter 0.55.



(Figure)
"H" = 0.95

(Figure)
"H" = 0.55




Method 1 of simulation
One can simulate sample-paths of an fBm using methods for generating stationary Gaussian processes with known covariance function. The simplest method relies on the Cholesky decomposition method of the covariance matrix (explained below), which on a grid of size 
 
 
 
  has complexity of order 
 
 
 
 . A more complex, but computationally faster method is the circulant embedding method of .
Suppose we want to simulate the values of the fBM at times 
 
 
 
  using the Cholesky decomposition method.

Form the matrix 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .


Compute 
 
 
 
  the square root matrix of 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 . Loosely speaking, 
 
 
 
  is the "standard deviation" matrix associated to the variance-covariance matrix 
 
 
 
 .


Construct a vector 
 
 
 
  of n numbers drawn according a standard Gaussian distribution,


If we define 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  yields a sample path of an fBm.

In order to compute 
 
 
 
 , we can use for instance the Cholesky decomposition method. An alternative method uses the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
 :

Since 
 
 
 
  is symmetric, positive-definite matrix, it follows that all eigenvalues

 
  of 
 
 
 
  satisfy 
 
 
 
 , (
 
 
 
 ).


Let 
 
 
 
  be the diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues, i.e. 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta. We define 
 
 
 
  as the diagonal matrix with entries 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 .

Note that the result is real-valued because 
 
 
 
 .

Let 
 
 
 
  an eigenvector associated to the eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
  as the matrix whose 
 
 
 
 -th column is the eigenvector 
 
 
 
 .

Note that since the eigenvectors are linearly independent, the matrix 
 
 
 
  is inversible.

It follows then that 
 
 
 
  because 
 
 
 
 .

Method 2 of simulation
It is also known that



where B is a standard Brownian motion and



Where 
 
 
 
  is the Euler hypergeometric integral.
Say we want simulate an fBm at points 
 
 
 
 .

Construct a vector of n numbers drawn according a standard Gaussian distribution.


Multiply it component-wise by √(T/n) to obtain the increments of a Brownian motion on [0, T]. Denote this vector by 
 
 
 
 .


For each 
 
 
 
 , compute









The integral may be efficiently computed by Gaussian quadrature. Hypergeometric functions are part of the GNU scientific library.
See also

Brownian surface
Autoregressive fractionally integrated moving average
Multifractal: The generalized framework of fractional Brownian motions.
Pink noise
Tweedie distributions

Notes
References


.
Craigmile P.F. (2003), "Simulating a class of stationary Gaussian processes using the Davies–Harte Algorithm, with application to long memory processes", Journal of Times Series Analysis, 24: 505–511.


.

.

.
Perrin E. et al. (2001), "nth-order fractional Brownian motion and fractional Gaussian noises", IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 49: 1049-1059. 
Samorodnitsky G., Taqqu M.S. (1994), Stable Non-Gaussian Random Processes, Chapter 7: "Self-similar processes" (Chapman & Hall).

Further reading


.

"
Category:Stochastic processes Category:Long-memory processes



Perrin et al., 2001.↩




