


MQV




MQV

MQV (Menezes–Qu–Vanstone) is an authenticated protocol for key agreement based on the Diffie–Hellman scheme. Like other authenticated Diffie-Hellman schemes, MQV provides protection against an active attacker. The protocol can be modified to work in an arbitrary finite group, and, in particular, elliptic curve groups, where it is known as elliptic curve MQV (ECMQV).
MQV was initially proposed by Menezes, Qu and Vanstone in 1995. It was modified with Law and Solinas in 1998. There are one-, two- and three-pass variants.
MQV is incorporated in the public-key standard IEEE P1363.
Some variants of MQV are claimed in patents assigned to Certicom.
MQV has some weaknesses that were fixed by HMQV in 2005.1 A few articles23 offered alternative viewpoint.
ECMQV has been dropped from the National Security Agency's Suite B set of cryptographic standards.
__TOC__
Description
Alice has a key pair (A,a) with A her public key and a her private key and Bob has the key pair (B,b) with B his public key and b his private key.
In the following 
 
 
 
  has the following meaning. Let 
 
 
 
  be a point on an elliptic curve. Then 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  and n is the order of the used generator point P. So 
 
 
 
  are the first L bits of the x coordinate of R.




Step

Operation





1

Alice generates a key pair (X,x) by generating randomly x and calculating X=xP with P a point on an elliptic curve.



2

Bob generates a key pair (Y,y) in the same way as Alice.



3

Now, Alice calculates 
 
 
 
  and sends X to Bob.



4

Bob calculates 
 
 
 
  and sends Y to Alice.



5

Alice calculates 
 
 
 
  and Bob calculates 
 
 
 
 
  where h is the cofactor (see Elliptic curve cryptography: domain parameters).



6

The communication of secret 
 
 
 
  was successful. A key for a symmetric-key algorithm can be derived from K.



Note: for the algorithm to be secure some checks have to be performed. See Hankerson et al.
Correctness
Bob calculates: 
 
 
 
 .
Alice calculates: 
 
 
 
 .
So the keys K are indeed the same with 
 
 

See also

Elliptic curve cryptography

References
Bibliography







External links

A Secure and Efficient Authenticated Diffie–Hellman Protocol by Sarr, Elbaz-Vincent, and Bajard
HMQV: A High-Performance Secure Diffie–Hellman Protocol by Hugo Krawczyk
Another look at HMQV
An Efficient Protocol for Authenticated Key Agreement
MQV and HMQV in IEEE P1363 (power point)

"
Category:Key-agreement protocols Category:Elliptic curve cryptography










