


Closed immersion




Closed immersion


For the same-name concept in differential geometry, see immersion (mathematics).


In algebraic geometry, a closed immersion of schemes is a morphism of schemes

 
  that identifies Z as a closed subset of X such that regular functions on Z can be extended locally to X.1 The latter condition can be formalized by saying that 
 
 
 
  is surjective.2
An example is the inclusion map 
 
 
 
  induced by the canonical map 
 
 
 
 .
Other characterizations
The following are equivalent:



 
  is a closed immersion.
For every open affine 
 
 
 
 , there exists an ideal 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  as schemes over U.
There exists an open affine covering 
 
 
 
  and for each j there exists an ideal 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  as schemes over 
 
 
 
 .
There is a quasi-coherent sheaf of ideals 
 
 
 
  on X such that 
 
 
 
  and f is an isomorphism of Z onto the global Spec of 
 
 
 
  over X.

Properties
A closed immersion is finite and radicial (universally injective). In particular, a closed immersion is universally closed. A closed immersion is stable under base change and composition. The notion of a closed immersion is local in the sense that f is a closed immersion if and only if for some (equivalently every) open covering 
 
 
 
  the induced map 
 
 
 
  is a closed immersion.34
If the composition 
 
 
 
  is a closed immersion and 
 
 
 
  is separated, then 
 
 
 
  is a closed immersion. If X is a separated S-scheme, then every S-section of X is a closed immersion.5
If 
 
 
 
  is a closed immersion and 
 
 
 
  is the quasi-coherent sheaf of ideals cutting out Z, then the direct image 
 
 
 
  from the category of quasi-coherent sheaves over Z to the category of quasi-coherent sheaves over X is exact, fully faithful with the essential image consisting of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .6
A flat closed immersion of finite presentation is the open immersion of an open closed subscheme.7
See also

Segre embedding
Regular embedding

Notes
References


The Stacks Project


"
Category:Morphisms of schemes



Mumford, The red book of varieties and schemes, Section II.5↩
↩
↩
http://stacks.math.columbia.edu/download/spaces-morphisms.pdf↩
↩
Stacks, Morphisms of schemes. Lemma 4.1↩
Stacks, Morphisms of schemes. Lemma 27.2↩




