


Alternating series test




Alternating series test

In mathematical analysis, the alternating series test is a method used to prove that an alternating series with terms that decrease in absolute value is a convergent series. The test was used by Gottfried Leibniz and is sometimes known as Leibniz's test, Leibniz's rule, or the Leibniz criterion.
Formulation
A series of the form



Or,



where an are positive, is called an alternating series.
The alternating series test then says: if 
 
 
 
  decreases monotonically and 
 
 
 
  then the alternating series converges.
Moreover, let L denote the sum of the series, then the partial sum



approximates L with error bounded by the next omitted term:



Proof
Suppose we are given a series of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all natural numbers n. (The case 
 
 
 
  follows by taking the negative.) 1
Proof of convergence
We will prove that both the partial sums 
 
 
 
  with odd number of terms, and 
 
 
 
  with even number of terms, converge to the same number L. Thus the usual partial sum 
 
 
 
  also converges to L.
The odd partial sums decrease monotonically:



while the even partial sums increase monotonically:



both because an decrease monotonically with n.
Moreover, since an are positive, 
 
 
 
 . Thus we can collect these facts to form the following suggestive inequality:



Now, note that a1 − a2 is a lower bound of the monotonically decreasing sequence S2m+1, the monotone convergence theorem then implies that this sequence converges as m approaches infinity. Similarly, the sequence of even partial sum converges too.
Finally, they must converge to the same number because



Call the limit L, then the monotone convergence theorem also tells us an extra information that



for any m. This means the partial sums of an alternating series also "alternates" above and below the final limit. More precisely, when there are odd (even) number of terms, i.e. the last term is a plus (minus) term, then the partial sum is above (below) the final limit.
This understanding leads immediately to an error bound of partial sums, shown below.
Proof of partial sum error bound
We would like to show 
 
 
 
  by splitting into two cases.
When k = 2m+1, i.e. odd, then



When k = 2m, i.e. even, then



as desired.
Both cases rely essentially on the last inequality derived in the previous proof.
For an alternative proof using Cauchy's convergence test, see Alternating series.
For a generalization, see Dirichlet's test.
Notes
See also

Alternating series
Dirichlet's test

References

Konrad Knopp (1956) Infinite Sequences and Series, § 3.4, Dover Publications ISBN 0-486-60153-6
Konrad Knopp (1990) Theory and Application of Infinite Series, § 15, Dover Publications ISBN 0-486-66165-2
E. T. Whittaker & G. N. Watson (1963) A Course in Modern Analysis, 4th edition, §2.3, Cambridge University Press ISBN 0-521-58807-3

External links



"
Category:Mathematical series Category:Convergence tests Category:Gottfried Leibniz



The proof follows the idea given by James Stewart (2012) “Calculus: Early Transcendentals, Seventh Edition” pp. 727–730. ISBN 0-538-49790-4




