


Score test




Score test

Rao's score test, or the score test (often known as the Lagrange multiplier test in econometrics1) is a statistical test of a simple null hypothesis that a parameter of interest 
 
 
 
  is equal to some particular value 
 
 
 
 . It is the most powerful test when the true value of 
 
 
 
  is close to 
 
 
 
 . The main advantage of the Score-test is that it does not require an estimate of the information under the alternative hypothesis or unconstrained maximum likelihood. This makes testing feasible when the unconstrained maximum likelihood estimate is a boundary point in the parameter space.
Single parameter test
The statistic
Let 
 
 
 
  be the likelihood function which depends on a univariate parameter 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the data. The score is 
 
 
 
  where



The Fisher information is2



The statistic to test 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 

which has an asymptotic distribution of 
 
 
 
 , when 
 
 
 
  is true.
Note on notation
Note that some texts use an alternative notation, in which the statistic 
 
 
 
  is tested against a normal distribution. This approach is equivalent and gives identical results.
Justification
The case of a likelihood with nuisance parameters
As most powerful test for small deviations


 
  Where 
 
 
 
  is the likelihood function, 
 
 
 
  is the value of the parameter of interest under the null hypothesis, and 
 
 
 
  is a constant set depending on the size of the test desired (i.e. the probability of rejecting 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is true; see Type I error).
The score test is the most powerful test for small deviations from 
 
 
 
 . To see this, consider testing 
 
 
 
  versus 
 
 
 
 . By the Neyman–Pearson lemma, the most powerful test has the form



Taking the log of both sides yields



The score test follows making the substitution (by Taylor series expansion)



and identifying the 
 
 
 
  above with 
 
 
 
 .
Relationship with other hypothesis tests
The likelihood ratio test, the Wald test, and the Score test are asymptotically equivalent tests of hypotheses.3 When testing nested models, the statistics for each test converge to a Chi-squared distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the difference in degrees of freedom in the two models.
Multiple parameters
A more general score test can be derived when there is more than one parameter. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is the maximum likelihood estimate of 
 
 
 
  under the null hypothesis 
 
 
 
 . Then



asymptotically under 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the number of constraints imposed by the null hypothesis and



and



This can be used to test 
 
 
 
 .
Special cases
In many situations, the score statistic reduces to another commonly used statistic.4
When the data follows a normal distribution, the score statistic is the same as the t statistic.
When the data consists of binary observations, the score statistic is the same as the chi-squared statistic in the Pearson's chi-squared test.
When the data consists of failure time data in two groups, the score statistic for the Cox partial likelihood is the same as the log-rank statistic in the log-rank test. Hence the log-rank test for difference in survival between two groups is most powerful when the proportional hazards assumption holds.
See also

Fisher information
Uniformly most powerful test
Score (statistics)

References
"
Category:Statistical tests



 Engle, Robert F (1984) . Wald, Likelihood Ratio and Lagrange Multiplier tests in Econometrics. in Handbook of Econometrics, Volume II, Edited by Z. Griliches and M.D. Intriligator. Elsevier Science Publishers BV.
Lehmann and Casella, eq. (2.5.16).






