


Restriction (mathematics)




Restriction (mathematics)

(Figure)
The function x2 with domain R does not have an inverse. If we restrict x2 to the non-negative real numbers, then it does have an inverse, known as the square root of x.

In mathematics, the restriction of a function f is a new function f|A obtained by choosing a smaller domain A for the original function f. The notation 
 
 
 
  is also used.
Formal definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a function from a set 
 
 
 
  to a set 
 
 
 
 
 , so that the domain of 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ). If a set 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 
 , then the '''restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  ''' is the function1


 
 .
Informally, the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
  is the same function as 
 
 
 
 , but is only defined on 
 
 
 
 .
If the function 
 
 
 
  is thought of as a relation

 
  on the Cartesian product

 
 
 , then the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  can be represented by the graph

 
 , where the pairs 
 
 
 
  represent edges in the graph 
 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

The restriction of the non-injective function

 
  to 
 
 
 
  is the injection 
 
 
 
 .
The factorial function is the restriction of the gamma function to the integers.

Properties of restrictions

Restricting a function 
 
 
 
  to its entire domain 
 
 
 
 
  gives back the original function; i.e., 
 
 
 
 .
Restricting a function twice is the same as restricting it once; i.e. if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .
The restriction of the identity function on a space X to a subset A of X is just the inclusion map of A into X.2
The restriction of a continuous function is continuous.34

Applications
Inverse functions
For a function to have an inverse, it must be one-to-one. If a function 
 
 
 
  is not one-to-one, it may be possible to define a partial inverse of 
 
 
 
 
  by restricting the domain. For example, the function



is not one-to-one, since . However, the function becomes one-to-one if we restrict to the domain 
 
 
 
 , in which case



(If we instead restrict to the domain 
 
 
 
 , then the inverse is the negative of the square root of 
 
 
 
 
 .) Alternatively, there is no need to restrict the domain if we are content with the inverse being a multivalued function:
Selection operators
In relational algebra, a selection (sometimes called a restriction to avoid confusion with SQL's use of SELECT) is a unary operation written as 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  where:



 
  and 
 
 
 
  are attribute names


 
 
  is a binary operation in the set 
 
 



 
  is a value constant


 
  is a relation

The selection 
 
 
 
  selects all those tuples in 
 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  holds between the 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  attribute.
The selection 
 
 
 
  selects all those tuples in 
 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  holds between the 
 
 
 
  attribute and the value 
 
 
 
 .
Thus, the selection operator restricts to a subset of the entire database.
The Pasting Lemma
The pasting lemma is a result in topology that relates the continuity of a function with the continuity of its restrictions to subsets.
Let 
 
 
 
  be both closed (or both open) subsets of a topological space A such that 
 
 
 
 
 , and let B also be a topological space. If 
 
 
 
  is continuous when restricted to both X and Y, then f is continuous.
This result allows one to take two continuous functions defined on closed (or open) subsets of a topological space and create a new one.
Sheaves
Sheaves provide a way of generalizing restrictions to objects besides functions.
In sheaf theory, one assigns an object 
 
 
 
  in a category to each open set

 
  of a topological space, and requires that the objects satisfy certain conditions. The most important condition is that there are restriction morphisms between every pair of objects associated to nested open sets; i.e., if 
 
 
 
 , then there is a morphism resV,U : F(U) → F(V) satisfying the following properties, which are designed to mimic the restriction of a function:

For every open set U of X, the restriction morphism resU,U : F(U) → F(U) is the identity morphism on F(U).
If we have three open sets W ⊆ V ⊆ U, then the composite 
(Locality) If (Ui) is an open covering of an open set U, and if s,t ∈ F(U) are such that s|Ui = t|Ui for each set Ui of the covering, then s = t; and
(Gluing) If (Ui) is an open covering of an open set U, and if for each i a section si ∈ F(Ui) is given such that for each pair Ui,Uj of the covering sets the restrictions of si and sj agree on the overlaps: si|Ui∩Uj = sj|Ui∩Uj, then there is a section s ∈ F(U) such that s|Ui = si for each i.

The collection of all such objects is called a sheaf. If only the first two properties are satisfied, it is a pre-sheaf.
Left- and right-restriction
More generally, the restriction (or domain restriction or left-restriction) 
 
 
 
 
  of a binary relation

 
  between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  may be defined as a relation having domain 
 
 
 
 , codomain 
 
 
 
 
  and graph . Similarly, one can define a right-restriction or range restriction

 
 . Indeed, one could define a restriction to 

 
 -ary relations, as well as to subsets understood as relations, such as ones of 
 
 
 
  for binary relations. These cases do not fit into the scheme of sheaves.
Anti-restriction
The domain anti-restriction (or domain subtraction) of a function or binary relation 
 
 
 
  (with domain 
 
 
 
 
  and codomain 
 
 
 
 ) by a set 
 
 
 
  may be defined as 
 
 
 
 ; it removes all elements of 
 
 
 
  from the domain 
 
 
 
 
 . It is sometimes denoted 
 
 
 
  ⩤ 
 
 
 
 .5 Similarly, the range anti-restriction (or range subtraction) of a function or binary relation 
 
 
 
  by a set 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 
 
 
 ; it removes all elements of 
 
 
 
  from the codomain 
 
 
 
 . It is sometimes denoted 
 
 
 
  ⩥ 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Deformation retract
Function (mathematics) #Restrictions and extensions
Binary relation #Restriction
Relational algebra#Selection (σ)

References
"
Category:Sheaf theory



↩
Halmos, Paul, Naive Set Theory. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand Company, 1960. Reprinted by Springer-Verlag, New York, 1974. ISBN 0-387-90092-6 (Springer-Verlag edition). Reprinted by Martino Fine Books, 2011. ISBN 978-1-61427-131-4 (Paperback edition).↩
Munkres, James R. Topology. Vol. 2. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 2000.↩
Adams, Colin Conrad, and Robert David Franzosa. Introduction to topology: pure and applied. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008.↩
Dunne, S. and Stoddart, Bill Unifying Theories of Programming: First International Symposium, UTP 2006, Walworth Castle, County Durham, UK, February 5-7, 2006, Revised Selected ... Computer Science and General Issues). Springer (2006)↩




