


Direct comparison test




Direct comparison test

In mathematics, the comparison test, sometimes called the direct comparison test to distinguish it from similar related tests (especially the limit comparison test), provides a way of deducing the convergence or divergence of an infinite series or an improper integral. In both cases, the test works by comparing the given series or integral to one whose convergence properties are known.
For series
In calculus, the comparison test for series typically consists of a pair of statements about infinite series with nonnegative (real-valued) terms:1

If the infinite series 
 
 
 
  converges and 
 
 
 
  for all sufficiently large n (that is, for all 
 
 
 
  for some fixed value N), then the infinite series 
 
 
 
 
  also converges.
If the infinite series 
 
 
 
  diverges and 
 
 
 
  for all sufficiently large n, then the infinite series 
 
 
 
  also diverges.

Note that the series having larger terms is sometimes said to dominate (or eventually dominate) the series with smaller terms.2
Alternatively, the test may be stated in terms of absolute convergence, in which case it also applies to series with complex terms:3

If the infinite series 
 
 
 
  is absolutely convergent and 
 
 
 
 
  for all sufficiently large n, then the infinite series 
 
 
 
  is also absolutely convergent.
If the infinite series 
 
 
 
  is not absolutely convergent and 
 
 
 
  for all sufficiently large n, then the infinite series 
 
 
 
  is also not absolutely convergent.

Note that in this last statement, the series 
 
 
 
 
  could still be conditionally convergent; for real-valued series, this could happen if the an are not all nonnegative.
The second pair of statements are equivalent to the first in the case of real-valued series because 
 
 
 
  converges absolutely if and only if 
 
 
 
 , a series with nonnegative terms, converges.
Proof
The proofs of all the statements given above are similar. Here is a proof of the third statement.
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be infinite series such that 
 
 
 
 
  converges absolutely (thus 
 
 
 
  converges), and without loss of generality assume that 
 
 
 
  for all positive integers n. Consider the partial sums


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  converges absolutely, 
 
 
 
 
  for some real number T. The sequence 
 
 
 
  is clearly nondecreasing, so 
 
 
 
  for all n. Thus for all n,


 
  This shows that 
 
 
 
  is a bounded monotonic sequence and so must converge to a limit. Therefore 
 
 
 
 
  is absolutely convergent.
For integrals
The comparison test for integrals may be stated as follows, assuming continuous real-valued functions f and g on 
 
 
 
  with b either 
 
 
 
  or a real number at which f and g each have a vertical asymptote:4

If the improper integral 
 
 
 
  converges and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
 , then the improper integral 
 
 
 
  also converges with 
 
 

If the improper integral 
 
 
 
  diverges and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
 , then the improper integral 
 
 
 
  also diverges.

Ratio comparison test
Another test for convergence of real-valued series, similar to both the direct comparison test above and the ratio test, is called the ratio comparison test:5

If the infinite series 
 
 
 
  converges and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  for all sufficiently large n, then the infinite series 
 
 
 
  also converges.

Notes


References








See also

Convergence tests
Convergence (mathematics)
Dominated convergence theorem
Integral test for convergence
Limit comparison test
Monotone convergence theorem

fr:Série convergente#Principe général : règles de comparaison"
Category:Convergence tests Category:Mathematical series



Ayres & Mendelson (1999), p. 401.
Munem & Foulis (1984), p. 662.
Silverman (1975), p. 119.
Buck (1965), p. 140.
Buck (1965), p. 161.




