


Weak isospin




Weak isospin

In particle physics, weak isospin is a quantum number relating to the weak interaction, and parallels the idea of isospin under the strong interaction. Weak isospin is usually given the symbol T or I with the third component written as Tz, T3, Iz or I3.1 Weak isospin is a complement of the weak hypercharge, which unifies weak interactions with electromagnetic interactions.
The weak isospin conservation law relates the conservation of T3; all weak interactions must preserve T3. It is also conserved by the other interactions and is therefore a conserved quantity in general. For this reason T3 is more important than T and often the term "weak isospin" refers to the "3rd component of weak isospin".
Relation with chirality
Fermions with negative chirality (also called left-handed fermions) have T = 
 
 
 
  and can be grouped into doublets with T3 = ±
 
 
 
  that behave the same way under the weak interaction. For example, up-type quarks (u, c, t) have T3 = +
 
 
 
  and always transform into down-type quarks (d, s, b), which have T3 = −
 
 
 
 
 , and vice versa. On the other hand, a quark never decays weakly into a quark of the same T3. Something similar happens with left-handed leptons, which exist as doublets containing a charged lepton (, , ) with T3 = −
 
 
 
  and a neutrino (, , ) with T3 = 
 
 
 
 .
Fermions with positive chirality (also called right-handed fermions) have T = 0 and form singlets that do not undergo weak interactions.
Electric charge, Q, is related to weak isospin, T3, and weak hypercharge, YW, by



Weak isospin and the W bosons
The symmetry associated with spin is SU(2). This requires gauge bosons to transform between weak isospin charges: bosons ,  and . This implies that  bosons have a T = 1, with three different values of T3.


boson (T3 = +1) is emitted in transitions {(T3 = +
 
 
 
 ) → (T3 = −
 
 
 
 
 )},

boson (T3 = −1) is emitted in transitions {(T3 = −
 
 
 
 ) → (T3 = +
 
 
 
 )}.

boson (T3 = 0) would be emitted in reactions where T3 does not change. However, under electroweak unification, the  boson mixes with the weak hypercharge gauge boson , resulting in the observed  boson and the photon of Quantum Electrodynamics.

See also

Field theoretical formulation of standard model
Weak hypercharge

References
"
Category:Theoretical physics Category:Flavour (particle physics) Category:Standard Model Category:Electroweak theory



Ambiguities: I is also used as sign for the 'normal' isospin, same for the third component I3 aka Iz. T is also used as the sign for Topness. This article uses T and T3.↩




