


Hurwitz matrix




Hurwitz matrix

In mathematics, a Hurwitz matrix, or Routh-Hurwitz matrix, in engineering stability matrix, is a structured real square matrix constructed with coefficients of a real polynomial.
Hurwitz matrix and the Hurwitz stability criterion
Namely, given a real polynomial


 
  the 
 
 
square matrix


 
  is called Hurwitz matrix corresponding to the polynomial 
 
 
 
 . It was established by Adolf Hurwitz in 1895 that a real polynomial is stable (that is, all its roots have strictly negative real part) if and only if all the leading principal minors of the matrix 
 
 
 
  are positive:


 
 
  and so on. The minors 
 
 
 
  are called the Hurwitz determinants.
Hurwitz stable matrices
In engineering and stability theory, a square matrix

 
  is called ' stable matrix' (or sometimes Hurwitz matrix) if every eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
  has strictly negative real part, that is,


 
  for each eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is also called a stability matrix, because then the differential equation


 
  is asymptotically stable, that is, 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  is a (matrix-valued) transfer function, then 
 
 
 
  is called Hurwitz if the poles of all elements of 
 
 
 
  have negative real part. Note that it is not necessary that 
 
 
 
  for a specific argument 
 
 
 
  be a Hurwitz matrix — it need not even be square. The connection is that if 
 
 
 
  is a Hurwitz matrix, then the dynamical system





 
  has a Hurwitz transfer function.
Any hyperbolic fixed point (or equilibrium point) of a continuous dynamical system is locally asymptotically stable if and only if the Jacobian of the dynamical system is Hurwitz stable at the fixed point.
The Hurwitz stability matrix is in crucial part on control theory. A system is stable if its control matrix is a Hurwitz matrix. The negative real components of the eigenvalues of the matrix represent negative feedback. Similarly, a system is inherently unstable if any of the eigenvalues have positive real components, representing positive feedback.
See also

Z-matrix
M-matrix
P-matrix
Perron–Frobenius theorem

References



Hassan K. Khalil (2002). Nonlinear Systems. Prentice Hall.
Siegfried H. Lehnigk, On the Hurwitz matrix, Zeitschrift für Angewandte Mathematik und Physik (ZAMP), May 1970
Bernard A. Asner, Jr., On the Total Nonnegativity of the Hurwitz Matrix, SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, Vol. 18, No. 2 (Mar., 1970)
Dimitar K. Dimitrov and Juan Manuel Peña, Almost strict total positivity and a class of Hurwitz polynomials, Journal of Approximation Theory, Volume 132, Issue 2 (February 2005)

External links



"
Category:Matrices Category:Differential equations


