


Mapping cylinder




Mapping cylinder

In mathematics, specifically algebraic topology, the mapping cylinder of a function

 
  between topological spaces

 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the quotient


 
  where the union is disjoint, and ∼ is the equivalence relation generated by


 
  That is, the mapping cylinder 
 
 
 
  is obtained by gluing one end of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  via the map 
 
 
 
 . Notice that the "top" of the cylinder 
 
 
 
  is homeomorphic to 
 
 
 
 , while the "bottom" is the space 
 
 
 
 .
See 1 for more details.
Basic properties
The bottom Y is a deformation retract of 
 
 
 
 . The projection 
 
 
 
  splits (via 
 
 
 
 ), and a deformation retraction 
 
 
 
  is given by:






(where points in 
 
 
 
  stay fixed, which is well-defined, because 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 ).
The map 
 
 
 
  is a homotopy equivalence if and only if the "top" 
 
 
 
  is a strong deformation retract of 
 
 
 
 . A proof can be found in.2 An explicit formula for the strong deformation retraction is produced in.3
Interpretation
The mapping cylinder may be viewed as a way to replace an arbitrary map by an equivalent cofibration, in the following sense:
Given a map 
 
 
 
 , the mapping cylinder is a space 
 
 
 
 , together with a cofibration 
 
 
 
  and a surjective homotopy equivalence

 
  (indeed, Y is a deformation retract of 
 
 
 
 ), such that the composition 
 
 
 
  equals f. 
Thus the space Y gets replaced with a homotopy equivalent space 
 
 
 
 , and the map f with a lifted map 
 
 
 
 . Equivalently, the diagram


 
  gets replaced with a diagram


 
  together with a homotopy equivalence between them.
The construction serves to replace any map of topological spaces by a homotopy equivalent cofibration.
Note that pointwise, a cofibration is a closed inclusion.
Applications
Mapping cylinders are quite common homotopical tools. One use of mapping cylinders is to apply theorems concerning inclusions of spaces to general maps, which might not be injective.
Consequently, theorems or techniques (such as homology, cohomology or homotopy theory) which are only dependent on the homotopy class of spaces and maps involved may be applied to 
 
 
 
  with the assumption that 
 
 
 
  and that 
 
 
 
  is actually the inclusion of a subspace.
Another, more intuitive appeal of the construction is that it accords with the usual mental image of a function as "sending" points of 
 
 
 
  to points of 
 
 
 
  and hence of embedding 
 
 
 
  within 
 
 
 
  despite the fact that the function need not be one-to-one.
Categorical application and interpretation
One can use the mapping cylinder to construct homotopy limits: given a diagram, replace the maps by cofibrations (using the mapping cylinder) and then take the ordinary pointwise limit (one must take a bit more care, but mapping cylinders are a component).
Conversely, the mapping cylinder is the homotopy pushout of the diagram where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Mapping telescope
Given a sequence of maps



the mapping telescope is the homotopical direct limit. If the maps are all already cofibrations (such as for the orthogonal groups 
 
 
 
 ), then the direct limit is the union, but in general one must use the mapping telescope. The mapping telescope is a sequence of mapping cylinders, joined end-to-end. The picture of the construction looks like a stack of increasingly large cylinders, like a telescope.
Formally, one defines it as



See also

Mapping cylinder (homological algebra)

References





"
Category:Algebraic topology



Algebraic Topology by Allen Hatcher. Page 2↩
Algebraic Topology by Allen Hatcher. Corollary 0.16↩
A Short Note on Mapping Cylinders by A. Aguado↩




