


Bejan number




Bejan number

There are two different Bejan numbers (Be) named after Duke University professor Adrian Bejan which are used in the scientific domains of thermodynamics and fluid mechanics.
Thermodynamics
In the context of thermodynamics, the Bejan number is the ratio of heat transfer irreversibility to total irreversibility due to heat transfer and fluid friction:1



where


 
  is the entropy generation contributed by heat transfer


 
  is the entropy generation contributed by fluid friction.
Fluid mechanics, heat transfer and mass transfer
In the context of fluid mechanics. the Bejan number is the dimensionless pressure drop along a channel of length 
 
 
 
 :2



where


 
  is the dynamic viscosity


 
  is the momentum diffusivity
In the context of heat transfer. the Bejan number is the dimensionless pressure drop along a channel of length 
 
 
 
 :3



where


 
  is the dynamic viscosity


 
  is the thermal diffusivity
The Be number plays in forced convection the same role that the Rayleigh number plays in natural convection.
In the context of mass transfer. the Bejan number is the dimensionless pressure drop along a channel of length 
 
 
 
 :4



where


 
  is the dynamic viscosity


 
  is the mass diffusivity
For the case of Reynolds analogy (Le = Pr = Sc = 1), it is clear that all three definitions of Bejan number are the same.
Also, Awad and Lage:5 obtained a modified form of the Bejan number, originally proposed by Bhattacharjee and Grosshandler for momentum processes, by replacing the dynamic viscosity appearing in the original proposition with the equivalent product of the fluid density and the momentum diffusivity of the fluid. This modified form is not only more akin to the physics it represents but it also has the advantage of being dependent on only one viscosity coefficient. Moreover, this simple modification allows for a much simpler extension of Bejan number to other diffusion processes, such as a heat or a species transfer process, by simply replacing the diffusivity coefficient. Consequently, a general Bejan number representation for any process involving pressure-drop and diffusion becomes possible. It is shown that this general representation yields analogous results for any process satisfying the Reynolds analogy (i. e., when Pr = Sc = 1), in which case the momentum, energy, and species concentration representations of Bejan number turn out to be the same.
Therefore, it would be more natural and broad to define Be in general, simply as:



where


 
  is the fluid density


 
  is the corresponding diffusivity of the process in consideration
In addition, Awad:6 presented Hagen number vs. Bejan number. Although their physical meaning is not the same because the former represents the dimensionless pressure gradient while the latter represents the dimensionless pressure drop, it will be shown that Hagen number coincides with Bejan number in cases where the characteristic length (l) is equal to the flow length (L). Also, a new expression of Bejan number in the Hagen-Poiseuille flow will be introduced. This expression is



where


 
  is the Reynolds number


 
  is the flow length


 
  is the pipe diameter
The above expression shows that the Bejan number in the Hagen-Poiseuille flow is indeed a dimensionless group, not recognized previously.
See also

Adrian Bejan
Entropy
Exergy
Thermodynamics
Constructal theory

References
"
Category:Dimensionless numbers of thermodynamics Category:Dimensionless numbers of fluid mechanics Category:Convection













