   Permutation automaton      Permutation automaton   In automata theory , a permutation automaton , or pure-group automaton , is a deterministic finite automaton such that each input symbol permutes the set of states. 1 2  Formally, a deterministic finite automaton   A   A   A   may be defined by the tuple ( Q , Σ, δ, q 0 , F ), where Q is the set of states of the automaton, Σ is the set of input symbols, δ is the transition function that takes a state q and an input symbol x to a new state δ( q , x ), q 0 is the initial state of the automaton, and F is the set of accepting states (also: final states) of the automaton.   A   A   A   is a permutation automaton if and only if, for every two distinct states and in Q and every input symbol   x   x   x   in Σ, δ( q i , x ) ≠ δ( q j , x ).  A formal language is p-regular (also: a pure-group language ) if it is accepted by a permutation automaton. For example, the set of strings of even length forms a p-regular language: it may be accepted by a permutation automaton with two states in which every transition replaces one state by the other.  Applications  The pure-group languages were the first interesting family of regular languages for which the star height problem was proved to be computable . 3 4  Another mathematical problem on regular languages is the separating words problem , which asks for the size of a smallest deterministic finite automaton that distinguishes between two given words of length at most n – by accepting one word and rejecting the other. The known upper bound in the general case is    O   (    n   2  /  5      (   log  n   )    3  /  5     )       O     superscript  n    2  5     superscript    n     3  5       O(n^{2/5}(\log n)^{3/5})   . 5 The problem was later studied for the restriction to permutation automata. In this case, the known upper bound changes to    O   (   n   1  /  2    )       O   superscript  n    1  2      O(n^{1/2})   . 6  References  "  Category:Automata theory  Category:Formal languages  Category:Permutations     ↩  ↩   Janusz A. Brzozowski : Open problems about regular languages , In: Ronald V. Book, editor, Formal language theory—Perspectives and open problems , pp. 23–47. Academic Press, 1980 (technical report version) ↩  ↩  ↩     