


Delta rule




Delta rule

In machine learning, the delta rule is a gradient descent learning rule for updating the weights of the inputs to artificial neurons in single-layer neural network.1 It is a special case of the more general backpropagation algorithm. For a neuron 
 
 
 
  with activation function

 
 , the delta rule for 
 
 
 
 's 
 
 
 
 
 th weight 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
 ,
where







 
  is a small constant called learning rate






 
  is the neuron's activation function






 
 
  is the target output






 
  is the weighted sum of the neuron's inputs






 
  is the actual output






 
  is the 
 
 
 
 th input.



It holds that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The delta rule is commonly stated in simplified form for a neuron with a linear activation function as



While the delta rule is similar to the perceptron's update rule, the derivation is different. The perceptron uses the Heaviside step function as the activation function 
 
 
 
 , and that means that 
 
 
 
  does not exist at zero, and is equal to zero elsewhere, which makes the direct application of the delta rule impossible.
Derivation of the delta rule
The delta rule is derived by attempting to minimize the error in the output of the neural network through gradient descent. The error for a neural network with 
 
 
 
 
  outputs can be measured as


 
 .
In this case, we wish to move through "weight space" of the neuron (the space of all possible values of all of the neuron's weights) in proportion to the gradient of the error function with respect to each weight. In order to do that, we calculate the partial derivative of the error with respect to each weight. For the 
 
 
 
 th weight, this derivative can be written as


 
 .
Because we are only concerning ourselves with the 
 
 
 
 th neuron, we can substitute the error formula above while omitting the summation:



Next we use the chain rule to split this into two derivatives:



To find the left derivative, we simply apply the general power rule:



To find the right derivative, we again apply the chain rule, this time differentiating with respect to the total input to 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 :



Note that the output of the 
 
 
 
 th neuron, 
 
 
 
 , is just the neuron's activation function 
 
 
 
  applied to the neuron's input 
 
 
 
 . We can therefore write the derivative of 
 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  simply as 
 
 
 
 's first derivative:



Next we rewrite 
 
 
 
  in the last term as the sum over all 
 
 
 
 
  weights of each weight 
 
 
 
  times its corresponding input 
 
 
 
 :



Because we are only concerned with the 
 
 
 
 th weight, the only term of the summation that is relevant is 
 
 
 
 
 . Clearly,


 
 ,
giving us our final equation for the gradient:



As noted above, gradient descent tells us that our change for each weight should be proportional to the gradient. Choosing a proportionality constant 
 
 
 
  and eliminating the minus sign to enable us to move the weight in the negative direction of the gradient to minimize error, we arrive at our target equation:


 
 .
See also

Stochastic gradient descent


Backpropagation

References
de:LMS-Algorithmus"
Category:Artificial neural networks



↩




