


Tutte theorem




Tutte theorem

In the mathematical discipline of graph theory the Tutte theorem, named after William Thomas Tutte, is a characterization of graphs with perfect matchings. It is a generalization of Hall's marriage theorem from bipartite to arbitrary graphs and is a special case of the Tutte–Berge formula.
Tutte's theorem
A graph, 
 
 
 
 , has a perfect matching if and only if for every subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the subgraph induced by 
 
 
 
  has at most  connected components with an odd number of vertices.1
Proof
First we write the condition:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the number of odd components of the subgraph induced by 
 
 
 
 .
Necessity of (∗): Consider a graph 
 
 
 
 , with a perfect matching. Let 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary subset of 
 
 
 
 . Delete 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary odd component in 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  had a perfect matching, at least one vertex in 
 
 
 
  must be matched to a vertex in 
 
 
 
 . Hence, each odd component has at least one vertex matched with a vertex in 
 
 
 
 . Since each vertex in 
 
 
 
  can be in this relation with at most one connected component (because of it being matched at most once in a perfect matching), 
 
 
 
 .2
Sufficiency of (∗): Let 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary graph satisfying (∗), and assume for a contradiction that it has no perfect matching. Consider the expansion of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , a maximally imperfect graph, in the sense that 
 
 
 
  is a spanning subgraph of 
 
 
 
 , but adding an edge to 
 
 
 
  will result in a perfect matching. We observe that 
 
 
 
  also satisfies condition (∗) since 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  with additional edges. Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of vertices of 
 
 
 
  of degree 
 
 
 
 . It can be shown through extensive case analysis that, if 
 
 
 
  is deleted, the remaining graph must form a disjoint union of complete graphs (each component is a complete graph). At most 
 
 
 
  of these complete graphs can be odd, so it is possible to match one vertex in each odd complete graph to a vertex in 
 
 
 
 , to match the remaining (evenly many) vertices in each complete graph among themselves, and to match the remaining vertices in 
 
 
 
  among themselves. The construction of a perfect matching in the imperfect graph 
 
 
 
  contradicts the assumption that 
 
 
 
  has no perfect matching, so it does have a perfect matching and the theorem follows.3
See also

Bipartite matching
Hall's marriage theorem
Petersen's theorem

Notes
References




"
Category:Matching Category:Theorems in graph theory Category:Articles containing proofs



, p.  84; , Theorem 5.4, p. 76.
, pp. 76–78.





