


Backtracking line search




Backtracking line search

In (unconstrained) minimization, a backtracking line search, a search scheme based on the Armijo–Goldstein condition, is a line search method to determine the maximum amount to move along a given search direction. It involves starting with a relatively large estimate of the step size for movement along the search direction, and iteratively shrinking the step size (i.e., "backtracking") until a decrease of the objective function is observed that adequately corresponds to the decrease that is expected, based on the local gradient of the objective function.
Motivation
Given a starting position 
 
 
 
  and a search direction 
 
 
 
 , the task of a line search is to determine a step size 
 
 
 
  that adequately reduces the objective function 
 
 
 
 
  (assumed smooth), i.e., to find a value of 
 
 
 
  that reduces 
 
 
 
  relative to 
 
 
 
 . However, it is usually undesirable to devote substantial resources to finding a value of 
 
 
 
  to precisely minimize 
 
 
 
 
 . This is because the computing resources needed to find a more precise minimum along one particular direction could instead be employed to identify a better search direction. Once an improved starting point has been identified by the line search, another subsequent line search will ordinarily be performed in a new direction. The goal, then, is just to identify a value of 
 
 
 
  that provides a reasonable amount of improvement in the objective function, rather than to find the actual minimizing value of 
 
 
 
 .
The backtracking line search starts with a large estimate of 
 
 
 
  and iteratively shrinks it. The shrinking continues until a value is found that is small enough to provide a decrease in the objective function that adequately matches the decrease that is expected to be achieved, based on the local function gradient 
 
 

Define the local slope of the function of 
 
 
 
 
  along the search direction 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  It is assumed that 
 
 
 
  is a direction in which some local decrease is possible, i.e., it is assumed that 
 
 
 
 .
Based on a selected control parameter 
 
 
 
 
 , the Armijo–Goldstein condition tests whether a step-wise movement from a current position 
 
 
 
  to a modified position 
 
 
 
  achieves an adequately corresponding decrease in the objective function. The condition is fulfilled if 
 
 

This condition, when used appropriately as part of a line search, can ensure that the step size is not excessively large. However, this condition is not sufficient on its own to ensure that the step size is nearly optimal, since any value of 
 
 
 
  that is sufficiently small will satisfy the condition.
Thus, the backtracking line search strategy starts with a relatively large step size, and repeatedly shrinks it by a factor 
 
 
 
 
  until the Armijo–Goldstein condition is fulfilled.
The search will terminate after a finite number of steps for any positive values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that are less than 1. For example, Armijo used  for both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in a paper he published in 1966.
Algorithm
Starting with a maximum candidate step size value 
 
 
 
 
 , using search control parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the backtracking line search algorithm can be expressed as follows:

Set 
 
 
 
  and iteration counter 
 
 
 
 .
Until the condition is satisfied that 
 
 
 
 
  repeatedly increment 
 
 
 
  and set 
 
 

Return 
 
 
 
  as the solution.

In other words, reduce 
 
 
 
  by a factor of 
 
 
 
 
  in each iteration until the Armijo–Goldstein condition is fulfilled.
References





"
Category:Mathematical optimization


