


Sturmian word




Sturmian word

 In mathematics, a Sturmian word (Sturmian sequence or billiard sequence1), named after Jacques Charles François Sturm, is a certain kind of infinitely long sequence of characters. Such a sequence can be generated by considering a game of English billiards on a square table. The struck ball will successively hit the vertical and horizontal edges labelled 0 and 1 generating a sequence of letters.2 This sequence is a Sturmian word.
Definition
Sturmian sequences can be defined strictly in terms of their combinatoric properties or geometrically as cutting sequences for lines of irrational slope or codings for irrational rotations. They are traditionally taken to be infinite sequences on the alphabet of the two symbols 0 and 1.
Combinatoric definitions
Sequences of low complexity
For an infinite sequence of symbols w, let σ(n) be the complexity function of w; i.e., σ(n) = the number of distinct subwords in w of length n. w is Sturmian if σ(n)=n+1 for all n.
Balanced sequences
A set X of binary strings is called balanced if the Hamming weight of elements of X takes at most two distinct values. That is, for any 
 
 
 
  |s|1=k or |s|1=k' where |s|1 is the number of 1s in s.
Let w be an infinite sequence of 0s and 1s and let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of all length-n subwords of w. The sequence w is Sturmian if 
 
 
 
  is balanced for all n and w is not eventually periodic.
Geometric definitions
Cutting sequence of irrational
Let w be an infinite sequence of 0s and 1s. The sequence w is Sturmian if for some 
 
 
 
 
  and some irrational 
 
 
 
 , w is realized as the cutting sequence of the line 
 
 
 
 .
Difference of Beatty sequences
Let w=(wn) be an infinite sequence of 0s and 1s. The sequence w is Sturmian if it is the difference of non-homogeneous Beatty sequences, that is, for some 
 
 
 
  and some irrational 
 
 



 
  for all 
 
 
 
  or


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
Coding of irrational rotation
 For 
 
 
 
 , define 
 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
  define the θ-coding of x to be the sequence (xn) where


 
 .
Let w be an infinite sequence of 0s and 1s. The sequence w is Sturmian if for some 
 
 
 
  and some irrational 
 
 
 
 
 , w is the θ-coding of x.
Discussion
Example
A famous example of a (standard) Sturmian word is the Fibonacci word;3 its slope is 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the golden ratio.
Balanced aperiodic sequences
A set S of finite binary words is balanced if for each n the subset Sn of words of length n has the property that the Hamming weight of the words in Sn takes at most two distinct values. A balanced sequence is one for which the set of factors is balanced. A balanced sequence has at most n+1 distinct factors of length n.4 An aperiodic sequence is one which does not consist of a finite sequence followed by a finite cycle. An aperiodic sequence has at least n+1 distinct factors of length n.5 A sequence is Sturmian if and only if it is balanced and aperiodic.6
Slope and intercept
A sequence

 
  over {0,1} is a Sturmian word if and only if there exist two real numbers, the slope

 
  and the intercept

 
 
 , with 
 
 
irrational, such that



for all 
 
 
 
 .78 Thus a Sturmian word provides a discretization of the straight line with slope 
 
 
 
  and intercept ρ. Without loss of generality, we can always assume 
 
 
 
 
 , because for any integer k we have



All the Sturmian words corresponding to the same slope 
 
 
 
  have the same set of factors; the word 
 
 
 
  corresponding to the intercept 
 
 
 
  is the standard word or characteristic word of slope 
 
 
 
 
 .9 Hence, if 
 
 
 
 , the characteristic word 
 
 
 
  is the first difference of the Beatty sequence corresponding to the irrational number 
 
 
 
 .
The standard word 
 
 
 
  is also the limit of a sequence of words 
 
 
 
 
  defined recursively as follows:
Let 
 
 
 
  be the continued fraction expansion of 
 
 
 
 , and define











where the product between words is just their concatenation. Every word in the sequence 
 
 
 
  is a prefix of the next ones, so that the sequence itself converges to an infinite word, which is 
 
 
 
 .
The infinite sequence of words 
 
 
 
  defined by the above recursion is called the standard sequence for the standard word 
 
 
 
 , and the infinite sequence d = (d1, d2, d3, ...) of nonnegative integers, with d1 ≥ 0 and dn > 0 (n ≥ 2), is called its directive sequence.
A Sturmian word w over {0,1} is characteristic if and only if both 0w and 1w are Sturmian.10
Frequencies
If s is an infinite sequence word and w is a finite word, let μN(w) denote the number of occurrences of w as a factor in the prefix of s of length N+|w|-1. If μN(w) has a limit as N→∞, we call this the frequency of w, denoted by μ(w).11
For a Sturmian word s, every finite factor has a frequency. The three-distance theorem states that the factors of fixed length n have at most three distinct frequencies, and if there are three values then one is the sum of the other two.12
Non-binary words
For words over an alphabet of size k greater than 2, we define a Sturmian word to be one with complexity function n+k−1.13 They can be described in terms of cutting sequences for k-dimensional space.14 An alternative definition is as words of minimal complexity subject to not being ultimately periodic.15
Associated real numbers
A real number for which the digits with respect to some fixed base form a Sturmian word is a transcendental number.16
History
Although the study of Sturmian words dates back to Johann III Bernoulli (1772),1718 it was Gustav A. Hedlund and Marston Morse in 1940 who coined the term Sturmian to refer to such sequences,1920 in honor of the mathematician Jacques Charles François Sturm due to the relation with the Sturm comparison theorem.21
See also

Cutting sequence

References
Further reading



"
Category:Combinatorics on words Category:Sequences and series



↩
↩
↩
↩


↩
↩

↩






J. Bernoulli III, Sur une nouvelle espece de calcul, Recueil pour les Astronomes, vol. 1, Berlin, 1772, pp. 255–284↩


↩





