


Stationary set




Stationary set

In mathematics, particularly in set theory and model theory, there are at least three notions of stationary set:
Classical notion
If 
 
 
 
  is a cardinal of uncountable cofinality, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
intersects every club set in 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is called a stationary set.1 If a set is not stationary, then it is called a thin set. This notion should not be confused with the notion of a thin set in number theory.
If 
 
 
 
  is a stationary set and 
 
 
 
  is a club set, then their intersection 
 
 
 
  is also stationary. This is because if 
 
 
 
  is any club set, then 
 
 
 
  is a club set, thus 
 
 
 
  is non empty. Therefore 
 
 
 
  must be stationary.
See also: Fodor's lemma
The restriction to uncountable cofinality is in order to avoid trivialities: Suppose 
 
 
 
  has countable cofinality. Then 
 
 
 
  is stationary in 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is bounded in 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if the cofinality of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , then any two stationary subsets of 
 
 
 
  have stationary intersection.
This is no longer the case if the cofinality of 
 
 
 
  is uncountable. In fact, suppose 
 
 
 
  is regular and 
 
 
 
  is stationary. Then 
 
 
 
  can be partitioned into 
 
 
 
  many disjoint stationary sets. This result is due to Solovay. If 
 
 
 
  is a successor cardinal, this result is due to Ulam and is easily shown by means of what is called an Ulam matrix.
H. Friedman has shown that for every countable successor ordinal 
 
 
 
 , every stationary subset of 
 
 
 
  contains a closed subset of order type 
 
 
 
  (Friedman).
Jech's notion
There is also a notion of stationary subset of 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
  a cardinal and 
 
 
 
  a set such that 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the set of subsets of 
 
 
 
  of cardinality 
 
 

 
 . This notion is due to Thomas Jech. As before, 
 
 
 
  is stationary if and only if it meets every club, where a club subset of 
 
 
 
  is a set unbounded under 
 
 
 
  and closed under union of chains of length at most 
 
 
 
 . These notions are in general different, although for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  they coincide in the sense that 
 
 
 
  is stationary if and only if 
 
 
 
  is stationary in 
 
 
 
 .
The appropriate version of Fodor's lemma also holds for this notion.
Generalized notion
There is yet a third notion, model theoretic in nature and sometimes referred to as generalized stationarity. This notion is probably due to Magidor, Foreman and Shelah and has also been used prominently by Woodin.
Now let 
 
 
 
  be a nonempty set. A set 
 
 
 
  is club (closed and unbounded) if and only if there is a function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Here, 
 
 
 
  is the collection of finite subsets of 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is stationary in 
 
 
 
  if and only if it meets every club subset of 
 
 
 
 .
To see the connection with model theory, notice that if 
 
 
 
  is a structure with universe

 
  in a countable language and 
 
 
 
  is a Skolem function for 
 
 
 
 , then a stationary 
 
 
 
  must contain an elementary substructure of 
 
 
 
 . In fact, 
 
 
 
  is stationary if and only if for any such structure 
 
 
 
  there is an elementary substructure of 
 
 
 
  that belongs to 
 
 
 
 .
References

Foreman, Matthew (2002) Stationary sets, Chang's Conjecture and partition theory, in Set Theory (The Hajnal Conference) DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comp. Sci., 58, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI. pp. 73–94. File at 1



External links



"
Category:Set theory Category:Ordinal numbers



Jech (2003) p.91




