


Mapping cone (topology)




Mapping cone (topology)

 In mathematics, especially homotopy theory, the mapping cone is a construction 
 
 
 
  of topology, analogous to a quotient space. It is also called the homotopy cofiber, and also notated 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Given a map

 
 , the mapping cone 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the quotient topological space of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the equivalence relation 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  on X. Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the unit interval [0,1] with its standard topology. Note that some (like May) use the opposite convention, switching 0 and 1.
Visually, one takes the cone on X (the cylinder 
 
 
 
  with one end (the 0 end) identified to a point), and glues the other end onto Y via the map f (the identification of the 1 end).
Coarsely, one is taking the quotient space by the image of X, so Cf "=" Y/f(X); this is not precisely correct because of point-set issues, but is the philosophy, and is made precise by such results as the homology of a pair and the notion of an n-connected map.
The above is the definition for a map of unpointed spaces; for a map of pointed spaces 
 
 
 
  (so 
 
 
 
 ), one also identifies all of 
 
 
 
 ; formally, 
 
 
 
  Thus one end and the "seam" are all identified with 
 
 

Example of circle
If 
 
 
 
  is the circle S1, Cf can be considered as the quotient space of the disjoint union of Y with the disk D2 formed by identifying a point x on the boundary of D2 to the point f(x) in Y.
Consider, for example, the case where Y is the disc D2, and

f: S1 → Y = D2


is the standard inclusion of the circle S1 as the boundary of D2. Then the mapping cone Cf is homeomorphic to two disks joined on their boundary, which is topologically the sphere S2.
Double mapping cylinder
The mapping cone is a special case of the double mapping cylinder. This is basically a cylinder joined on one end to a space X1 via the map

f1: S1 → X1


and joined on the other end to a space X2 via the map

f2: S1 → X2.
 

The mapping cone is the degenerate case of the double mapping cylinder (also known as the homotopy pushout), in which one space is a single point.
Applications
CW-complexes
Attaching a cell
Effect on fundamental group
Given a space X and a loop



representing an element of the fundamental group of X, we can form the mapping cone Cα. The effect of this is to make the loop α contractible in Cα, and therefore the equivalence class of α in the fundamental group of Cα will be simply the identity element.
Given a group presentation by generators and relations, one gets a 2-complex with that fundamental group.
Homology of a pair
The mapping cone lets one interpret the homology of a pair as the reduced homology of the quotient:
If E is a homology theory, and 
 
 
 
  is a cofibration, then 
 
 
 
 , which follows by applying excision to the mapping cone.1
Relation to homotopy (homology) equivalences
A map 
 
 
 
  between simply-connected CW complexes is a homotopy equivalence if and only if its mapping cone is contractible.
More generally, a map is called n-connected (as a map) if its mapping cone is n-connected (as a space), plus a little more. See A. Hatcher Algebraic Topology.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a fixed homology theory. The map 
 
 
 
  induces isomorphisms on 
 
 
 
 , if and only if the map 
 
 
 
  induces an isomorphism on 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Mapping cone (homological algebra)

References


"
Category:Algebraic topology



Peter May "A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology", section 14.2↩




