


Turing jump




Turing jump

In computability theory, the Turing jump or Turing jump operator, named for Alan Turing, is an operation that assigns to each decision problem

 
  a successively harder decision problem 
 
 
 
  with the property that 
 
 
 
  is not decidable by an oracle machine with an oracle for 
 
 
 
 .
The operator is called a jump operator because it increases the Turing degree of the problem 
 
 
 
 . That is, the problem 
 
 
 
  is not Turing reducible to 
 
 
 
 . Post's theorem establishes a relationship between the Turing jump operator and the arithmetical hierarchy of sets of natural numbers. Informally, given a problem, the Turing jump returns the set of Turing machines which halt when given access to an oracle that solves that problem.
Definition
Given a set 
 
 
 
  and a Gödel numbering  of the 

 
 -computable functions, the Turing jump

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is defined as



The 

 
 th Turing jump  is defined inductively by






The 

 
  jump  of 
 
 
 
  is the effective join of the sequence of sets  for 
 
 
 
 :



where  denotes the 
 
 
 
 th prime.
The notation 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is often used for the Turing jump of the empty set. It is read zero-jump or sometimes zero-prime.
Similarly,  is the 
 
 
 
 th jump of the empty set. For finite 
 
 
 
 , these sets are closely related to the arithmetic hierarchy.
The jump can be iterated into transfinite ordinals: the sets  for , where  is the Church-Kleene ordinal, are closely related to the hyperarithmetic hierarchy. Beyond , the process can be continued through the countable ordinals of the constructible universe, using set-theoretic methods (Hodes 1980). The concept has also been generalized to extend to uncountable regular cardinals (Lubarsky 1987).
Examples

The Turing jump 
 
 
 
  of the empty set is Turing equivalent to the halting problem.
For each 
 
 
 
 , the set  is m-complete at level 
 
 
 
  in the arithmetical hierarchy.
The set of Gödel numbers of true formulas in the language of Peano arithmetic with a predicate for 
 
 
 
  is computable from .

Properties



 
  is 
 
 
 
 -computably enumerable but not 
 
 
 
 -computable.
If 
 
 
 
  is Turing equivalent to 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is Turing equivalent to 
 
 
 
 . The converse of this implication is not true.
(Shore and Slaman, 1999) The function mapping 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is definable in the partial order of the Turing degrees.

Many properties of the Turing jump operator are discussed in the article on Turing degrees.
References

Ambos-Spies, K. and Fejer, P. Degrees of Unsolvability. Unpublished. http://www.cs.umb.edu/~fejer/articles/History_of_Degrees.pdf







"
Category:Computability theory


