


Dodgson condensation




Dodgson condensation

In mathematics, Dodgson condensation is a method of computing the determinants of square matrices. It is named for its inventor, Charles Dodgson (better known as Lewis Carroll). The method in the case of an n × n matrix is to construct an (n − 1) × (n − 1) matrix, an (n − 2) × (n − 2), and so on, finishing with a 1 × 1 matrix, which has one entry, the determinant of the original matrix.
General method
This algorithm can be described in the following four steps:

Let A be the given n × n matrix. Arrange A so that no zeros occur in its interior. An explicit definition of interior would be all ai,j with 
 
 
 
 . One can do this using any operation that one could normally perform without changing the value of the determinant, such as adding a multiple of one row to another.
Create an (n − 1) × (n − 1) matrix B, consisting of the determinants of every 2 × 2 submatrix of A. Explicitly, we write 
 
 

Using this (n − 1) × (n − 1) matrix, perform step 2 to obtain an (n − 2) × (n − 2) matrix C. Divide each term in C by the corresponding term in the interior of A so 
 
 
 
 .
Let A = B, and B = C. Repeat step 3 as necessary until the 1 × 1 matrix is found; its only entry is the determinant.

Examples
Without zeros
One wishes to find



We make a matrix of its 2 × 2 submatrices.



We then find another matrix of determinants:



We must then divide each element by the corresponding element of our original matrix. The interior of the original matrix is 
 
 
 
 , so after dividing we get 
 
 
 
 . The process must be repeated to arrive at a 1 × 1 matrix. 
 
 
 
  We divide by the interior of our 3 × 3 matrix, which is just -5, giving us 
 
 
 
 . -8 is indeed the determinant of the original matrix.
With zeros
Simply writing out the matrices:



Here we run into trouble. If we continue the process, we will eventually be dividing by 0. We can perform four row exchanges on the initial matrix to preserve the determinant and repeat the process, with most of the determinants precalculated:



Hence, we arrive at a determinant of 36.
Desnanot–Jacobi identity and proof of correctness of the condensation algorithm
The proof that the condensation method computes the determinant of the matrix if no divisions by zero are encountered is based on an identity known as the Desnanot–Jacobi identity or Lewis Carroll identity.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a square matrix, and for each 
 
 
 
 , denote by 
 
 
 
  the matrix that results from 
 
 
 
  by deleting the 
 
 
 
 -th row and the 
 
 
 
 -th column. Similarly, for 
 
 
 
 , denote by 
 
 
 
  the matrix that results from 
 
 
 
  by deleting the 
 
 
 
 -th and 
 
 
 
 -th rows and the 
 
 
 
 -th and 
 
 
 
 -th columns.
Desnanot–Jacobi identity



Proof of the correctness of Dodgson condensation
Rewrite the identity as



 Now note that by induction it follows that when applying the Dodgson condensation procedure to a square matrix 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
 , the matrix in the 
 
 
 
 -th stage of the computation (where the first stage 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the matrix 
 
 
 
  itself) consists of all the connected minors of order 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , where a connected minor is the determinant of a connected 
 
 
 
  sub-block of adjacent entries of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, in the last stage 
 
 
 
 , one gets a matrix containing a single element equal to the unique connected minor of order 
 
 
 
 , namely the determinant of 
 
 
 
 .
Proof of the Desnanot-Jacobi identity
We follow the treatment in Bressoud's book; for an alternative combinatorial proof see the paper by Zeilberger. Denote 
 
 
 
  (up to sign, the 
 
 
 
 -th minor of 
 
 
 
 ), and define a 
 
 
 
  matrix 
 
 
 
  by


 (Note that the first and last column of 
 
 
 
  are equal to those of the adjugate matrix of 
 
 
 
 ). The identity is now obtained by computing 
 
 
 
  in two ways. First, we can directly compute the matrix product 
 
 
 
  (using simple properties of the adjugate matrix, or alternatively using the formula for the expansion of a matrix determinant in terms of a row or a column) to arrive at


 where we use 
 
 
 
  to denote the 
 
 
 
 -th entry of 
 
 
 
 . The determinant of this matrix is 
 
 
 
 .
 Second, this is equal to the product of the determinants, 
 
 
 
 . But clearly


 so the identity follows from equating the two expressions we obtained for 
 
 
 
  and dividing out by 
 
 
 
  (this is allowed if one thinks of the identities as polynomial identities over the ring of polynomials in the 
 
 
 
  indeterminate variables 
 
 
 
 ).
Notes
References and further reading

Bressoud, David M., Proofs and Confirmations: The Story of the Alternating Sign Matrix Conjecture, MAA Spectrum, Mathematical Associations of America, Washington, D.C., 1999.
Bressoud, David M. and Propp, James, How the alternating sign matrix conjecture was solved, Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 46 (1999), 637-646.
Dodgson, C. L., Condensation of Determinants, Being a New and Brief Method for Computing their Arithmetical Values, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 15 (1866-1867), 150-155.
Knuth, Donald, Overlapping Pfaffians, Electronic Journal of Combinatorics, 3 no. 2 (1996).
Mills, William H., Robbins, David P., and Rumsey, Howard, Jr., Proof of the Macdonald conjecture, Inventiones Mathematicae, 66 (1982), 73-87.
Mills, William H., Robbins, David P., and Rumsey, Howard, Jr., Alternating sign matrices and descending plane partitions, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 34 (1983), 340-359.
Robbins, David P., The story of 
 
 
 
 , The Mathematical Intelligencer, 13 (1991), 12-19.
Zeilberger, Doron, Dodgson's determinant evaluation rule proved by two-timing men and women, Electronic Journal of Combinatorics, 4 no. 2 (1997).

External links

Dodgson Condensation entry in MathWorld

"
Category:Determinants Category:Lewis Carroll


