


Convergent series




Convergent series

In mathematics, a series is the sum of the terms of a sequence of numbers.
Given a sequence 
 
 
 
 , the nth partial sum

 
  is the sum of the first n terms of the sequence, that is,



A series is convergent if the sequence of its partial sums 
 
 
 
  converges; in other words, it approaches a given number. In more formal language, a series converges if there exists a limit

 
  such that for any arbitrarily small positive number 
 
 
 
 , there is a large integer

 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
 ,



Any series that is not convergent is said to be divergent.
Examples of convergent and divergent series

The reciprocals of the positive integers produce a divergent series (harmonic series):
 
 


Alternating the signs of the reciprocals of positive integers produces a convergent series:
 
 


The reciprocals of prime numbers produce a divergent series (so the set of primes is "large"):
 
 


The reciprocals of triangular numbers produce a convergent series:
 
 


The reciprocals of factorials produce a convergent series (see e):
 
 


The reciprocals of square numbers produce a convergent series (the Basel problem):
 
 


The reciprocals of powers of 2 produce a convergent series (so the set of powers of 2 is "small"):
 
 


Alternating the signs of reciprocals of powers of 2 also produces a convergent series:
 
 


The reciprocals of Fibonacci numbers produce a convergent series (see ψ):
 
 



Convergence tests
There are a number of methods of determining whether a series converges or diverges.  Comparison test. The terms of the sequence 
 
 
 
  are compared to those of another sequence 
 
 
 
 . If,
for all n, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  converges, then so does 
 
 

However, if,
for all n, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  diverges, then so does 
 
 

Ratio test. Assume that for all n, 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that there exists 
 
 
 
  such that



If r  1,}} then the series diverges. If  the ratio test is inconclusive, and the series may converge or diverge.
Root test or ''' nth root test'''. Suppose that the terms of the sequence in question are non-negative. Define r as follows:




where "lim sup" denotes the limit superior (possibly ∞; if the limit exists it is the same value).
 

If r  1,}} then the series diverges. If  the root test is inconclusive, and the series may converge or diverge.
The ratio test and the root test are both based on comparison with a geometric series, and as such they work in similar situations. In fact, if the ratio test works (meaning that the limit exists and is not equal to 1) then so does the root test; the converse, however, is not true. The root test is therefore more generally applicable, but as a practical matter the limit is often difficult to compute for commonly seen types of series.
Integral test. The series can be compared to an integral to establish convergence or divergence. Let 
 
 
 
  be a positive and monotone decreasing function. If



then the series converges. But if the integral diverges, then the series does so as well.
Limit comparison test. If 
 
 
 
 , and the limit 
 
 
 
  exists and is not zero, then 
 
 
 
  converges if and only if

 
  converges.
Alternating series test. Also known as the Leibniz criterion, the alternating series test states that for an alternating series of the form 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  is monotone decreasing, and has a limit of 0 at infinity, then the series converges.
Cauchy condensation test. If 
 
 
 
  is a positive monotone decreasing sequence, then 
 
 
 
  converges if and only if 
 
 
 
  converges.
Dirichlet's test
Abel's test
Raabe's test
Conditional and absolute convergence
(Figure)
Illustration of the absolute convergence of the power series of Exp[z] around 0 evaluated at . The length of the line is finite.

(Figure)
Illustration of the conditional convergence of the power series of log(z+1) around 0 evaluated at  The length of the line is infinite.

For any sequence 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  for all n. Therefore,



This means that if 
 
 
 
  converges, then 
 
 
 
  also converges (but not vice versa).
If the series 
 
 
 
  converges, then the series 
 
 
 
  is absolutely convergent. An absolutely convergent sequence is one in which the length of the line created by joining together all of the increments to the partial sum is finitely long. The power series of the exponential function is absolutely convergent everywhere.
If the series 
 
 
 
  converges but the series 
 
 
 
  diverges, then the series 
 
 
 
  is conditionally convergent. The path formed by connecting the partial sums of a conditionally convergent series is infinitely long. The power series of the logarithm is conditionally convergent.
The Riemann series theorem states that if a series converges conditionally, it is possible to rearrange the terms of the series in such a way that the series converges to any value, or even diverges.
Uniform convergence
Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of functions. The series 
 
 
 
  is said to converge uniformly to f if the sequence 
 
 
 
  of partial sums defined by



converges uniformly to f.
There is an analogue of the comparison test for infinite series of functions called the Weierstrass M-test.
Cauchy convergence criterion
The Cauchy convergence criterion states that a series


 
  converges if and only if the sequence of partial sums is a Cauchy sequence. This means that for every 
 
 
 
  there is a positive integer 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  which is equivalent to



See also

Convergent sequence
Normal convergence
List of mathematical series
Divergent series

External links


Weisstein, Eric (2005). Riemann Series Theorem. Retrieved May 16, 2005.

de:Konvergenzkriterium sv:Konvergens (matematik)"
Category:Mathematical series Category:Convergence (mathematics)


