


Second moment of area




Second moment of area


This article is about the geometrical property of an area, termed the second moment of area. For the moment of inertia dealing with the rotation of an object with mass, see mass moment of inertia.



For a list, see list of area moments of inertia.


The second moment of area, also known as moment of inertia of plane area, area moment of inertia, or second area moment, is a geometrical property of an area which reflects how its points are distributed with regard to an arbitrary axis. The second moment of area is typically denoted with either an 
 
 
 
  for an axis that lies in the plane or with a 
 
 
 
  for an axis perpendicular to the plane. Its unit of dimension is length to fourth power, L4.
In the field of structural engineering, the second moment of area of the cross-section of a beam is an important property used in the calculation of the beam's deflection and the calculation of stress caused by a moment applied to the beam.

''Note: Different disciplines use "Moment of Inertia" (MOI) to refer to either or both of the planar second moment of area, 
 
 
 
 , where x is the distance to some reference plane, or the polar second moment of area, 
 
 
 
 , where r is the distance to some reference axis. In each case the integral is over all the infinitesimal elements of area, dA, in some two-dimensional cross-section. In math and physics, "Moment of Inertia" is strictly the second moment of mass with respect to distance from an axis
 
 
 
 , where r is the distance to some potential rotation axis, and the integral is over all the infinitesimal elements of mass, dm, in a three-dimensional space occupied by an object. The MOI, in this sense, is the analog of mass for rotational problems.'' In engineering (especially mechanical and civil), "Moment of Inertia" commonly refers to the second moment of the area.1


Definition
 The second moment of area for an arbitrary shape with respect to an arbitrary axis 
 
 
 
  is defined as





 
  = Differential area of the arbitrary shape


 
  = Distance from the axis BB to dA2
For example, when the desired reference axis is the x-axis the second moment of area, 
 
 
 
  (often denoted as 
 
 
 
 ) can be computed in Cartesian coordinates as



The second moment of the area is crucial in Euler–Bernoulli theory of slender beams.
Product moment of area
More generally, the product moment of area is defined as



Parallel axis theorem
It is often easier to derive the second moment of area with respect to its centroidal axis, 
 
 
 
 . However, it may be necessary to calculate the second moment of area with respect to a different, parallel axis, say the 
 
 
 
  axis. The parallel axis theorem states



where


 
  = Area of the shape


 
  = Perpendicular distance between the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  axes3
A similar statement can be made about the 
 
 
 
  axis and the parallel centroidal 
 
 
 
  axis. Or, in general, any centroidal 
 
 
 
  axis and a parallel 
 
 
 
  axis.
Perpendicular axis theorem
For the simplicity of calculation, it is often desired to define the polar moment of area (with respect to a perpendicular axis) in terms of two area moments of inertia (both with respect to in-plane axes). The simplest case relates 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .



This relationship relies on the Pythagorean theorem which relates 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and on the linearity of integration.
Composite shapes
For more complex areas, it is often easier to divide the area into a series of "simpler" shapes. The second moment of area for the entire shape is the sum of the second moment of areas of all of its parts about a common axis. This can include shapes that are "missing" (i.e. holes, hollow shapes, etc.), in which case the second moment of area of the "missing" areas are subtracted, rather than added. In other words, the second moment of area of "missing" parts are considered negative for the method of composite shapes.
Examples
See list of area moments of inertia for other shapes.
Rectangle with centroid at the origin
Consider a rectangle with base 
 
 
 
  and height 
 
 
 
  whose centroid is located at the origin. 
 
 
 
  represents the second moment of area with respect to the x-axis; 
 
 
 
  represents the second moment of area with respect to the y-axis; 
 
 
 
  represents the polar moment of inertia with respect to the z-axis.









 
  (see Perpendicular axis theorem)
Annulus centered at origin
 Consider an annulus whose center is at the origin, outside radius is 
 
 
 
 , and inside radius is 
 
 
 
 . Because of the symmetry of the annulus, the centroid also lies at the origin. We can determine the polar moment of inertia, 
 
 
 
 , about the 
 
 
 
  axis by the method of composite shapes. This polar moment of inertia is equivalent to the polar moment of inertia of a circle with radius 
 
 
 
  minus the polar moment of inertia of a circle with radius 
 
 
 
 , both centered at the origin. First, let us derive the polar moment of inertia of a circle with radius 
 
 
 
  with respect to the origin. In this case, it is easier to directly calculate 
 
 
 
  as we already have 
 
 
 
 , which has both an 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  component. Instead of obtaining the second moment of area from Cartesian coordinates as done in the previous section, we shall calculate 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  directly using Polar Coordinates.




Now, the polar moment of inertia about the 
 
 
 
  axis for an annulus is simply, as stated above, the difference of the second moments of area of a circle with radius 
 
 
 
  and a circle with radius 
 
 
 
 .



Alternatively, we could change the limits on the 
 
 
 
  integral the first time around to reflect the fact that there is a hole. This would be done like this.



Any polygon
 The second moment of area for any simple polygon on the XY-plane can be computed in general by summing contributions from each segment of the polygon. A polygon is assumed to be counter clock wise (for clockwise polygon all values will be negative with same absolute value)









where 
 
 
 
  (with 
 
 
 
 ) are the coordinates of any polygon vertex.4
See also

List of area moments of inertia
List of moments of inertia
Moment of inertia
Parallel axis theorem
Perpendicular axis theorem
Radius of gyration

References


External links

Calculator for Second Moment of Area

"
Category:Geometry Category:Structural analysis Category:Physical quantities



Beer, Ferdinand (2009). Vector Mechanics for Engineers: Statics. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-352940-0.↩
Pilkey, Walter D. (2002). Analysis and Design of Elastic Beams. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-38152-7.↩
Hibbeler, R. C. (2004). Statics and Mechanics of Materials (Second ed.). Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-028127-1.↩
↩




