


Barrelled space




Barrelled space

In functional analysis and related areas of mathematics, barrelled spaces are Hausdorff topological vector spaces for which every barrelled set in the space is a neighbourhood for the zero vector. A barrelled set or a barrel in a topological vector space is a set which is convex, balanced, absorbing and closed. Barrelled spaces are studied because a form of the Banach–Steinhaus theorem still holds for them.
History
Barrelled spaces were introduced by .
Examples

In a semi normed vector space the closed unit ball is a barrel.
Every locally convex topological vector space has a neighbourhood basis consisting of barrelled sets, although the space itself need not be a barreled space.
Fréchet spaces, and in particular Banach spaces, are barrelled, but generally a normed vector space is not barrelled.
Montel spaces are barrelled. Consequently, strong duals of Montel spaces are barrelled (since they are Montel spaces).
locally convex spaces which are Baire spaces are barrelled.

Properties
For a Hausdorff locally convex space

 
  with continuous dual 
 
 
 
  the following are equivalent:

X is barrelled,
every 
 
 
 
 -bounded subset of the continuous dual space X' is equicontinuous (this provides a partial converse to the Banach-Steinhaus theorem),1
for all subsets A of the continuous dual space X', the following properties are equivalent: A is 2

equicontinuous,
relatively weakly compact,
strongly bounded,
weakly bounded,

X carries the strong topology

 
 
 ,
every lower semi-continuous semi-norm on 
 
 
 
  is continuous,
the 0-neighborhood bases in X and the fundamental families of bounded sets in 
 
 
 
  correspond to each other by polarity.3

In addition,

Every sequentially complete quasibarrelled space is barrelled.
A barrelled space need not be Montel, complete, metrizable, unordered Baire-like, nor the inductive limit of Banach spaces.

Quasi-barrelled spaces
A topological vector space

 
  for which every barrelled bornivorous set in the space is a neighbourhood of 
 
 
 
  is called a quasi-barrelled space, where a set is bornivorous if it absorbs all bounded subsets of 
 
 
 
 
 . Every barrelled space is quasi-barrelled.
For a locally convex space

 
  with continuous dual 
 
 
 
  the following are equivalent:



 
  is quasi-barrelled,
every bounded lower semi-continuous semi-norm on 
 
 
 
  is continuous,
every 
 
 
 
 
 -bounded subset of the continuous dual space 
 
 
 
  is equicontinuous.

References








fr:Ensemble tonnelé"
Category:Topological vector spaces



Schaefer (1999) p. 127, 141, Treves (1995) p. 350






