


Rényi entropy




Rényi entropy

In information theory, the Rényi entropy generalizes the Hartley entropy, the Shannon entropy, the collision entropy and the min-entropy. Entropies quantify the diversity, uncertainty, or randomness of a system. The Rényi entropy is named after Alfréd Rényi.1
The Rényi entropy is important in ecology and statistics as indices of diversity. The Rényi entropy is also important in quantum information, where it can be used as a measure of entanglement. In the Heisenberg XY spin chain model, the Rényi entropy as a function of α can be calculated explicitly by virtue of the fact that it is an automorphic function with respect to a particular subgroup of the modular group.23 In theoretical computer science, the min-entropy is used in the context of randomness extractors.
Definition
The Rényi entropy of order 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , is defined as


 
  .4
Here, 
 
 
 
  is a discrete random variable with possible outcomes 
 
 
 
  and corresponding probabilities 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
 , and the logarithm is base 2. If the probabilities are 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , then all the Rényi entropies of the distribution are equal
 
 
 
 . In general, for all discrete random variables 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  is a non-increasing function in 
 
 
 
 .
Applications often exploit the following relation between the Rényi entropy and the p-norm of the vector of probabilities:


 
  . Here, the discrete probability distribution 
 
 
 
  is interpreted as a vector in 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The Rényi entropy for any 
 
 
 
  is Schur concave.
Special cases of the Rényi entropy
 As 
 
 
 
  approaches zero, the Rényi entropy increasingly weighs all possible events more equally, regardless of their probabilities. In the limit for 
 
 
 
 , the Rényi entropy is just the logarithm of the size of the support of 
 
 
 
 
 . The limit for 
 
 
 
  is the Shannon entropy. As 
 
 
 
  approaches infinity, the Rényi entropy is increasingly determined by the events of highest probability.
Hartley or max-entropy
Provided the probabilities are nonzero,5

 
  is the logarithm of the cardinality of X, sometimes called the Hartley entropy of X:



Shannon entropy
The limiting value of 
 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  is the Shannon entropy:6



Collision entropy
Collision entropy, sometimes just called "Rényi entropy," refers to the case 
 
 
 
 ,



where X and Y are independent and identically distributed.
Min-entropy
In the limit as 
 
 
 
 
 , the Rényi entropy 
 
 
 
  converges to the min-entropy

 
 :



Equivalently, the min-entropy 
 
 
 
  is the largest real number 
 
 
 
 
  such that all events occur with probability at most 
 
 
 
 .
The name min-entropy stems from the fact that it is the smallest entropy measure in the family of Rényi entropies. In this sense, it is the strongest way to measure the information content of a discrete random variable. In particular, the min-entropy is never larger than the Shannon entropy.
The min-entropy has important applications for randomness extractors in theoretical computer science: Extractors are able to extract randomness from random sources that have a large min-entropy; merely having a large Shannon entropy does not suffice for this task.
Inequalities between different values of α
That 
 
 
 
  is non-increasing in 
 
 
 
 , which can be proven by differentiation,7 as


 
  which is proportional to Kullback–Leibler divergence (which is always non-negative), where 
 
 
 
 .
In particular cases inequalities can be proven also by Jensen's inequality:89



For values of 
 
 
 
 , inequalities in the other direction also hold. In particular, we have10



On the other hand, the Shannon entropy 
 
 
 
  can be arbitrarily high for a random variable 
 
 
 
  that has a given min-entropy.
Rényi divergence
As well as the absolute Rényi entropies, Rényi also defined a spectrum of divergence measures generalising the Kullback–Leibler divergence.11
The Rényi divergence of order α, where , of a distribution P from a distribution Q is defined to be:



Like the Kullback-Leibler divergence, the Rényi divergences are non-negative for . This divergence is also known as the alpha-divergence (α-divergence).
Some special cases:


 
  : minus the log probability under Q that ;


 
  : minus twice the logarithm of the Bhattacharyya coefficient; ()


 
  : the Kullback-Leibler divergence;


 
  : the log of the expected ratio of the probabilities;


 
  : the log of the maximum ratio of the probabilities.
For any fixed distributions P and Q, Rényi divergence is nondecreasing as a function of its order α, and it is continuous on the set of α for which it is finite.12
==Why α=1 is special == The value α = 1, which gives the Shannon entropy and the Kullback–Leibler divergence, is special because it is only at α=1 that the chain rule of conditional probability holds exactly:



for the absolute entropies, and



for the relative entropies.
The latter in particular means that if we seek a distribution p(x,a) which minimizes the divergence from some underlying prior measure m(x,a), and we acquire new information which only affects the distribution of a, then the distribution of p(x|a) remains m(x|a), unchanged.
The other Rényi divergences satisfy the criteria of being positive and continuous; being invariant under 1-to-1 co-ordinate transformations; and of combining additively when A and X are independent, so that if p(A,X) = p(A)p(X), then



and



The stronger properties of the α = 1 quantities, which allow the definition of conditional information and mutual information from communication theory, may be very important in other applications, or entirely unimportant, depending on those applications' requirements.
Exponential families
The Rényi entropies and divergences for an exponential family admit simple expressions 13



and


 
  where


 
  is a Jensen difference divergence.
Physical meaning
Renyi entropy in quantum physics is considered unphysical, or non-observable, due to its nonlinear dependence on density matrix. So is the Shannon entropy. Recently, Nazarov showed a correspondence that reveals the physical meaning of the Renyi entropy flow in time. His proposal is similar to the fluctuation-dissipation theorem in spirit and allows to measure quantum entropy using full counting statistics (FCS) of energy transfers. 14
See also

Diversity indices
Tsallis entropy
Generalized entropy index

Notes
References














































"
Category:Information theory Category:Entropy and information



↩
↩
↩

RFC 4086, page 6↩
↩
↩


 
  holds because 
 
 
 
 .↩


 
  holds because 
 
 
 
 .↩


 
  holds because 
 
 
↩
↩

↩
, , ↩




