


Longest words




Longest words

The longest word in any given language depends on the word formation rules of each specific language, and on the types of words allowed for consideration. Agglutinative languages allow for the creation of long words via compounding. Even non-agglutinative languages may allow word formation of theoretically limitless length in certain contexts. Words consisting of hundreds, thousands, or even millions of characters have been coined with the goal of being ranked among the world's longest words; technical scientific terms can run to hundreds of thousands of characters in length. Place names may not be accepted on lists of longest words despite their length. Longest word candidates may be judged by their acceptance in major dictionaries such as the Oxford English Dictionary or in record-keeping publications like Guinness World Records, and by the frequency of their use in ordinary language. 
In Sortable Table




data-sort-type="number" | Max

Language (non scientific)





431/
 
 


Sanskrit Longest word ever



173/
 
 


Polish



173

Greek



136/
 
 


Afrikaans



85

Māori



70/
 
 


Turkish



64

Icelandic



56/
 
 


Hungarian



54

Spanish



53/
 
 


Dutch



46

Malay



45

English



44

Romanian



44

Slovak



42

Georgian



41

Czech



40

Lithuanian



39

Bulgarian



35

Basque



33

Kazakh



32

Tagalog



30

Serbian



30

Montenegrin



30

Italian



30

Croatian



29

Portuguese



29

Armenian



27

French



27

Latvian



26

Irish



25

Hebrew and Indonesian



20

Arabic



12

Esperanto shortest word ever







Danish







Estonian







Finnish







German







Russian







Swedish







Norwegian



Afrikaans
Afrikaans, as its daughter language of Dutch, is capable of forming compounds of potentially limitless length in the same manner as Dutch. According to the Total Book of South African Records, the longest word in the language is 1 Tweedehandsemotorverkoopsmannevakbondstakingsvergaderingsameroeperstoespraakskrywerspersverklaringuitreikingsmediakonferensieaankondiging (136 letters), which means issuable media conference's announcement at a press release regarding the convener's speech at a secondhand car dealership union's strike meeting. The word, however, it's contrived to be long and won't occur in normal speech or writing.
Arabic
A common misconception is that the 9 letter word فسيكفيكهم (fasayakfeekahumu, "so he will save you from them") is the longest word in the Arabic language. This word is the longest word in the Quran but not the longest in the Arabic language. For example, take the word فأسقيناكموه (’fa’asqaynakumuhu, "and We gave it to you to drink"); this word is two letters longer than the previous one. The actual longest word in Arabic is أفاستسقيناكموها (’afastasqaynakumuha, "did we ask you to give it to us to drink"), which is a 15 letter word.
Armenian
The longest word in Armenian language is considered the 29 letter-long Արևաճաճանչաերկրափայլատակություն (Arevajajanchaerkrapaylatakutyun).
Basque
The longest word in Basque language is considered the 35 letter-long konstituziokontrakotasunarekikoetan followed by a 34 letter word bederatziehungarrenarenganainokoak.
The longest last name is Jaureguiñalaberrigoyakoiturrimendiolaberrigoitiechezarreta (58) followed by Gaztelubarriurrutikoberrengormaetxebarrialdeconecoa (51) and ''Iturriberrigorrigoicoerrotaberricoganekoechea (45).
The longest basque topomyn is Azpilicuetagaraycosaroyarenberecolarrea (39).2
Bulgarian
The longest word in Bulgarian is considered the 39 letter-long непротивоконституционствувателствувайте (neprotivokonstitutsionstvuvatelstvuvayte).3
Croatian
Officially the longest word in Croatian is 30-letters long prijestolonasljednikovičičinima (lj is considered a one letter in Croatian alphabet). Translation would be "of little heiress apparent to the throne" in plural dative case. There are also forms of long words which include numbers, but those words are never officially counted as the longest since one could form indefinitely long words in such way (e.g. 30 letters long sedamdesetsedmerogodišnjakinja what would mean "of little 77 years old woman" in plural dative case).
Czech
Traditionally, the word nejneobhospodařovávatelnějšímu is considered as the longest Czech word, but there are some longer artificial words. Most of them are compound adjectives in dative, instrumental or other grammatical case and derived from the iterative or frequentative verbal form or the ability adjective form (like -able). 

nejneobhospodařovávatelnějšímu, "to the least farmable one", 30 letters
nejzdevětadevadesáteroroznásobitelnějšími, "by the most possible to be 99-tuplable out"#, 41 letters
nejnerestrukturalizovávatelnějšímu, "to the least restructurable one", 34 letters
nejneznesrozumitelňovávatelnějšímu, "to the least able to be making less understandable", 34 letters
nejnevykrystalizovávatelnějšímu, "to the least crystallizable one", 31 letters

(See also the Czech article.)
Danish
Speciallægepraksisplanlægningsstabiliseringsperiode, which is 51 letters, is the longest Danish word that has been used in an official context. It means "Period of plan stabilising for a specialist doctor's practice," and was used during negotiations with the local government. Konstantinopolitanerinde, 24 letters, meaning female inhabitant of Constantinople, is often mentioned as the longest non-compound word.
But even longer words can be created as Danish grammar allows its user to put nouns together, forming brand new words, making it possible for a word to be arbitrarily long.
For instance, for the fairytale The Shepherdess and the Chimney Sweep, the author Hans Christian Andersen named one of the characters Gedebukkebensoverogundergeneralkrigskommandersergenten ("General-clothes-press-inspector-head-superintendent-Goat-legs" or in direct translation "Goaty-legged-above-and-under-general-war-commanding-sergent") as a parody on the long Danish military titles which is 54 letters long.
Another example is multiplikationsudregningstabelshæfteopbevaringsreolsproduktionsfacilitet, 77 letters, which is "Production facility of storage shelves of boxes for notebooks for the calculations of multiplication tables."
Dutch
Dutch, like many Germanic languages, is capable of forming compounds of potentially limitless length. The 53-letter word Kindercarnavalsoptochtvoorbereidingswerkzaamhedenplan, meaning "a plan for preparation activities for a children's carnival procession", was cited by the 1996 Guinness Book of World Records as the longest Dutch word.4
The longest word in the authoritative Van Dale Dutch dictionary (2009 edition) in plural form is meervoudigepersoonlijkheidsstoornissen;5 38 letters long, meaning "multiple personality disorders". The entry in the dictionary however is in the singular, counting 35 letters.
The longest entry in the 1984 edition of the same dictionary was zandzeepsodemineraalwatersteenstralen, 37 letters, a variation of opsodemieteren, meaning "to fob off".
The free OpenTaal dictionary,6 which has been certified by the Dutch Language Union (the official Dutch language institute) and is included in many open-source applications, contains the following longest words, which are 40 letters long:

vervoerdersaansprakelijkheidsverzekering, "carriers' liability insurance";
bestuurdersaansprakelijkheidsverzekering, "drivers' liability insurance";
overeenstemmingsbeoordelingsprocedures, "conformity assessment procedures" (38 letters)

The word often said to be the longest in Dutch - probably because of its funny meaning and alliteration - which has also appeared in print, is hottentottententententoonstellingsterrein ("exhibition ground for Hottentot tents");7 counting 41 letters. If this word is pluralised, it adds another two letters.
English
The longest technical word in English is the scientific name for the protein titin, at 189,819 letters. Titin is the largest known polypeptide in the human body, composed of 34,350 amino acids. Though lexicographers regard generic names of chemical compounds as verbal formulae rather than English words, for its sheer length it is often included in longest-word lists.
The 45-letter word pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis is the longest English word that appears in a major dictionary.8 Originally coined to become a candidate for the longest word in English, the term eventually developed some independent use in medicine.9 It is referred to as "P45" by researchers.10
Antidisestablishmentarianism, at 28 letters, is the longest non-coined, non-technical English word. It refers to a 19th-century political movement that opposed the disestablishment of the Church of England as the state church of England.
Floccinaucinihilipilification, at 29 letters and meaning the act of estimating something as being worth so little as to be practically valueless, or the habit of doing so, is the longest non-technical, coined word in the English language.
Esperanto
The longest official Esperanto roots are 12 letters long, shown here with added the substantive "-o" ending:

administracio (administration),
aŭtobiografio (autobiography),
diskriminacii (to discriminate),
konservatorio (conservatory),
paleontologio (palaeontology),
paralelogramo (parallelogram), and
trigonometrio (trigonometry).11

Since Esperanto allows word compounding, there are no limits on how long a word can theoretically become. A relatively short example is the 46-letter komencopaleontologiokonservatoriaĉestriĝontajn, which is an (accusative and plural) adjective that means "about to begin to become the leader of a contemptible palaeontology conservatory". (Such clusters are not considered good style, but are permissible under the rules of Esperanto grammar.)
Estonian
Estonian has many long words; one of the more notable ones, at 24 characters, is "kuulilennuteetunneliluuk", meaning "the hatch a bullet flies out of when exiting a tunnel". It is notable as it is also a palindrome, meaning it can be read from both ends.
One other long word is "uusaastaöövastuvõtuhommikuidüll" at 31 characters, denoting an ideallistic morning after the new year. It can be used in a sentence such as "Maalilist jõuluööeelootusaega ja illuminaarses aoõhetuses uusaastaöövastuvõtuhommikuidülli" to say "merry Christmas and a happy new year".
Another good example of a long word is "sünnipäevanädalalõpupeopärastlõunaväsimus" which means “The tiredness one feels on the afternoon of the weekend birthday party”. Translated literally by parts this becomes "birth day week end party after lunch tiredness".
In Estonian it's possible to create very long words by converting the first word into the next word's genitive, forming a compound which can be arbitrarily long, one example is "isapaabulinnusabakattesulesilmamunavärvivabrikukuldväravaauvahtkonnaülemapühapäevaajakiririnnataskusisevoodrivahe" at 114 characters, meaning "the peacock's tail's covert feather's eyeball's color factory's golden gate's guard's head's sunday jacket's breast pocket's inner lining gap". Because of this, there is no official "longest word" in the language.
Finnish
Two examples of long words that have been in everyday use in the Finnish language are  which means "three phase kilowatt hour meter" (32 letters),  ("a public utility of a municipal federation for provision of basic services", 34 letters)12 and  "airplane jet turbine engine auxiliary mechanic non-commissioned officer student" (61 letters), an actual military term, although one which has been deprecated. If conjugated forms are allowed, even longer real words can be made. Allowing derivatives and clitics allows the already lengthy word to grow even longer, although the usability of the word starts to degrade. The Finnish language uses free forming of composite words: new words can even be formed during a conversation. One can add nouns after each other without breaking grammar rules.
If one allows artificial constructs as well as using clitics and conjugated forms, one can create even longer words: such as  (102 letters), which was created by Artturi Kannisto.13
The longest non-compound (a single stem with prefixes and suffixes) Finnish word recognised by the Guinness Book of Records is  (see also Agglutination#Extremes), based on the stem  (reason, sanity), and it means: I wonder if – even with his/her quality of not having been made unsystematized
and a defunct bar named after it, , are the longest place names in use.
French
The longest usual word in French is intergouvernementalisations (27 letters), plural form of intergouvernementalisation (26 letters) 14
As in English, the longest technical word in French is the scientific name for titin (189,819 letters).
Georgian
In Georgian,  is the most commonly accepted longest word. It contains 47 letters and means: (he/she) said that it is also for those who are like the ones that need to be back/again counter-revolutionized.
German
In German, whole numbers (smaller than 1 million) can be expressed as single words, which makes  (777,777) a 65 letter word. In combination with  or, as a noun, , all numbers can be written as one word. A 79 letter word, , was named the longest published word in the German language by the 1996 Guinness Book of World Records, but longer words are possible. The word refers to a division of an Austrian steam-powered shipping company named the  which transported passengers and cargo on the Danube.
The longest word that is not created artificially as a longest-word record seems to be  at 63 letters. The word means "law delegating beef label monitoring" but as of 2013 the law was removed from the books because European Union regulations have changed, leading to news reports that Germany "had lost its longest word".15
Greek
In his comedy Assemblywomen (c. 392 BC) Aristophanes coined the 173-letter word λοπαδο­τεμαχο­σελαχο­γαλεο­κρανιο­λειψανο­δριμ­υπο­τριμματο­σιλφιο­καραβο­μελιτο­κατακεχυ­μενο­κιχλ­επι­κοσσυφο­φαττο­περιστερ­αλεκτρυον­οπτο­κεφαλλιο­κιγκλο­πελειο­λαγῳο­σιραιο­βαφη­τραγανο­πτερύγων. (Lopadotemachoselachogaleokranioleipsanodrimhypotrimmatosilphioparaomelitokatakechymenokichlepikossyphophattoperisteralektryonoptekephalliokigklopeleio-lagoiosiraiobaphetraganopterygon) A fictional food dish consisting of a combination of fish, poultry and other meat, hare usually refers to rabbit, it is cited as the longest ancient Greek word ever written.16 A formal Greek word of 24 letters is ἠλεκτροεγκεφαλογραφήματος meaning "of an electroencephalogram" according to the Oxford Greek dictionary.
Hebrew
The longest Hebrew word is the 19-letter-long (including vowels) וכשלאנציקלופדיותינו (u'chshelentsiklopedioténu), which means "and when our encyclopedias will have...." The Hebrew word "אנציקלופדיה" (encyclopedia) is of a European origin. The longest word in Hebrew that doesn't originate from another language is "וכשלהתמרמרויותינו," (u'lechshehitmarmeruyoteno) which crudely means "and when, to our resentments...."
The 11-letter-long (including vowels) וְהָאֲחַשְׁדַּרְפְּנִים (veha'aḥashdarpením) is the longest word to appear in the Hebrew Old Testament. Its meaning is "and the satraps". This word doesn't have a Hebrew origin as well.
Hungarian
Megszentségteleníthetetlenségeskedéseitekért, with 44 letters is one example of a long word in the Hungarian language and means something like "for your [plural] continued behaviour as if you could not be desecrated". It is already morphed, since Hungarian is an agglutinative language. The language does not have a "longest word" due to its agglutinating nature. It is always possible to construct a longer one with enough creativity.
The longest dictionary form word is the word in use (although it is constructed from the word: szent meaning: "saint"), megszentségteleníthetetlen, with 25 characters, and means "something that cannot be desecrated".
Another word that conforms to Hungarian orthography: legeslegtöredezettségmentesíthetetlenebbeskedéseitekért (67 letters) can be translated to something like "because of your highest unfragmentationability factor".
Icelandic
The longest word in Icelandic is .17 It has 64 letters and means "A ring on a key chain for the main door of a tool storage shed used by road workers on (the hill) Vaðlaheiði".
Analysis of a corpus of contemporary Icelandic texts by Uwe Quasthoff, Sabine Fiedler and Erla Hallsteinsdóttir identified  ("of the International Transport Workers' Federation"; 37 letters) and  ("of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries' Organization"; 45 letters) as the longest unhyphenated and hyphenated words.18
Indonesian
The longest word in Indonesian is ketidakbertanggungjawabannyalah, means "it is his/her irresponsibility that (does something)", in the order form. It is composed of 31 letters.
Irish
The longest word in common use in Irish is leas-phríomhfheidhmeannaigh, meaning "deputy chief executives." It has 26 letters.
Italian
The longest word in Italian is traditionally precipitevolissimevolmente, which is a 26-letter-long adverb.19 It is formed by subsequent addition of postfixes to the original root:

precipitevole: "hasty";
precipitevolissimo: "very hasty";
precipitevolissimevole: "[of someone/something] that acts very hastily", (not grammatically correct);
precipitevolissimevolmente: "in a way like someone/something that acts very hastily" (not grammatically correct, but nowadays part of the language).

The word is never used in every-day language, but in jokes. Nevertheless, it is an official part of Italian language; it was coined in 1677 by poet Francesco Moneti:  The word technically violates Italian grammar rules, the correct form being precipitevolissimamente, which is three letters and one syllable shorter. The poet coined the new word to have 11 syllables in the second verse.
Other words can be created with a similar (and grammatically correct) mechanism starting from a longer root, winding up with a longer word. Some examples are:

sovramagnificentissimamente (cited by Dante Alighieri in De vulgari eloquentia), 27 letters, "in a way that is more than magnificent by far" (archaic)1;
incontrovertibilissimamente, 27 letters, "in a way that is very difficult to falsify";
particolareggiatissimamente, 27 letters, "in an extremely detailed way";
anticostituzionalissimamente, 28 letters, "in a way that strongly violates the constitution".

The longest accepted neologism is psiconeuroendocrinoimmunologia (30 letters)..
Other long words are:

hippopotomonstrosesquippedaliofobia (35 letters)
nonilfenossipolietilenossietonolo (33 letters)
pentagonododecaedrotetraedrico (30 letters)
esofagodermatodigiunoplastica (29 letters)
elettroencefalograficamente (27 letters)
diclorodifeniltricloroetano (27 letters)
intradermopalpebroreazione (26 letters).

Kazakh
The longest Kazakh word is қанағаттандырылмағандықтарыңыздан, meaning "because of your dissatisfaction". It is 33 letters long.
Korean
The longest Korean word is 니코틴아마이드 아데닌 다이뉴클레오타이드, meaning "nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide". It is 19 letters long.
Latvian
The longest technical terms are common with other European languages, but the longest non-technical word is pretpulksteņrādītājvirziens, 27 letters long, which means "counter-clockwise direction".
Lithuanian
The longest Lithuanian word is 40 letters long:

nebeprisikiškiakopūstlapiaujančiuosiuose - "in those, of masculine gender, who aren't gathering enough wood sorrel's leaves by themselves anymore." - the plural locative case of past iterative active participle of verb kiškiakopūstlapiauti meaning "to pick wood-sorrels' leaves" (leaves of edible forest plant with sour taste, word by word translation "rabbit cabbage"). The word is attributed to software developer / writer Andrius Stasauskas. 2

One other longest Lithuanian words are 39 letters long:

the participle nebeprisikiškiakopūsteliaudavusiuose, "in those that were repeatedly unable to pick enough of small wood-sorrels in the past" – the plural locative case of past iterative active participle of verb kiškiakopūsteliauti meaning "to pick wood-sorrels" (edible forest plant with sour taste, word by word translation "rabbit's cabbage"). The word is commonly attributed to famous Lithuanian language teacher Jonas Kvederaitis, who actually used the plural first person of past iterative tense, nebeprisikiškiakopūstaudavome.

There are two Lithuanian words sharing 35 letters:

the participle nebeprisikiškiakopūsteliaudavusiems, "for those who were repeatedly unable to pick enough of small

wood-sorrels in the past" – the plural dative case of past iterative active participle of the verb kiškiakopūsteliauti;

the adjective septyniasdešimtseptyniasluoksniuose – the plural locative case of the adjective septyniasdešimtseptyniasluoksnis meaning "(object) with seventy-seven layers".

Malay
There are two 46-letter word that are cited to be the longest word in the Malay language. Both are technical terms:

menyepodaknyahcasdiversifikasielektrostatikkan (to undiversify uncharged electrostatic electricity.)
penyetidaknyahcasdiversifikasielektrostatikkan (the process of undiversifiying uncharged electrostatic electricity.)


 While the longest non-technical word in the Malay language is the 23-letter word, ketidakbolehkuatkuasaan, which means "unenforceability".
Māori
The 85-letter place name Taumatawhakatangihangakoauauotamateaturipukakapikomaungahoronukupokaiwhenuakitanatahu was the longest place name in the Māori language.
Montenegrin
The longest word in Montenegrin, although not in common use, is prijestolonasljednikovićevica (30 letters), and that word is used to describe a female member of royal family.
Norwegian
The longest word in Norwegian, that is a real word in ordinary use, is menneskerettighetsorganisasjonene (33 letters). The meaning is "the human rights organizations". Being used mostly in statistics, the term sannsynlighetstetthetsfunksjonene (meaning “the probability density functions”) is also 33 characters long. The physics term minoritetsladningsbærerdiffusjonskoeffisientmålingsapparatur has 60 characters, but is not a common word. Its meaning is "(a) device for measuring the distance between particles in a crystal".
In theory, though, it is possible in Norwegian to make words as long as one wants; for instance, menneskerettighetsorganisasjonssekretæren (the secretary of a human rights organization), menneskerettighetsorganisasjonssekretærkurset (the course for secretaries working for human rights organizations), menneskerettighetsorganisasjonssekretærkursmateriellet (the material for a course for secretaries working for human rights organizations), and so on, are possible. The reason is that compounds are, unlike in English, mostly closed in Norwegian (skolebuss vs. school bus). Definite articles are also suffixed instead of being separate words (bussen vs. the bus), which may lengthen nouns by an additional two-three letters.
Polish
The longest Polish words can be created as adjectives from numerals and nouns.
Dziewięćsetdziewięćdziesięciodziewięcionarodowościowego, 54 letters, is the genitive singular form of an adjective meaning roughly "of nine-hundred and ninety-nine nationalities".
Similar words are rather artificial compounds, constructed within allowed grammar rules, but are seldom used in spoken language, although they are not nonsense words. It is possible to make even longer words in this way, for example:
Dziewięćsetdziewięćdziesiątdziewięćmiliardówdziewięćsetdziewięćdziesiątdziewięćmilionówdziewięćsetdziewięćdziesiątdziewięćtysięcydziewięćsetdziewięćdziesięciodziewięcioletni (173 letters, meaning "999,999,999,999 years old").
One of the longest common words is 31-letter dziewięćdziesięciokilkuletniemu – the dative singular form of "ninety-and-some years old one". Another common long word is pięćdziesięciogroszówka (23 letters), "a 50 groszy coin".
Portuguese
The 52-letter word  (plural diminutive of ) is the longest word . It is a plural noun referring to a sufferers of the disease pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis. The 29-letter word  (adverb, meaning "most anticonstitutionally") is recognized as being the longest non-technical word.
Romanian
The 44-letter word pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcaniconioză is the longest word. It is a noun referring to the disease pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis.20
Russian
Theoretically, it is possible to create Russian words of unlimited length, for example: прапрапра...дедушка (praprapra...dedushka, great great great...grandfather). Most likely one of the longest originally-Russian words is превысокомногорассмотрительствующий (prevysokomnogorassmotritelstvuyushchy) which contains 35 letters, in its dative singular form превысокомногорассмотрительствующему (prevysokomnogorassmotritelstvuyushchemu, with 36 letters), which can be an example of excessively official vocabulary of 19th century. The longest numeral compounds, such as Тысячевосьмисотвосьмидесятидевятимикрометровый (Tysyachevosmisotvosmidesyatidevyatimikrometrovy), which is an adjective containing 46 letters, meaning "1889-micrometer".
Sanskrit
Sanskrit allows word compounding of arbitrary length. Nouns and verbs can be expressed in one word. The longest word ever used in Sanskrit literature is (in Devanagari):

निरन्तरान्धकारिता-दिगन्तर-कन्दलदमन्द-सुधारस-बिन्दु-सान्द्रतर-घनाघन-वृन्द-सन्देहकर-स्यन्दमान-मकरन्द-बिन्दु-बन्धुरतर-माकन्द-तरु-कुल-तल्प-कल्प-मृदुल-सिकता-जाल-जटिल-मूल-तल-मरुवक-मिलदलघु-लघु-लय-कलित-रमणीय-पानीय-शालिका-बालिका-करार-विन्द-गलन्तिका-गलदेला-लवङ्ग-पाटल-घनसार-कस्तूरिकातिसौरभ-मेदुर-लघुतर-मधुर-शीतलतर-सलिलधारा-निराकरिष्णु-तदीय-विमल-विलोचन-मयूख-रेखापसारित-पिपासायास-पथिक-लोकान्
 

In IAST transliteration:

nirantarāndhakāritā-digantara-kandaladamanda-sudhārasa-bindu-sāndratara-ghanāghana-vr̥nda-sandehakara-syandamāna-makaranda-bindu-bandhuratara-mākanda-taru-kula-talpa-kalpa-mr̥dula-sikatā-jāla-jaṭila-mūla-tala-maruvaka-miladalaghu-laghu-laya-kalita-ramaṇīya-pānīya-śālikā-bālikā-karāra-vinda-galantikā-galadelā-lavaṅga-pāṭala-ghanasāra-kastūrikātisaurabha-medura-laghutara-madhura-śītalatara-saliladhārā-nirākariṣṇu-tadīya-vimala-vilocana-mayūkha-rekhāpasārita-pipāsāyāsa-pathika-lokān


from the Varadāmbikā Pariṇaya Campū by Tirumalāmbā,21 in transliteration composed of 431 letters, thus making it the longest word ever to appear in worldwide literature.22
Each hyphen separates every individual word this word is composed of.
The approximate meaning of this word is:

"In it, the distress, caused by thirst, to travellers, was alleviated by clusters of rays of the bright eyes of the girls; the rays that were shaming the currents of light, sweet and cold water charged with the strong fragrance of cardamom, clove, saffron, camphor and musk and flowing out of the pitchers (held in) the lotus-like hands of maidens (seated in) the beautiful water-sheds, made of the thick roots of vetiver mixed with marjoram, (and built near) the foot, covered with heaps of couch-like soft sand, of the clusters of newly sprouting mango trees, which constantly darkened the intermediate space of the quarters, and which looked all the more charming on account of the trickling drops of the floral juice, which thus caused the delusion of a row of thick rainy clouds, densely filled with abundant nectar."
 

Serbian
The longest word in the Serbian language, except the ones that describe a person's age, seems to be a 26-letter long word престолонаследниковићевица, which means: Great granddaughter of the ruler (a ruler who sits on a throne). It can also be spelled пријестолонаследниковићевица (30), which means the same, but in ijekavian dialect. The second longest word is оториноларинглогија (20), which means otorhinolaryngology. The longest word which describes a person's age is деведесетдеветогодишњакиња (26), which means 99-year-old woman.
Slovak
Traditionally, the word najneobhospodarovateľnejšiemu is considered as the longest Slovak word, but there are some longer artificial words. Most of them are compound adjectives in dative, instrumental or other grammatical case and derived from the iterative or frequentative verbal form or the ability adjective form (like -able).23 24

najneobhospodarovateľnejšiemu, "to the least not farmable one", 29 letters

Artificial words, lexically valid but never used in language

najnerozkrasokorčuľovateľnejšieho, 33 letters
znajneprekryštalizovávateľnejšievajúcimi, 44 letters "to the least not crystazed one"
znajnepreinternacionalizovateľnejšievať, 39 letters

Numbers, can by considered as a single multicharacter word, but commonly written as separated numbers.

sedemstodeväťdesiatsedemtisícsedemstodeväťdesiatsedemi (797.797) - 55 letters - sedem sto deväťdesiatsedem tisíc sedem sto deväťdesiatsedemi

Names of chemicals, but these words are not from native language

tetraethylenpentaminoakrylonitrilglycidol - 41 letters

Spanish
The longest word in Spanish is the 54-letter behemoth pentakismyriahexakisquilioletracosiohexacontapentágono ("56645-side polygon"). Other long words are "Pneumonoultramicroscopisilicovulcanoconiosis" (lung disease caused by silica poisoning), "hipopotomounstruosesquipedaliofobia" (fear of long words), "esternocleidomastoideitis" (inflammation of the sternocleidomastoid muscle) and "anticonstitucionalmente" ([proceeding in a manner that is] contrary to the constitution) and "electroencefalografistas" (specialists that do electrical scans on brains).
The word "anticonstitucionalmente" is usually considered the longest word in general use. Some dictionaries (but not the RAE dictionary25) removed its root word ("anticonstitucional") in 2005, causing comments about it not "being a valid word anymore" and suggesting the use of "inconstitucional" as a replacement, but it doesn't have the same meaning, making this alleged removal an improper one.
The word "otorrinolaringología" is also considered the one of the longest words in general use in Spanish language.
Swedish
Realisationsvinstbeskattning (28 letters) is the longest word in Svenska Akademiens Ordlista. It means "capital gains taxation". However, Swedish grammar makes it possible to create arbitrarily long words. One such word is Spårvagnsaktiebolagsskensmutsskjutarefackföreningspersonalbeklädnadsmagasinsförrådsförvaltarens (95 letters) which means: "[belonging to] The manager of the depot for the supply of uniforms to the personnel of the track cleaners' union of the tramway company".26
;
Tagalog
The longest known Filipino word in a dictionary is the 32-letter, 14-syllable Pinakanakapagpapabagabag-damdamin, which means "the most emotionally disturbing (or upsetting) thing" from the root bagabag which means "to upset".
Like all other Philippine languages, Tagalog is an agglutinate language, and because of this there are many opportunities in everyday speech to create long words (by English standards).
Examples of this include:

Pinagpinamamagaspasan (21 letters, 9 syllables) meaning "a dusty place where chickens usually groom themselves"
Nagsisipagsisinunga-sinungalingan (32-letters, 13-syllables) meaning "trying to scatter pretended lies."
''Nakikipagsisinunga-sinungalingan ''(31 letters, 13 syllables) meaning "[two] people trying to scatter pretended lies with each other" from the root sisinunga-sinungalingan ('pretending to lie')

Turkish
Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimizdenmişsinizcesine, at 70 letters, has been cited as the longest Turkish word, though it is a compound word and Turkish, as an agglutinative language, carries the potential for words of arbitrary length.
1. Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimizdenmişsinizcesine, at 70 letters, means "As if you would be from those we can not easily/quickly make a maker of unsuccessful ones".
2. Çekoslovakyalılaştıramadıklarımızdanmışsınız means "I think you are one of those people whom we could not turn into a Czechoslovakian?"
3. Afyonkarahisarlılaştırabildiklerimizdenmişsinizcesine means "As if you are one of the people that we made resemble from Afyonkarahisar".
Word formation




Turkish

English





Muvaffak

Successful



Muvaffakiyet

Success



Muvaffakiyetsiz

Unsuccessful ({{'}}without success')



Muvaffakiyetsizleş(-mek)

(To) become unsuccessful



Muvaffakiyetsizleştir(-mek)

(To) make one unsuccessful



Muvaffakiyetsizleştirici

Maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileş(-mek)

(To) become a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştir(-mek)

(To) make one a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriver(-mek)

(To) easily/quickly make one a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriverebil(-mek)

(To) be able to make one easily/quickly a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebil(-mek)

Not (to) be able to make one easily/quickly a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebilecek

One who is not able to make one easily/quickly a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebilecekler

Those who are not able to make one easily/quickly a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimiz

Those whom we cannot make easily/quickly a maker unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimizden

From those we can not easily/quickly make a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimizdenmiş

(Would be) from those we can not easily/quickly make a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimizdenmişsiniz

You would be from those we can not easily/quickly make a maker of unsuccessful ones



Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimizdenmişsinizcesine

As if you would be from those we can not easily/quickly make a maker of unsuccessful ones



Ukrainian
Long words are not typical for Ukrainian so the majority of them in this language are of foreign descent and mostly related to science. Perhaps the longest word of the Ukrainian language in the Nominative case is дихлордифенілтрихлорметилметан (dyxlordyfeniltryxlormetylmetan, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane or DDT) which contains 30 letters. In the Instrumental case this word contains 32 letters. There may be longer chemical terms in Ukrainian.
Theoretically, there can be words with unlimited length, for example: прапрапра...дідусь (praprapra...didusj, great great great...grandfather).
Vietnamese
Nghiêng, with 7 letters, meaning "inclined, lean", is the longest morpheme in the mostly disyllabic Vietnamese language.27 It is unclear as to what the longest actual word is but they can go to 5 syllables or beyond. Examples include:
Sự-phản-ứng-trung-hòa (Neutralization).
Sự-phản-đối-việc-tách-nhà-thờ-ra-khỏi-nhà-nước (Antidisestablishmentarianism).
Welsh
Llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantyiiivth, a railway station on the island of Anglesey in Wales, is the longest place name in the Welsh language. At 51 letters in the Welsh alphabet (the digraphs ll and ch are each collated as single letters) the name can be translated as "St Mary's church in the hollow of the white hazel near to the rapid whirlpool and the church of St Tysilio of the red cave". However, it was artificially contrived in the 1860s as a publicity stunt, to give the station the longest name of any railway station in the United Kingdom.
Long words are comparatively rare in Welsh. Candidates for long words other than proper nouns include the following (the digraph dd is also treated as a single letter, as is ng in many instances including in the last word below):

gwrthddatgysylltiadaeth (antidisestablishmentarianism)
microgyfrifiaduron (microcomputers)
tra-arglwyddiaethasant (they predominated)
cyfrwngddarostynedigaeth (intercession)28

See also

Morphology (linguistics)
Longest English sentence
Jugemu

References
af:Langste woord"
Category:Word coinage Category:Superlatives



↩
 Iñaki Arranz, Hitza azti, Alberdania, 2006, 283 pages. (Zein da euskal hitzik luzeena?)↩
↩
↩
http://levenslangleren.be/taal.php/wat-is-het-langste-woord-in-het-nederlands↩
Website project OpenTaal↩
http://books.google.nl/books?id=AQ-00e6bMGYC&pg;;=PA46&lpg;=PA46&dq;=Hottentottententententoonstellingsterrein&source;=bl&ots;=Hy0ziNXvBK&sig;=c7ycDxa6wWv0SFFuZ8OSuEFBrkE&hl;=en&sa;=X&ei;=j47KT-bkApP68QOLlKjrDw&redir;_esc=y#v=onepage&q;=Hottentottententententoonstellingsterrein&f;=false ↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
http://www.llky.fi/↩
Karilas, Yrjö: Antero Vipunen, arvoitusten ja ongelmien, leikkien ja pelien sekä eri harrastelualojen pikkujättiläinen, p. 226, 20th edition. WSOY 2003. ISBN 9510121770↩
French wikipédia : https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mots_les_plus_longs_en_fran%C3%A7ais↩
Slated (AP):"Law change spells end for Germany's longest word"↩
↩
↩
↩
http://books.google.com/books?id=c_E9AAAAYAAJ&pg;;=PA884&lpg;=PA884&dq;=precipitevolissimevolmente+crusca&source;=bl&ots;=3Yd9sNDji_&sig;=hyCIYkS6pSGC_iDU0G_0t-PWHbA&hl;=en&ei;=asfETtCtB8XssgaX-rztCw&sa;=X&oi;=book_result&ct;=result&resnum;=5&ved;=0CD4Q6AEwBA#v=onepage&q;&f;=false↩
↩
http://hellenisteukontos.blogspot.in/2010/03/what-is-longest-word-of-sanskrit.html↩
[http://books.google.gr/books?ei=gSsKUaa_IeO-0QXntICYDw&hl;;=el&id;=zgoFN4QKARsC&dq;=Guinness+book+of+world+records+1991&q;=Guinness+Book+of+World+Records%2C+1991+longest+word#search_anchor]↩
http://jazykovaporadna.sme.sk/q/1973/↩
http://www.juls.savba.sk/ediela/ks/2012/4/ks2012-4.pdf↩
http://lema.rae.es/drae/?val=anticonstitucional↩
↩
↩
https://listserv.heanet.ie/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind0011&L;;=welsh-l&D;=1&O;=A&T;=0&P;=739↩




