


Mathieu function




Mathieu function

In mathematics, the Mathieu functions are certain special functions useful for treating a variety of problems in applied mathematics, including:

vibrating elliptical drumheads,
quadrupole mass analyzers and quadrupole ion traps for mass spectrometry
wave motion in periodic media, such as ultracold atoms in an optical lattice
the phenomenon of parametric resonance in forced oscillators,
exact plane wave solutions in general relativity,
the Stark effect for a rotating electric dipole,
in general, the solution of differential equations that are separable in elliptic cylindrical coordinates.

They were introduced by  in the context of the first problem.
Mathieu equation
The canonical form for Mathieu's differential equation is



The Mathieu equation is a Hill equation with only 1 harmonic mode.
Closely related is Mathieu's modified differential equation



which follows on substitution 
 
 
 
 .
The two above equations can be obtained from the Helmholtz equation in two dimensions, by expressing it in elliptical coordinates and then separating the two variables.1 This is why they are also known as angular and radial Mathieu equation, respectively.
The substitution 
 
 
 
 
  transforms Mathieu's equation to the algebraic form



This has two regular singularities at 
 
 
 
  and one irregular singularity at infinity, which implies that in general (unlike many other special functions), the solutions of Mathieu's equation cannot be expressed in terms of hypergeometric functions.
Mathieu's differential equations arise as models in many contexts, including the stability of railroad rails as trains drive over them, seasonally forced population dynamics, the four-dimensional wave equation, and the Floquet theory of the stability of limit cycles.
Floquet solution
According to Floquet's theorem (or Bloch's theorem), for fixed values of a,q, Mathieu's equation admits a complex valued solution of form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a complex number, the Mathieu exponent, and P is a complex valued function which is periodic in 
 
 
 
 
  with period 
 
 
 
 . However, P is in general not sinusoidal. In the example plotted below, 
 
 
 
  (real part, red; imaginary part; green): 
Mathieu sine and cosine
For fixed a,q, the Mathieu cosine

 
  is a function of 
 
 
 
  defined as the unique solution of the Mathieu equation which

takes the value 
 
 
 
 
 ,
is an even function, hence 
 
 
 
 .

Similarly, the Mathieu sine

 
  is the unique solution which

takes the value 
 
 
 
 ,
is an odd function, hence 
 
 
 
 .

These are real-valued functions which are closely related to the Floquet solution:





 
  The general solution to the Mathieu equation (for fixed a,q) is a linear combination of the Mathieu cosine and Mathieu sine functions.
A noteworthy special case is


 
  i.e. when the corresponding Helmholtz equation problem has circular symmetry.
In general, the Mathieu sine and cosine are aperiodic. Nonetheless, for small values of q, we have approximately


 
  For example:  

Periodic solutions
Given 
 
 
 
 , for countably many special values of 
 
 
 
 
 , called characteristic values, the Mathieu equation admits solutions which are periodic with period 
 
 
 
 . The characteristic values of the Mathieu cosine, sine functions respectively are written 
 
 
 
 , where n is a natural number. The periodic special cases of the Mathieu cosine and sine functions are often written 
 
 
 
  respectively, although they are traditionally given a different normalization (namely, that their L2 norm equal 
 
 
 
 ). Therefore, for positive q, we have





 
  Here are the first few periodic Mathieu cosine functions for q = 1:  Note that, for example, 
 
 
 
  (green) resembles a cosine function, but with flatter hills and shallower valleys.
Solutions to the modified Mathieu equation
See also

Monochromatic electromagnetic plane wave, an example of an important exact plane wave solution to the Einstein field equation in general relativity which is expressed using Mathieu cosine functions.
Inverted pendulum
Lamé function

References


Gertrude Blanch, "Chapter 20. Mathieu Functions", in Milton Abramowitz and Irene A. Stegun, eds., Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables (Dover: New York, 1972)



External links


Timothy Jones, Mathieu's Equations and the Ideal rf-Paul Trap (2006)

Mathieu equation, EqWorld
List of equations and identities for Mathieu Functions functions.wolfram.com
NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions: Mathieu Functions and Hill's Equation

"
Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Special functions


