


Relative homology




Relative homology

In algebraic topology, a branch of mathematics, the (singular) homology of a topological space relative to a subspace is a construction in singular homology, for pairs of spaces. The relative homology is useful and important in several ways. Intuitively, it helps determine what part of an absolute homology group comes from which subspace.
Definition
Given a subspace 
 
 
 
 , one may form the short exact sequence



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the singular chains on the space X. The boundary map on 
 
 
 
  leaves 
 
 
 
  invariant and therefore descends to a boundary map on the quotient. The corresponding homology is called relative homology:



One says that relative homology is given by the relative cycles, chains whose boundaries are chains on A, modulo the relative boundaries (chains that are homologous to a chain on A, i.e. chains that would be boundaries, modulo A again).
Properties
The above short exact sequences specifying the relative chain groups gives rise to a chain complex of short exact sequences. An application of the snake lemma then yields a long exact sequence



The connecting map δ takes a relative cycle, representing a homology class in Hn(X, A), to its boundary (which is a cycle in A).
It follows that Hn(X, x0), where x0 is a point in X, is the n-th reduced homology group of X. In other words, Hi(X, x0) = Hi(X) for all i > 0. When i = 0, H0(X, x0) is the free module of one rank less than H0(X). The connected component containing x0 becomes trivial in relative homology.
The excision theorem says that removing a sufficiently nice subset Z ⊂ A leaves the relative homology groups Hn(X, A) unchanged. Using the long exact sequence of pairs and the excision theorem, one can show that Hn(X, A) is the same as the n-th reduced homology groups of the quotient space X/A.
The n-th local homology group of a space X at a point x0 is defined to be Hn(X, X - {x0}). Informally, this is the "local" homology of X close to x0.
Relative homology readily extends to the triple (X, Y, Z) for Z ⊂ Y ⊂ X.
One can define the Euler characteristic for a pair Y ⊂ X by



The exactness of the sequence implies that the Euler characteristic is additive, i.e. if Z ⊂ Y ⊂ X, one has



Functoriality
The map 
 
 
 
  can be considered to be a functor



where Top2 is the category of pairs of topological spaces and 

 is the category chain complexes of abelian groups.
Examples
One important use of relative homology is the computation of the homology groups of quotient spaces 
 
 
 
 . In the case that 
 
 
 
  is a subspace of 
 
 
 
  fulfilling the mild regularity condition that there exists a neighborhood of 
 
 
 
  that has 
 
 
 
  as a deformation retract, then the group 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 . We can immediately use this fact to compute the homology of a sphere. We can realize 
 
 
 
  as the quotient of an n-disk by its boundary, i.e. 
 
 
 
 . Applying the exact sequence of relative homology gives the following:


Because the disk is contractible, we know its homology groups vanish in all dimensions, so the above sequence collapses to the short exact sequence:



Therefore, we get isomorphisms 
 
 
 
 . We can now proceed by induction to show that 
 
 
 
 . Now because 
 
 
 
  is the deformation retract of a suitable neighborhood of itself in 
 
 
 
 , we get that 
 
 

See also

Excision Theorem
Mayer–Vietoris sequence

References


Joseph J. Rotman, An Introduction to Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-96678-1

"
Category:Homology theory


