


Clausius–Clapeyron relation




Clausius–Clapeyron relation

The Clausius–Clapeyron relation, named after Rudolf Clausius1 and Benoît Paul Émile Clapeyron,2 is a way of characterizing a discontinuous phase transition between two phases of matter of a single constituent. On a pressure–temperature (P–T) diagram, the line separating the two phases is known as the coexistence curve. The Clausius–Clapeyron relation gives the slope of the tangents to this curve. Mathematically,



where 
 
 
 
  is the slope of the tangent to the coexistence curve at any point, 
 
 
 
  is the specific latent heat, 
 
 
 
 
  is the temperature, 
 
 
 
  is the specific volume change of the phase transition and 
 
 
 
  is the entropy change of the phase transition.
Derivations
(Figure)
A typical phase diagram. The dotted green line gives the anomalous behavior of water. The Clausius–Clapeyron relation can be used to find the relationship between pressure and temperature along phase boundaries.

Derivation from state postulate
Using the state postulate, take the specific entropy

 
  for a homogeneous substance to be a function of specific volume

 
  and temperature

 
 
 .3



The Clausius–Clapeyron relation characterizes behavior of a closed system during a phase change, during which temperature and pressure are constant by definition. Therefore,4



Using the appropriate Maxwell relation gives5



where 
 
 
 
  is the pressure. Since pressure and temperature are constant, by definition the derivative of pressure with respect to temperature does not change.67 Therefore the partial derivative of specific entropy may be changed into a total derivative



and the total derivative of pressure with respect to temperature may be factored out when integrating from an initial phase 
 
 
 
  to a final phase 
 
 
 
 ,8 to obtain



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are respectively the change in specific entropy and specific volume. Given that a phase change is an internally reversible process, and that our system is closed, the first law of thermodynamics holds



where 
 
 
 
  is the internal energy of the system. Given constant pressure and temperature (during a phase change) and the definition of specific enthalpy

 
 , we obtain









Given constant pressure and temperature (during a phase change), we obtain9



Substituting the definition of specific latent heat

 
  gives



Substituting this result into the pressure derivative given above (
 
 
 
 
 ), we obtain1011



This result (also known as the Clapeyron equation) equates the slope of the tangent to the coexistence curve

 
 , at any given point on the curve, to the function 
 
 
 
  of the specific latent heat 
 
 
 
 , the temperature 
 
 
 
 
 , and the change in specific volume 
 
 
 
 .
Derivation from Gibbs–Duhem relation
Suppose two phases, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , are in contact and at equilibrium with each other. Their chemical potentials are related by



Furthermore, along the coexistence curve,



One may therefore use the Gibbs–Duhem relation



(where 
 
 
 
  is the specific entropy, 
 
 
 
  is the specific volume, and 
 
 
 
  is the molar mass) to obtain



Rearrangement gives



from which the derivation of the Clapeyron equation continues as in the previous section.
Ideal gas approximation at low temperatures
When the phase transition of a substance is between a gas phase and a condensed phase (liquid or solid), and occurs at temperatures much lower than the critical temperature of that substance, the specific volume of the gas phase 
 
 
 
  greatly exceeds that of the condensed phase 
 
 
 
 . Therefore one may approximate



at low temperatures. If pressure is also low, the gas may be approximated by the ideal gas law, so that



where 
 
 
 
  is the pressure, 
 
 
 
  is the specific gas constant, and 
 
 
 
  is the temperature. Substituting into the Clapeyron equation



we can obtain the Clausius–Clapeyron equation12



for low temperatures and pressures,13 where 
 
 
 
  is the specific latent heat of the substance.
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be any two points along the coexistence curve between two phases 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . In general, 
 
 
 
  varies between any two such points, as a function of temperature. But if 
 
 
 
  is constant,









or14



These last equations are useful because they relate equilibrium or saturation vapor pressure and temperature to the latent heat of the phase change, without requiring specific volume data.
Applications
Chemistry and chemical engineering
For transitions between a gas and a condensed phase with the approximations described above, the expression may be rewritten as



where 
 
 
 
  is a constant. For a liquid-gas transition, 
 
 
 
  is the specific latent heat (or specific enthalpy) of vaporization; for a solid-gas transition, 
 
 
 
 
  is the specific latent heat of sublimation. If the latent heat is known, then knowledge of one point on the coexistence curve determines the rest of the curve. Conversely, the relationship between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is linear, and so linear regression is used to estimate the latent heat.
Meteorology and climatology
Atmospheric water vapor drives many important meteorologic phenomena (notably precipitation), motivating interest in its dynamics. The Clausius–Clapeyron equation for water vapor under typical atmospheric conditions (near standard temperature and pressure) is



where:



 
  is saturation vapor pressure


 
 
  is temperature


 
  is the specific latent heat of evaporation of water


 
  is the gas constant of water vapor

The temperature dependence of the latent heat 
 
 
 
 , and therefore of the saturation vapor pressure 
 
 
 
 , cannot be neglected in this application. Fortunately, the August-Roche-Magnus formula provides a very good approximation, using pressure in hPa and temperature in Celsius:


1516
(This is also sometimes called the Magnus or Magnus-Tetens approximation, though this attribution is historically inaccurate.17)
Under typical atmospheric conditions, the denominator of the exponent depends weakly on 
 
 
 
  (for which the unit is Celsius). Therefore, the August-Roche-Magnus equation implies that saturation water vapor pressure changes approximately exponentially with temperature under typical atmospheric conditions, and hence the water-holding capacity of the atmosphere increases by about 7% for every 1 °C rise in temperature.18
Example
One of the uses of this equation is to determine if a phase transition will occur in a given situation. Consider the question of how much pressure is needed to melt ice at a temperature 
 
 
 
  below 0 °C. Note that water is unusual in that its change in volume upon melting is negative. We can assume



and substituting in


 
  = 3.34
 
 
 
 
  J/kg (latent heat of fusion for water),


 
  = 273 K (absolute temperature), and


 
  = −9.05
 
 
 
  m³/kg (change in specific volume from solid to liquid),
we obtain


 
  = −13.5 MPa/K.
To provide a rough example of how much pressure this is, to melt ice at −7 °C (the temperature many ice skating rinks are set at) would require balancing a small car (mass = 1000 kg19) on a thimble (area = 1 cm²).
Second derivative
While the Clausius–Clapeyron relation gives the slope of the coexistence curve, it does not provide any information about its curvature or second derivative. The second derivative of the coexistence curve of phases 1 and 2 is given by 20


 
  where subscripts 1 and 2 denote the different phases, 
 
 
 
  is the specific heat capacity at constant pressure, 
 
 
 
  is the thermal expansion coefficient, and 
 
 
 
  is the isothermal compressibility.
See also

Van 't Hoff equation
Antoine equation
Lee-Kesler method

References
Bibliography

M.K. Yau and R.R. Rogers, Short Course in Cloud Physics, Third Edition, published by Butterworth–Heinemann, January 1, 1989, 304 pages. EAN 9780750632157 ISBN 0-7506-3215-1
J.V. Iribarne and W.L. Godson, Atmospheric Thermodynamics, published by D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland, 1973, 222 pages
H.B. Callen, Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics, published by Wiley, 1985. ISBN 0-471-86256-8

"
Category:Thermodynamic equations Category:Atmospheric thermodynamics Category:Engineering thermodynamics

















 - Equation 25 provides these coefficients
 - Equation 21 provides these coefficients
M. G. Lawrence, "The relationship between relative humidity and the dew point temperature in moist air: A simple conversion and applications", Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 86, 225-233, 2005
IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis, "FAQ 3.2 How is Precipitation Changing ?", URL http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/faq-3-2.html






