


Membership function (mathematics)




Membership function (mathematics)

The membership function of a fuzzy set is a generalization of the indicator function in classical sets. In fuzzy logic, it represents the degree of truth as an extension of valuation. Degrees of truth are often confused with probabilities, although they are conceptually distinct, because fuzzy truth represents membership in vaguely defined sets, not likelihood of some event or condition. Membership functions were introduced by Zadeh in the first paper on fuzzy sets (1965). Zadeh, in his theory of fuzzy sets, proposed using a membership function (with a range covering the interval (0,1)) operating on the domain of all possible values.
Definition
For any set 
 
 
 
 , a membership function on 
 
 
 
  is any function from 
 
 
 
  to the real unit interval 
 
 
 
 .
Membership functions on 
 
 
 
  represent fuzzy subsets of 
 
 
 
 . The membership function which represents a fuzzy set 
 
 
 
  is usually denoted by 
 
 
 
  For an element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the value 
 
 
 
  is called the membership degree of 
 
 
 
  in the fuzzy set 
 
 
 
  The membership degree 
 
 
 
  quantifies the grade of membership of the element 
 
 
 
  to the fuzzy set 
 
 
 
  The value 0 means that 
 
 
 
  is not a member of the fuzzy set; the value 1 means that 
 
 
 
  is fully a member of the fuzzy set. The values between 0 and 1 characterize fuzzy members, which belong to the fuzzy set only partially.

(Figure)
Fuzzy crisp.svg



Membership function of a fuzzy set

Sometimes,1 a more general definition is used, where membership functions take values in an arbitrary fixed algebra or structure 
 
 
 
 ; usually it is required that 
 
 
 
  be at least a poset or lattice. The usual membership functions with values in [0, 1] are then called [0, 1]-valued membership functions.
Capacity
See the article on Capacity of a set for a closely related definition in mathematics.
One application of membership functions is as capacities in decision theory.
In decision theory, a capacity is defined as a function, 
 
 
 
  from S, the set of subsets of some set, into 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  is set-wise monotone and is normalized (i.e. 
 
 
 
  This is a generalization of the notion of a probability measure, where the probability axiom of countable additivity is weakened. A capacity is used as a subjective measure of the likelihood of an event, and the "expected value" of an outcome given a certain capacity can be found by taking the Choquet integral over the capacity.
See also

Defuzzification
Fuzzy measure theory
Fuzzy set operations
Rough set

References
Bibliography

Zadeh L.A., 1965, "Fuzzy sets". Information and Control 8: 338–353. 1


Goguen J.A, 1967, "L-fuzzy sets". Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications 18: 145–174

External links

Fuzzy Image Processing

"
Category:Fuzzy logic



First in Goguen (1967).




