   Teth      Teth   Teth , also written as or Tet , is the ninth letter of the Semitic abjads , including Phoenician Ṭēt , Hebrew Ṭēt , Aramaic Ṭēth , Syriac Ṭēṯ , and Arabic . It is 16th in modern Arabic order. The Persian Ța is pronounced as a hard "t" sound and is the 19th letter in the modern Persian alphabet . The Phoenician letter also gave rise to the Greek  theta (Θ), originally an aspirated  voiceless alveolar stop but now used for the voiceless dental fricative .  The sound value of Teth is , one of the Semitic emphatic consonants .  Origins  The Phoenician letter name  means "wheel", but the letter possibly (according to Brian Colless ) continues a Middle Bronze Age glyph named  "good", Tav in Aramaic and Tov טוב in Hebrew, ṭayyib طَيّب in modern Arabic, based on the nfr "good" hieroglyph :  F35  Jewish scripture books about the "holy letters" from the 10th century and on discuss the connection or origin of the letter Teth with the word Tov, 1 and the Bible uses the word 'Tov' in alphabetic chapters to depict the letter. 2  Hebrew Tet      Orthographic variants     | Serif     ט     The Hebrew spelling of name of the letter:  Hebrew pronunciation  In Modern Hebrew , Tet represents a voiceless alveolar plosive , although this can be pharyngealized to produce  in traditional Temani and Sephardi pronunciation.  Significance  In gematria , Tet represents the number nine. When followed by an apostrophe, it means 9,000. The most common example of this usage is in the numbers of the Hebrew years (e.g., ט'תשנד in numbers would be the date 9754).  As well, in gematria, the number 15 is written with Tet and Vav , (9+6) to avoid the normal construction Yud and Hei (10+5) which spells a name of God . Similarly, 16 is written with Tet and Zayin (9+7) instead of Yud and Vav (10+6) to avoid spelling part of the Tetragrammaton .  Tet is also one of the seven letters which receive special crowns (called tagin ) when written in a Sefer Torah . See Shin , Ayin , Gimmel , Nun , Zayin , and Tzadi .  Arabic Ṭāʾ  The letter is named ; Modern Standard Arabic pronunciation: .  Similar symbols  A symbol similar to the Phoenician teth is used for the tensor product , as   ⊗   tensor-product   \otimes   , but this is presumably an independent development, by modification of the multiplication sign ×. The Hebrew ט is also visually similar to the letter Ʋ .  Character encodings  References  "  Category:Phoenician alphabet  Category:Arabic letters  Category:Hebrew alphabet     This was especially emphasized ever since the late 1600s after the Baal Shem Tov became influential, since the letter Teth was in his Acronym standing for Tov, and goodness was part of his philosophy. ↩  i.e. Psalms 119: 65-72. and many more. ↩     