


Bornological space




Bornological space

In mathematics, particularly in functional analysis, a bornological space is a type of space which, in some sense, possesses the minimum amount of structure needed to address questions of boundedness of sets and functions, in the same way that a topological space possesses the minimum amount of structure needed to address questions of continuity. Bornological spaces were first studied by Mackey and their name was given by Bourbaki.
Bornological sets
Let X be any set. A bornology on X is a collection B of subsets of X such that

B covers X, i.e. 
 
 

B is stable under inclusions, i.e. if A ∈ B and A′ ⊆ A, then A′ ∈ B;
B is stable under finite unions, i.e. if B1, ..., Bn ∈ B, then 
 
 


Elements of the collection B are usually called bounded sets. However, if it is necessary to differentiate this formal usage of the term "bounded" with traditional uses, elements of the collection B may also be called bornivorous sets. The pair (X, B) is called a bornological set.
A base of the bornology B is a subset 
 
 
 
  of B such that each element of B is a subset of an element of 
 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

For any set X, the power set of X is a bornology.
For any set X, the set of finite subsets of X is a bornology. Similarly the set of all at most countably inifinite subsets is a bornology. More generally: The set 
 
 
 
  of all subsets of 
 
 
 
  having cardinality at most 
 
 
 
  is a bornology.
For any topological space X that is T1, the set of subsets of X with compact closure is a bornology.

Bounded maps
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are two bornologies over the spaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, and if 
 
 
 
  is a function, then we say that 
 
 
 
  is a bounded map if it maps 
 
 
 
 
 -bounded sets in 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 -bounded sets in 
 
 
 
 . If in addition 
 
 
 
  is a bijection and 
 
 
 
 
  is also bounded then we say that 
 
 
 
  is a bornological isomorphism.
Examples:

If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are any two topological vector spaces (they need not even be Hausdorff) and if 
 
 
 
  is a continuous linear operator between them, then 
 
 
 
 
  is a bounded linear operator (when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have their von-Neumann bornologies). The converse is in general false.

Theorems:

Suppose that X and Y are locally convex spaces and that 
 
 
 
  is a linear map. Then the following are equivalent:
 
u is a bounded map,
u takes bounded disks to bounded disks,
For every bornivorous (i.e. bounded in the bornological sense) disk D in Y, 
 
 
 
  is also bornivorous.


Vector bornologies
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a vector space over a field K and then a vector bornology on 
 
 
 is a bornology B on 
 
 
 
  that is stable under vector addition, scalar multiplication, and the formation of balanced hulls (i.e. if the sum of two bounded sets is bounded, etc.). If in addition B is stable under the formation of convex hulls (i.e. the convex hull of a bounded set is bounded) then B is called a convex vector bornology. And if the only bounded subspace of 
 
 
 
  is the trivial subspace (i.e. the space consisting only of 
 
 
 
 ) then it is called separated. A subset A of B is called bornivorous if it absorbs every bounded set. In a vector bornology, A is bornivorous if it absorbs every bounded balanced set and in a convex vector bornology A is bornivorous if it absorbs every bounded disk.
Bornology of a topological vector space
Every topological vector space X gives a bornology on X by defining a subset 
 
 
 
 
  to be bounded (or von-Neumann bounded), if and only if for all open sets 
 
 
 
 containing zero there exists a 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . If X is a locally convex topological vector space then 
 
 
 
  is bounded if and only if all continuous semi-norms on X are bounded on B.
The set of all bounded subsets of X is called the bornology or the Von-Neumann bornology of X.
Induced topology
Suppose that we start with a vector space 
 
 
 
 
  and convex vector bornology B on 
 
 
 
 . If we let T denote the collection of all sets that are convex, balanced, and bornivorous then T forms neighborhood basis at 0 for a locally convex topology on 
 
 
 
  that is compatible with the vector space structure of 
 
 
 
 .
Bornological spaces
In functional analysis, a bornological space is a locally convex topological vector space whose topology can be recovered from its bornology in a natural way. Explicitly, a Hausdorff locally convex space

 
  with continuous dual

 
 
  is called a bornological space if any one of the following equivalent conditions holds:

The locally convex topology induced by the von-Neumann bornology on 
 
 
 
  is the same as 
 
 
 
 's initial topology,
Every bounded semi-norm on 
 
 
 
  is continuous,
For all locally convex spaces Y, every bounded linear operator from 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 
  is continuous.
X is the inductive limit of normed spaces.
X is the inductive limit of the normed spaces X_D as D varies over the closed and bounded disks of X (or as D varies over the bounded disks of X).
Every convex, balanced, and bornivorous set in 
 
 
 
  is a neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 .
X carries the Mackey topology 
 
 
 
  and all bounded linear functionals on X are continuous.


 
  has both of the following properties:
 


 
 
  is convex-sequential or C-sequential, which means that every convex sequentially open subset of 
 
 
 
  is open,


 
  is sequentially bornological or S-bornological, which means that every convex and bornivorous subset of 
 
 
 
  is sequentially open.


where a subset A of 
 
 
 
  is called sequentially open if every sequence converging to 0 eventually belongs to A.
Examples
The following topological vector spaces are all bornological:

Any metrisable locally convex space is bornological. In particular, any Fréchet space.
Any LF-space (i.e. any locally convex space that is the strict inductive limit of Fréchet spaces).
Separated quotients of bornological spaces are bornological.
The locally convex direct sum and inductive limit of bornological spaces is bornological.
Fréchet Montel have a bornological strong dual.

Properties

Given a bornological space X with continuous dual X′, then the topology of X coincides with the Mackey topology τ(X,X′).
 
In particular, bornological spaces are Mackey spaces.

Every quasi-complete (i.e. all closed and bounded subsets are complete) bornological space is barrelled. There exist, however, bornological spaces that are not barrelled.
Every bornological space is the inductive limit of normed spaces (and Banach spaces if the space is also quasi-complete).
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a metrizable locally convex space with continuous dual 
 
 
 
 . Then the following are equivalent:
 


 
  is bornological,


 
  is quasi-barrelled,


 
  is barrelled,


 
 
  is a distinguished space.

If 
 
 
 
  is bornological, 
 
 
 
  is a locally convex TVS, and 
 
 
 
  is a linear map, then the following are equivalent:
 


 
  is continuous,
for every set 
 
 
 
 
  that's bounded in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is bounded,
If 
 
 
 
  is a null sequence in 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 
  is a null sequence in 
 
 
 
 .

The strong dual of a bornological space is complete, but it need not be bornological.
Closed subspaces of bornological space need not be bornological.

Banach disks
Suppose that X is a topological vector space. Then we say that a subset D of X is a disk if it is convex and balanced. The disk D is absorbing in the space span(D) and so its Minkowski functional forms a seminorm on this space, which is denoted by 
 
 
 
  or by 
 
 
 
 . When we give span(D) the topology induced by this seminorm, we denote the resulting topological vector space by 
 
 
 
 . A basis of neighborhoods of 0 of this space consists of all sets of the form r D where r ranges over all positive real numbers.
This space is not necessarily Hausdorff as is the case, for instance, if we let 
 
 
 
 
  and D be the x-axis. However, if D is a bounded disk and if X is Hausdorff, then 
 
 
 
  is a norm and 
 
 
 
  is a normed space. If D is a bounded sequentially complete disk and X is Hausdorff, then the space 
 
 
 
  is a Banach space. A bounded disk in X for which 
 
 
 
  is a Banach space is called a Banach disk, infracomplete, or a bounded completant.
Suppose that X is a locally convex Hausdorff space and that D is a bounded disk in X. Then

If D is complete in X and T is a Barrell in X, then there is a number r > 0 such that 
 
 
 
 
 .

Examples

Any closed and bounded disk in a Banach space is a Banach disk.
If U is a convex balanced closed neighborhood of 0 in X then the collection of all neighborhoods r U, where r > 0 ranges over the positive real numbers, induces a topological vector space topology on X. When X has this topology, it is denoted by X_U. Since this topology is not necessarily Hausdorff nor complete, the completion of the Hausdorff space 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is a complete Hausdorff space and 
 
 
 
  is a norm on this space making 
 
 
 
 
  into a Banach space. The polar of U, 
 
 
 
 , is a weakly compact bounded equicontinuous disk in 
 
 
 
  and so is infracomplete.

Ultrabornological spaces
A disk in a topological vector space X is called infrabornivorous if it absorbs all Banach disks. If X is locally convex and Hausdorff, then a disk is infrabornivorous if and only if it absorbs all compact disks. A locally convex space is called ultrabornological if any of the following conditions hold:

every infrabornivorous disk is a neighborhood of 0,
X be the inductive limit of the spaces 
 
 
 
  as D varies over all compact disks in X,
A seminorm on X that is bounded on each Banach disk is necessarily continuous,
For every locally convex space Y and every linear map 
 
 
 
 , if u is bounded on each Banach disk then u is continuous.
For every Banach space Y and every linear map 
 
 
 
 
 , if u is bounded on each Banach disk then u is continuous.

Properties

The finite product of ultrabornological spaces is ultrabornological.
Inductive limits of ultrabornological spaces are ultrabornological.

See also

Space of linear maps

References





"
Category:Topological vector spaces


