


Suspension (topology)




Suspension (topology)

In topology, the suspension SX of a topological space X is the quotient space:



of the product of X with the unit interval I = [0, 1]. Thus, X is stretched into a cylinder and then both ends are collapsed to points. One views X as "suspended" between the end points. One can also view the suspension as two cones on X glued together at their base (or as a quotient of a single cone).
Given a continuous map 
 
 
 
  there is a map 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
  This makes 
 
 
 
  into a functor from the category of topological spaces into itself. In rough terms S increases the dimension of a space by one: it takes an n-sphere to an (n + 1)-sphere for n ≥ 0.
The space 
 
 
 
  is homeomorphic to the join

 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a discrete space with two points.
The space 
 
 
 
  is sometimes called the unreduced, unbased, or free suspension of 
 
 
 
 , to distinguish it from the reduced suspension described below.
The suspension can be used to construct a homomorphism of homotopy groups, to which the Freudenthal suspension theorem applies. In homotopy theory, the phenomena which are preserved under suspension, in a suitable sense, make up stable homotopy theory.
Reduced suspension
If X is a pointed space (with basepoint x0), there is a variation of the suspension which is sometimes more useful. The reduced suspension or based suspension ΣX of X is the quotient space:


 
 .
This is the equivalent to taking SX and collapsing the line (x0 × I) joining the two ends to a single point. The basepoint of ΣX is the equivalence class of (x0, 0).
One can show that the reduced suspension of X is homeomorphic to the smash product of X with the unit circle S1.



For well-behaved spaces, such as CW complexes, the reduced suspension of X is homotopy equivalent to the ordinary suspension.
Σ gives rise to a functor from the category of pointed spaces to itself. An important property of this functor is that it is a left adjoint to the functor 
 
 
 
  taking a (based) space 
 
 
 
  to its loop space

 
 . In other words,



naturally, where 
 
 
 
  stands for continuous maps which preserve basepoints. This is not the case for unreduced suspension and free loop space.
Desuspension
Desuspension is an operation inverse to suspension.1
See also

Cone (topology)
Join (topology)

References

Allen Hatcher, Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Presses, Cambridge, 2002. xii+544 pp. ISBN 0-521-79160-X and ISBN 0-521-79540-0


"
Category:Topology Category:Homotopy theory








