


Gires–Tournois etalon




Gires–Tournois etalon

In optics, a Gires–Tournois etalon is a transparent plate with two reflecting surfaces, one of which has very high reflectivity. Due to multiple-beam interference, light incident on a Gires–Tournois etalon is (almost) completely reflected, but has an effective phase shift that depends strongly on the wavelength of the light.
The complex amplitude reflectivity of a Gires–Tournois etalon is given by



where r1 is the complex amplitude reflectivity of the first surface,



n is the index of refraction of the plate
 
t is the thickness of the plate
 
θt is the angle of refraction the light makes within the plate, and
 
λ is the wavelength of the light in vacuum.
 

Nonlinear effective phase shift
(Figure)
Nonlinear phase shift Φ as a function of δ for different R values: (a) R = 0, (b) R = 0.1, (c) R = 0.5, and (d) R = 0.9.

Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is real. Then 
 
 
 
 , independent of 
 
 
 
 . This indicates that all the incident energy is reflected and intensity is uniform. However, the multiple reflection causes a nonlinear phase shift

 
 .
To show this effect, we assume 
 
 
 
 
  is real and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the intensity reflectivity of the first surface. Define the effective phase shift 
 
 
 
  through



One obtains



For R = 0, no reflection from the first surface and the resultant nonlinear phase shift is equal to the round-trip phase change (
 
 
 
 ) – linear response. However, as can be seen, when R is increased, the nonlinear phase shift 
 
 
 
  gives the nonlinear response to 
 
 
 
  and shows step-like behavior. Gires–Tournois etalon has applications for laser pulse compression and nonlinear Michelson interferometer.
Gires–Tournois etalons are closely related to Fabry–Pérot etalons.
References


(An interferometer useful for pulse compression of a frequency modulated light pulse.)
Gires–Tournois Interferometer in RP Photonics Encyclopedia of Laser Physics and Technology

"
Category:Optics Category:Interferometers


