


Rice distribution




Rice distribution

 
In probability theory, the Rice distribution or Rician distribution is the probability distribution of the magnitude of a circular bivariate normal random variable with potentially non-zero mean. It was named after Stephen O. Rice.
Characterization
The probability density function is


 
  where I0(z) is the modified Bessel function of the first kind with order zero.
The characteristic function is:12



where 
 
 
 
  is one of Horn's confluent hypergeometric functions with two variables and convergent for all finite values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It is given by:34



where



is the rising factorial.
Properties
Moments
The first few raw moments are:


















and, in general, the raw moments are given by



Here Lq(x) denotes a Laguerre polynomial:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the confluent hypergeometric function of the first kind. When k is even, the raw moments become simple polynomials in σ and ν, as in the examples above.
For the case q = 1/2:



The second central moment, the variance, is



Note that 
 
 
 
  indicates the square of the Laguerre polynomial 
 
 
 
 , not the generalized Laguerre polynomial 
 
 

Differential equation
The pdf of the Rice distribution is a solution of the following differential equation:



Related distributions



 
  has a Rice distribution if 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are statistically independent normal random variables and 
 
 
 
  is any real number.


Another case where 
 
 
 
  comes from the following steps:


1. Generate 
 
 
 
  having a Poisson distribution with parameter (also mean, for a Poisson) 
 
 



2. Generate 
 
 
 
  having a chi-squared distribution with  degrees of freedom.
 


3. Set 
 
 



If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  has a noncentral chi-squared distribution with two degrees of freedom and noncentrality parameter 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  has a noncentral chi distribution with two degrees of freedom and noncentrality parameter 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 , i.e., for the special case of the Rice distribution given by ν = 0, the distribution becomes the Rayleigh distribution, for which the variance is 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  has an exponential distribution.5

Limiting cases
For large values of the argument, the Laguerre polynomial becomes6



It is seen that as ν becomes large or σ becomes small the mean becomes ν and the variance becomes σ2.
Parameter estimation (the Koay inversion technique)
There are three different methods for estimating the parameters of the Rice distribution, (1) method of moments,78910 (2) method of maximum likelihood,111213 and (3) method of least squares. In the first two methods the interest is in estimating the parameters of the distribution, ν and σ, from a sample of data. This can be done using the method of moments, e.g., the sample mean and the sample standard deviation. The sample mean is an estimate of μ1' and the sample standard deviation is an estimate of μ21/2.
The following is an efficient method, known as the "Koay inversion technique".14 for solving the estimating equations, based on the sample mean and the sample standard deviation, simultaneously . This inversion technique is also known as the fixed point formula of SNR. Earlier works1516 on the method of moments usually use a root-finding method to solve the problem, which is not efficient.
First, the ratio of the sample mean to the sample standard deviation is defined as r, i.e., 
 
 
 
 . The fixed point formula of SNR is expressed as



where 
 
 
 
  is the ratio of the parameters, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is given by:



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are modified Bessel functions of the first kind.
Note that 
 
 
 
  is a scaling factor of 
 
 
 
  and is related to 
 
 
 
  by:



To find the fixed point, 
 
 
 
 , of 
 
 
 
 , an initial solution is selected, 
 
 
 
 , that is greater than the lower bound, which is 
 
 
 
  and occurs when 
 
 
17 (Notice that this is the 
 
 
 
  of a Rayleigh distribution). This provides a starting point for the iteration, which uses functional composition, and this continues until 
 
 
 
  is less than some small positive value. Here, 
 
 
 
  denotes the composition of the same function, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  times. In practice, we associate the final 
 
 
 
  for some integer 
 
 
 
  as the fixed point, 
 
 
 
 , i.e., 
 
 
 
 .
Once the fixed point is found, the estimates 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are found through the scaling function, 
 
 
 
 , as follows:



and



To speed up the iteration even more, one can use the Newton's method of root-finding.18 This particular approach is highly efficient.
Applications

The Euclidean norm of a bivariate normally distributed random vector.
Rician fading
Effect of sighting error on target shooting.19

See also

Rayleigh distribution
Stephen O. Rice (1907–1986)

Notes
References

Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I. A. (ed.), Handbook of Mathematical Functions, National Bureau of Standards, 1964; reprinted Dover Publications, 1965. ISBN 0-486-61272-4
Rice, S. O., Mathematical Analysis of Random Noise. Bell System Technical Journal 24 (1945) 46–156.

Liu, X. and Hanzo, L., A Unified Exact BER Performance Analysis of Asynchronous DS-CDMA Systems Using BPSK Modulation over Fading Channels, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Volume 6, Issue 10, October 2007, Pages 3504–3509.
Annamalai, A., Tellambura, C. and Bhargava, V. K., Equal-Gain Diversity Receiver Performance in Wireless Channels, IEEE Transactions on Communications,Volume 48, October 2000, Pages 1732–1745.
Erdelyi, A., Magnus, W., Oberhettinger, F. and Tricomi, F. G., Higher Transcendental Functions, Volume 1. McGraw-Hill Book Company Inc., 1953.
Srivastava, H. M. and Karlsson, P. W., Multiple Gaussian Hypergeometric Series. Ellis Horwood Ltd., 1985.
Sijbers J., den Dekker A. J., Scheunders P. and Van Dyck D., "Maximum Likelihood estimation of Rician distribution parameters", IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, Vol. 17, Nr. 3, p. 357–361, (1998)

 Koay, C.G. and Basser, P. J., Analytically exact correction scheme for signal extraction from noisy magnitude MR signals, Journal of Magnetic Resonance, Volume 179, Issue = 2, p. 317–322, (2006)
Abdi, A., Tepedelenlioglu, C., Kaveh, M., and Giannakis, G. On the estimation of the K parameter for the Rice fading distribution, IEEE Communications Letters, Volume 5, Number 3, March 2001, Pages 92–94.



External links

[http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/loadFile.do?objectId=14237&objectType;;=FILE MATLAB code for Rice/Rician distribution] (PDF, mean and variance, and generating random samples)

he:דעיכות מסוג רייס"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions



Liu 2007 (in one of Horn's confluent hypergeometric functions with two variables).
Annamalai 2000 (in a sum of infinite series).
Erdelyi 1953.
Srivastava 1985.
Richards, M.A., Rice Distribution for RCS, Georgia Institute of Technology (Sep 2006)
Abramowitz and Stegun (1968) §13.5.1
Talukdar et al. 1991
Bonny et al. 1996
Sijbers et al. 1998
den Dekker and Sijbers 2014



Koay et al. 2006 (known as the SNR fixed point formula).

Abdi 2001







