


Differential algebra




Differential algebra

In mathematics, differential rings, differential fields, and differential algebras are rings, fields, and algebras equipped with finitely many derivations, which are unary functions that are linear and satisfy the Leibniz product rule. A natural example of a differential field is the field of rational functions C(t) in one variable, over the complex numbers, where the derivation is the differentiation with respect to t.
Differential algebra refers also to the area of mathematics consisting in the study of these algebraic objects and their use for an algebraic study of the differential equations. Differential algebra was introduced by Joseph Ritt.1
Differential ring
A differential ring is a ring R equipped with one or more derivations, that is additive homomorphisms



such that each derivation ∂ satisfies the Leibniz product rule



for every 
 
 
 
 . Note that the ring could be noncommutative, so the somewhat standard d(xy) = xdy + ydx form of the product rule in commutative settings may be false. If 
 
 
 
  is multiplication on the ring, the product rule is the identity



where 
 
 
 
 
  means the function which maps a pair 
 
 
 
  to the pair 
 
 
 
 .
Differential field
A differential field is a commutative field K equipped with derivations.
The well-known formula for differentiating fractions



follows from the product rule. Indeed, we must have



By the product rule, we then have



Solving with respect to 
 
 
 
 , we obtain the sought identity.
If K is a differential field then the field of constants of K is 
 
 

A differential algebra over a field K is a K-algebra A wherein the derivation(s) commutes with the field. That is, for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  one has



In index-free notation, if 
 
 
 
  is the ring morphism defining scalar multiplication on the algebra, one has



As above, the derivation must obey the Leibniz rule over the algebra multiplication, and must be linear over addition. Thus, for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  one has



and



Derivation on a Lie algebra
A derivation on a Lie algebra

 
  is a linear map 
 
 
 
  satisfying the Leibniz rule:



For any 
 
 
 
 , ad(a) is a derivation on 
 
 
 
 , which follows from the Jacobi identity. Any such derivation is called an inner derivation.
Examples
If 
 
 
 
  is unital, then ∂(1) = 0 since ∂(1) = ∂(1 × 1) = ∂(1) + ∂(1). For example, in a differential field of characteristic zero 
 
 
 
 , the rationals are always a subfield of the field of constants of 
 
 
 
 .
Any ring is a differential ring with respect to the trivial derivation which maps any ring element to zero.
The field Q(t) has a unique structure as a differential field, determined by setting ∂(t) = 1: the field axioms along with the axioms for derivations ensure that the derivation is differentiation with respect to t. For example, by commutativity of multiplication and the Leibniz law one has that ∂(u2) = u ∂(u) + ∂(u)u= 2u∂(u).
The differential field Q(t) fails to have a solution to the differential equation



but expands to a larger differential field including the function et which does have a solution to this equation. A differential field with solutions to all systems of differential equations is called a differentially closed field. Such fields exist, although they do not appear as natural algebraic or geometric objects. All differential fields (of bounded cardinality) embed into a large differentially closed field. Differential fields are the objects of study in differential Galois theory.
Naturally occurring examples of derivations are partial derivatives, Lie derivatives, the Pincherle derivative, and the commutator with respect to an element of the algebra.
Ring of pseudo-differential operators
Differential rings and differential algebras are often studied by means of the ring of pseudo-differential operators on them.
This is the ring



Multiplication on this ring is defined as



Here 
 
 
 
  is the binomial coefficient. Note the identities



which makes use of the identity



and



See also

Differential Galois theory
Kähler differential
Differentially closed field
A D-module is an algebraic structure with several differential operators acting on it.
A differential graded algebra is a differential algebra with an additional grading.
Arithmetic derivative
Differential calculus over commutative algebras
Difference algebra
Differential algebraic geometry
Picard–Vessiot theory

References

Buium, Differential Algebra and Diophantine Geometry, Hermann (1994).
I. Kaplansky, Differential Algebra, Hermann (1957).
E. Kolchin, Differential Algebra and Algebraic Groups, 1973
D. Marker, Model theory of differential fields, Model theory of fields, Lecture notes in Logic 5, D. Marker, M. Messmer and A. Pillay, Springer Verlag (1996).
A. Magid, Lectures on Differential Galois Theory, American Math. Soc., 1994

External links

David Marker's home page has several online surveys discussing differential fields.

"
 



↩




