


Conservative extension




Conservative extension

In mathematical logic, a logical theory

 
  is a (proof theoretic) conservative extension of a theory 
 
 
 
  if the language of 
 
 
 
 
  extends the language of 
 
 
 
 ; every theorem of 
 
 
 
  is a theorem of 
 
 
 
 ; and any theorem of 
 
 
 
  that is in the language of 
 
 
 
 
  is already a theorem of 
 
 
 
 .
More generally, if Γ is a set of formulas in the common language of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is Γ-conservative over 
 
 
 
 
  if every formula from Γ provable in 
 
 
 
  is also provable in 
 
 
 
 .
To put it informally, the new theory may possibly be more convenient for proving theorems, but it proves no new theorems about the language of the old theory.
Note that a conservative extension of a consistent theory is consistent. [If it were not, then by the principle of explosion ("everything follows from a contradiction"), every theorem in the original theory as well as its negation would belong to the new theory, which then would not be a conservative extension.] Hence, conservative extensions do not bear the risk of introducing new inconsistencies. This can also be seen as a methodology for writing and structuring large theories: start with a theory, 
 
 
 
 , that is known (or assumed) to be consistent, and successively build conservative extensions 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 , ... of it.
The theorem provers Isabelle and ACL2 adopt this methodology by providing a language for conservative extensions by definition.
Recently, conservative extensions have been used for defining a notion of module for ontologies: if an ontology is formalized as a logical theory, a subtheory is a module if the whole ontology is a conservative extension of the subtheory.
An extension which is not conservative may be called a proper extension.
Examples

ACA0 (a subsystem of second-order arithmetic) is a conservative extension of first-order Peano arithmetic.
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory is a conservative extension of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice (ZFC).
Internal set theory is a conservative extension of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice (ZFC).
Extensions by definitions are conservative.
Extensions by unconstrained predicate or function symbols are conservative.
IΣ1 (a subsystem of Peano arithmetic with induction only for Σ01-formulas) is a Π02-conservative extension of the primitive recursive arithmetic (PRA).1
ZFC is a Π13-conservative extension of ZF by Shoenfield's absoluteness theorem.
ZFC with the continuum hypothesis is a Π21-conservative extension of ZFC.

Model-theoretic conservative extension
With model-theoretic means, a stronger notion is obtained: an extension 
 
 
 
  of a theory 
 
 
 
  is model-theoretically conservative if every model of 
 
 
 
  can be expanded to a model of 
 
 
 
 . It is straightforward to see that each model-theoretic conservative extension also is a (proof-theoretic) conservative extension in the above sense. The model theoretic notion has the advantage over the proof theoretic one that it does not depend so much on the language at hand; on the other hand, it is usually harder to establish model theoretic conservativity.
References
External links

The importance of conservative extensions for the foundations of mathematics

"
Category:Proof theory Category:Model theory



Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, Fernando Ferreira, A simple proof of Parsons’ theorem↩




