


Club set




Club set

In mathematics, particularly in mathematical logic and set theory, a club set is a subset of a limit ordinal which is closed under the order topology, and is unbounded (see below) relative to the limit ordinal. The name club is a contraction of "closed and unbounded".
Formal definition
Formally, if 
 
 
 
  is a limit ordinal, then a set 
 
 
 
  is closed in 
 
 
if and only if for every 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . Thus, if the limit of some sequence from 
 
 
 
  is less than 
 
 
 
 , then the limit is also in 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a limit ordinal and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is unbounded in 
 
 
 
  if for any 
 
 
 
 , there is some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
If a set is both closed and unbounded, then it is a club set. Closed proper classes are also of interest (every proper class of ordinals is unbounded in the class of all ordinals).
For example, the set of all countable limit ordinals is a club set with respect to the first uncountable ordinal; but it is not a club set with respect to any higher limit ordinal, since it is neither closed nor unbounded. The set of all limit ordinals 
 
 
 
  is closed unbounded in 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  regular). In fact a club set is nothing else but the range of a normal function (i.e. increasing and continuous).
More generally, if 
 
 
 
  is a nonempty set and 
 
 
 
  is a cardinal, then 
 
 
 
  is club if every union of a subset of 
 
 
 
  is in 
 
 
 
  and every subset of 
 
 
 
  of cardinality less than 
 
 
 
  is contained in some element of 
 
 
 
  (see stationary set).
The closed unbounded filter
Let 
 
 
 
  be a limit ordinal of uncountable cofinality

 
  For some 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of closed unbounded subsets of 
 
 
 
  Then 
 
 
 
  is also closed unbounded. To see this, one can note that an intersection of closed sets is always closed, so we just need to show that this intersection is unbounded. So fix any 
 
 
 
  and for each n<ω choose from each 
 
 
 
  an element 
 
 
 
  which is possible because each is unbounded. Since this is a collection of fewer than 
 
 
 
  ordinals, all less than 
 
 
 
  their least upper bound must also be less than 
 
 
 
  so we can call it 
 
 
 
  This process generates a countable sequence 
 
 
 
  The limit of this sequence must in fact also be the limit of the sequence 
 
 
 
  and since each 
 
 
 
  is closed and 
 
 
 
  is uncountable, this limit must be in each 
 
 
 
  and therefore this limit is an element of the intersection that is above 
 
 
 
  which shows that the intersection is unbounded. QED.
From this, it can be seen that if 
 
 
 
  is a regular cardinal, then 
 
 
 
  is a non-principal 
 
 
 
 -complete filter on 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  is a regular cardinal then club sets are also closed under diagonal intersection.
In fact, if 
 
 
 
  is regular and 
 
 
 
  is any filter on 
 
 
 
  closed under diagonal intersection, containing all sets of the form 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  must include all club sets.
See also

Club filter
Stationary set
Clubsuit

References

Jech, Thomas, 2003. Set Theory: The Third Millennium Edition, Revised and Expanded. Springer. ISBN 3-540-44085-2.
Levy, A. (1979) Basic Set Theory, Perspectives in Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag. Reprinted 2002, Dover. ISBN 0-486-42079-5


"
Category:Set theory Category:Ordinal numbers


