


Fundamental solution




Fundamental solution

In mathematics, a fundamental solution for a linear partial differential operator

 
  is a formulation in the language of distribution theory of the older idea of a Green's function. In terms of the Dirac delta "function"

 
 , a fundamental solution 
 
 
 
  is the solution of the inhomogeneous equation





Here 
 
 
 
  is a priori only assumed to be a distribution.
This concept has long been utilized for the Laplacian in two and three dimensions. (It was investigated for all dimensions for the Laplacian by Marcel Riesz.) The existence of a fundamental solution for any operator with constant coefficients — the most important case, directly linked to the possibility of using convolution to solve an arbitrary right hand side — was shown by Bernard Malgrange and Leon Ehrenpreis.
Example
Consider the following differential equation 
 
 
 
  with


 
 .
The fundamental solutions can be obtained by solving 
 
 
 
 , explicitly,



Since for the Heaviside function

 
  we have


 
  there is a solution


 
  Here 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary constant introduced by the integration. For convenience, set 
 
 
 
  = − 1/2.
After integrating  and choosing the new integration constant as zero, one has



Motivation
Once the fundamental solution is found, it is easy to find the desired solution of the original equation. In fact, this process is achieved by convolution.
Fundamental solutions also play an important role in the numerical solution of partial differential equations by the boundary element method.
Application to the example
Consider the operator 
 
 
 
  and the differential equation mentioned in the example,



We can find the solution of the original equation by convolving the right-hand side sin(
 
 
 
 ) with the fundamental solution F(x) = |x |/2,



This shows that some care must be taken when working with functions which do not have enough regularity (e.g. compact support, L1 integrability) since, we know that the desired solution is 
 
 
 
 , while the above integral diverges for all 
 
 
 
 . The two expressions for 
 
 
 
  are, however, equal as distributions.
An example that more clearly works


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the characteristic (indicator) function of the unit interval [0,1]. In that case, it can be readily verified that the convolution 
 
 
 
  with F(x)=|x|/2 is a solution, i.e., has second derivative equal to 
 
 
 
 .
Proof that the convolution is a solution
Denote the convolution of functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . Say we are trying to find the solution of 
 
 
 
 . We want to prove that 
 
 
 
  is a solution of the previous equation, i.e. we want to prove that 
 
 
 
 . When applying the differential operator, 
 
 
 
 , to the convolution, it is known that


 
  provided 
 
 
 
  has constant coefficients.
If 
 
 
 
  is the fundamental solution, the right side of the equation reduces to



But since the delta function is an identity element for convolution, this is simply 
 
 
 
 . Summing up,



Therefore, if 
 
 
 
  is the fundamental solution, the convolution 
 
 
 
  is one solution of 
 
 
 
 . This does not mean that it is the only solution. Several solutions for different initial conditions can be found.
Fundamental solutions for some partial differential equations
Laplace equation
For the Laplace equation,


 
  the fundamental solutions in two and three dimensions are



Screened Poisson equation
For the Screened Poisson equation, where the parameter 
 
 
 
  is real and the fundamental solution a modified Bessel function,


 
  the two- and three-dimensional Helmholtz equations have the fundamental solutions



Biharmonic equation
For the Biharmonic equation,


 
  the biharmonic equation has the fundamental solutions



Signal processing
In signal processing, the analog of the fundamental solution of a differential equation is called the impulse response of a filter.
See also

Green's function
Impulse response
Parametrix

References



"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Generalized functions


