


Powerful p-group




Powerful p-group

In mathematics, in the field of group theory, especially in the study of p-groups and pro-p-groups, the concept of powerful p-groups plays an important role. They were introduced in , where a number of applications are given, including results on Schur multipliers. Powerful p-groups are used in the study of automorphisms of p-groups , the solution of the restricted Burnside problem , the classification of finite p-groups via the coclass conjectures , and provided an excellent method of understanding analytic pro-p-groups .
Formal definition
A finite p-group 
 
 
 
  is called powerful if the commutator subgroup

 
  is contained in the subgroup 
 
 
 
  for odd 
 
 
 
 , or if 
 
 
 
  is contained in the subgroup 
 
 
 
  for p=2.
Properties of powerful p-groups
Powerful p-groups have many properties similar to abelian groups, and thus provide a good basis for studying p-groups. Every finite p-group can be expressed as a section of a powerful p-group.
Powerful p-groups are also useful in the study of pro-p groups as it provides a simple means for characterising p-adic analytic groups (groups that are manifolds over the p-adic numbers): A finitely generated pro-p group is p-adic analytic if and only if it contains an open normal subgroup that is powerful: this is a special case of a deep result of Michel Lazard (1965).
Some properties similar to abelian p-groups are: if 
 
 
 
  is a powerful p-group then:

The Frattini subgroup

 
  of 
 
 
 
  has the property 
 
 



 
  for all 
 
 
 
  That is, the group generated by 
 
 
 
 th powers is precisely the set of 
 
 
 
 th powers.
If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

The 
 
 
 
 th entry of the lower central series of 
 
 
 
  has the property 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

Every quotient group of a powerful p-group is powerful.
The Prüfer rank of 
 
 
 
  is equal to the minimal number of generators of 
 
 


Some less abelian-like properties are: if 
 
 
 
  is a powerful p-group then:



 
  is powerful.
Subgroups of 
 
 
 
  are not necessarily powerful.

References

Lazard, Michel (1965), Groupes analytiques p-adiques, Publ.Math.IHES 26 (1965), 389-603.






"
Category:P-groups Category:Properties of groups


