


Hydraulic conductivity




Hydraulic conductivity

Hydraulic conductivity, symbolically represented as 
 
 
 
 , is a property of vascular plants, soils and rocks, that describes the ease with which a fluid (usually water) can move through pore spaces or fractures. It depends on the intrinsic permeability of the material, the degree of saturation, and on the density and viscosity of the fluid. Saturated hydraulic conductivity, Ksat, describes water movement through saturated media.
Methods of determination
 There are two broad categories of determining hydraulic conductivity:

Empirical approach by which the hydraulic conductivity is correlated to soil properties like pore size and particle size (grain size) distributions, and soil texture
Experimental approach by which the hydraulic conductivity is determined from hydraulic experiments using Darcy's law

The experimental approach is broadly classified into:

Laboratory tests using soil samples subjected to hydraulic experiments
Field tests (on site, in situ) that are differentiated into:
 
small scale field tests, using observations of the water level in cavities in the soil
large scale field tests, like pump tests in wells or by observing the functioning of existing horizontal drainage systems.


The small scale field tests are further subdivided into:

infiltration tests in cavities above the water table
slug tests in cavities below the water table

Estimation by empirical approach
Estimation from grain size
Allen Hazen derived an empirical formula for approximating hydraulic conductivity from grain size analyses:


 
  where


 
  Hazen's empirical coefficient, which takes a value between 0.0 and 1.5 (depending on literatures), with an average value of 1.0. A.F. Salarashayeri & M. Siosemarde give C as usually taken between 1.0 and 1.5, with D in mm and K in cm/s.


 
  is the diameter of the 10 percentile grain size of the material
Pedotransfer function
A pedotransfer function (PTF) is a specialized empirical estimation method, used primarily in the soil sciences, however has increasing use in hydrogeology.1 There are many different PTF methods, however, they all attempt to determine soil properties, such as hydraulic conductivity, given several measured soil properties, such as soil particle size, and bulk density.
Determination by experimental approach
There are relatively simple and inexpensive laboratory tests that may be run to determine the hydraulic conductivity of a soil: constant-head method and falling-head method.
Laboratory methods
Constant-head method
The constant-head method is typically used on granular soil. This procedure allows water to move through the soil under a steady state head condition while the quantity (volume) of water flowing through the soil specimen is measured over a period of time. By knowing the quantity 
 
 
 
  of water measured, length 
 
 
 
  of specimen, cross-sectional area 
 
 
 
  of the specimen, time 
 
 
 
  required for the quantity of water 
 
 
 
 
  to be discharged, and head 
 
 
 
 , the hydraulic conductivity can be calculated:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the flow velocity. Using Darcy's Law:


 
  and expressing the hydraulic gradient 
 
 
 
 
  as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the difference of hydraulic head over distance 
 
 
 
 , yields:


 
  Solving for 
 
 
 
 
  gives:



Falling-head method
The falling-head method is totally different from the constant head methods in its initial setup; however, the advantage to the falling-head method is that it can be used for both fine-grained and coarse-grained soils. The soil sample is first saturated under a specific head condition. The water is then allowed to flow through the soil without maintaining a constant pressure head.2



In-situ (field) methods
Augerhole method
There are also in-situ methods for measuring the hydraulic conductivity in the field.
 When the water table is shallow, the augerhole method, a slug test, can be used for determining the hydraulic conductivity below the water table.
 The method was developed by Hooghoudt (1934) 3 in The Netherlands and introduced in the US by Van Bavel en Kirkham (1948).4
 The method uses the following steps:

an augerhole is perforated into the soil to below the water table
water is bailed out from the augerhole
the rate of rise of the water level in the hole is recorded
the K-value is calculated from the data as:5


K = F (Ho-Ht) / t
 

(Figure)
Cumulative frequency distribution (lognormal) of hydraulic conductivity (X-data)

where: K = horizontal saturated hydraulic conductivity (m/day), H = depth of the waterlevel in the hole relative to the water table in the soil (cm), Ht = H at time t, Ho = H at time t = 0, t = time (in seconds) since the first measurement of H as Ho, and F is a factor depending on the geometry of the hole:

F = 4000
 
 
/

 
 (20+D/
 
 
 
 
 )(2−
 
 
 
 /D)
 

where
 
 
 
  = radius of the cylindrical hole (cm), 
 
 
 
  is the average depth of the water level in the hole relative to the water table in the soil (cm), found as 
 
 
 
 =(Ho+Ht)/2, and D is the depth of the bottom of the hole relative to the water table in the soil (cm).
The picture shows a large variation of K-values measured with the augerhole method in an area of 100 ha.6 The ratio between the highest and lowest values is 25. The cumulative frequency distribution is lognormal and was made with the CumFreq program.
Related magnitudes
Transmissivity
The transmissivity is a measure of how much water can be transmitted horizontally, such as to a pumping well.
 :Transmissivity should not be confused with the similar word transmittance used in optics, meaning the fraction of incident light that passes through a sample.'' An aquifer may consist of 
 
 
 
 
  soil layers. The transmissivity for horizontal flow 
 
 
 
  of the 
 
 
 
  soil layer with a saturated thickness 
 
 
 
  and horizontal hydraulic conductivity 
 
 
 
  is:


 
  Transmissivity is directly proportional to horizontal hydraulic conductivity 
 
 
 
  and thickness 
 
 
 
 . Expressing 
 
 
 
  in m/day and 
 
 
 
  in m, the transmissivity 
 
 
 
 
  is found in units m2/day.
 The total transmissivity 
 
 
 
  of the aquifer is:7


 
  where 
 
 
 
  signifies the summation over all layers 
 
 
 
 .
The apparent horizontal hydraulic conductivity 
 
 
 
 
  of the aquifer is:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , the total thickness of the aquifer, is 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 .
The transmissivity of an aquifer can be determined from pumping tests.8
Influence of the water table
 When a soil layer is above the water table, it is not saturated and does not contribute to the transmissivity. When the soil layer is entirely below the water table, its saturated thickness corresponds to the thickness of the soil layer itself. When the water table is inside a soil layer, the saturated thickness corresponds to the distance of the water table to the bottom of the layer. As the water table may behave dynamically, this thickness may change from place to place or from time to time, so that the transmissivity may vary accordingly.
 In a semi-confined aquifer, the water table is found within a soil layer with a negligibly small transmissivity, so that changes of the total transmissivity (Dt) resulting from changes in the level of the water table are negligibly small.
 When pumping water from an unconfined aquifer, where the water table is inside a soil layer with a significant transmissivity, the water table may be drawn down whereby the transmissivity reduces and the flow of water to the well diminishes.
Resistance
The resistance to vertical flow (Ri) of the 
 
 
 
 
  soil layer with a saturated thickness 
 
 
 
  and vertical hydraulic conductivity Kvi is:

Ri = 
 
 
 
  / Kvi


Expressing Kvi in m/day and 
 
 
 
  in m, the resistance (Ri) is expressed in days.
 The total resistance (Rt) of the aquifer is:9

Rt = Σ Ri = Σ

 
  / Kvi


where Σ signifies the summation over all layers
 
 
 
 = 1, 2, 3, . . .
 
 

 The apparent vertical hydraulic conductivity (KvA) of the aquifer is:

KvA = Dt / Rt
 

where Dt is the total thickness of the aquifer: Dt = Σ

 
 , with 
 
 
 
 = 1, 2, 3, . . .
 
 

The resistance plays a role in aquifers where a sequence of layers occurs with varying horizontal permeability so that horizontal flow is found mainly in the layers with high horizontal permeability while the layers with low horizontal permeability transmit the water mainly in a vertical sense.
Anisotropy
When the horizontal and vertical hydraulic conductivity (Khi and Kvi) of the 
 
 
 
 
  soil layer differ considerably, the layer is said to be anisotropic with respect to hydraulic conductivity.
 When the apparent horizontal and vertical hydraulic conductivity (KhA and KvA) differ considerably, the aquifer is said to be anisotropic with respect to hydraulic conductivity.
 An aquifer is called semi-confined when a saturated layer with a relatively small horizontal hydraulic conductivity (the semi-confining layer or aquitard) overlies a layer with a relatively high horizontal hydraulic conductivity so that the flow of groundwater in the first layer is mainly vertical and in the second layer mainly horizontal.
 The resistance of a semi-confining top layer of an aquifer can be determined from pumping tests.10
 When calculating flow to drains 11 or to a well field 12 in an aquifer with the aim to control the water table, the anisotropy is to be taken into account, otherwise the result may be erroneous.
Relative properties
Because of their high porosity and permeability, sand and gravel aquifers have higher hydraulic conductivity than clay or unfractured granite aquifers. Sand or gravel aquifers would thus be easier to extract water from (e.g., using a pumping well) because of their high transmissivity, compared to clay or unfractured bedrock aquifers.
Hydraulic conductivity has units with dimensions of length per time (e.g., m/s, ft/day and (gal/day)/ft² ); transmissivity then has units with dimensions of length squared per time. The following table gives some typical ranges (illustrating the many orders of magnitude which are likely) for K values.
Hydraulic conductivity (K) is one of the most complex and important of the properties of aquifers in hydrogeology as the values found in nature:

range over many orders of magnitude (the distribution is often considered to be lognormal),
vary a large amount through space (sometimes considered to be randomly spatially distributed, or stochastic in nature),
are directional (in general K is a symmetric second-rank tensor; e.g., vertical K values can be several orders of magnitude smaller than horizontal K values),
are scale dependent (testing a m³ of aquifer will generally produce different results than a similar test on only a cm³ sample of the same aquifer),
must be determined indirectly through field pumping tests, laboratory column flow tests or inverse computer simulation, (sometimes also from grain size analyses), and
are very dependent (in a non-linear way) on the water content, which makes solving the unsaturated flow equation difficult. In fact, the variably saturated K for a single material varies over a wider range than the saturated K values for all types of materials (see chart below for an illustrative range of the latter).

Ranges of values for natural materials
Table of saturated hydraulic conductivity (K) values found in nature
Values are for typical fresh groundwater conditions — using standard values of viscosity and specific gravity for water at 20°C and 1 atm. See the similar table derived from the same source for intrinsic permeability values.13




K (cm/s)

10²

101

100=1

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

10−8

10−9

10−10



K (ft/day)

105

10,000

1,000

100

10

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

0.0001

10−5

10−6

10−7



Relative Permeability

Pervious

Semi-Pervious

Impervious



Aquifer

Good

Poor

None



Unconsolidated Sand & Gravel

Well Sorted Gravel

Well Sorted Sand or Sand & Gravel

Very Fine Sand, Silt, Loess, Loam




Unconsolidated Clay & Organic


Peat

Layered Clay

Fat / Unweathered Clay



Consolidated Rocks

Highly Fractured Rocks

Oil Reservoir Rocks

Fresh Sandstone

Fresh Limestone, Dolomite

Fresh Granite



Source: modified from Bear, 1972
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity by Soil Texture
See also

Aquifer test
Pedotransfer function–for estimating hydraulic conductivities given soil properties

References


External links

[http://www.fxsolver.com/solve/share/jZLNM1J9bHMGTCqIglfgmQ==/ Hydraulic conductivity calculator]

"
Category:Hydrology Category:Hydraulic engineering Category:Soil mechanics Category:Soil physics




Liu, Cheng "Soils and Foundations." Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2001 ISBN 0-13-025517-3
S.B.Hooghoudt, 1934, in Dutch. Bijdrage tot de kennis van enige natuurkundige grootheden van de grond. Verslagen Landbouwkundig Onderzoek No. 40 B, p. 215-345.
C.H.M. van Bavel and D. Kirkham, 1948. Field measurement of soil permeability using auger holes. Soil. Sci. Soc. Am. Proc 13:90-96.
Determination of the Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity. Chapter 12 in: H.P.Ritzema (ed., 1994) Drainage Principles and Applications, ILRI Publication 16, p.435-476. International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement, Wageningen (ILRI), The Netherlands. ISBN 90-70754-33-9. Free download from: 1 , under nr. 6, or directly as PDF : 2
Drainage research in farmers' fields: analysis of data. Contribution to the project “Liquid Gold” of the International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement (ILRI), Wageningen, The Netherlands. Free download from : 3 , under nr. 2, or directly as PDF : 4

J.Boonstra and R.A.L.Kselik, SATEM 2002: Software for aquifer test evaluation, 2001. Publ. 57, International Institute for Land reclamation and Improvement (ILRI), Wageningen, The Netherlands. ISBN 90-70754-54-1 On line : 5


The energy balance of groundwater flow applied to subsurface drainage in anisotropic soils by pipes or ditches with entrance resistance. International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement, Wageningen, The Netherlands. On line : 6 . Paper based on: R.J. Oosterbaan, J. Boonstra and K.V.G.K. Rao, 1996, “The energy balance of groundwater flow”. Published in V.P.Singh and B.Kumar (eds.), Subsurface-Water Hydrology, p. 153-160, Vol.2 of Proceedings of the International Conference on Hydrology and Water Resources, New Delhi, India, 1993. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. ISBN 978-0-7923-3651-8 . On line : 7. The corresponding free EnDrain program can be downloaded from: 8
Subsurface drainage by (tube)wells, 9 pp. Explanation of equations used in the WellDrain model. International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement (ILRI), Wageningen, The Netherlands. On line: 9 . The corresponding free WellDrain program can be downloaded from : 10





