


Tautological one-form




Tautological one-form

In mathematics, the tautological one-form is a special 1-form defined on the cotangent bundle T*Q of a manifold Q. The exterior derivative of this form defines a symplectic form giving T*Q the structure of a symplectic manifold. The tautological one-form plays an important role in relating the formalism of Hamiltonian mechanics and Lagrangian mechanics. The tautological one-form is sometimes also called the Liouville one-form, the Poincaré one-form, the canonical one-form, or the symplectic potential. A similar object is the canonical vector field on the tangent bundle. In algebraic geometry and complex geometry the term "canonical" is discouraged, due to confusion with the canonical class, and the term "tautological" is preferred, as in tautological bundle.
In canonical coordinates, the tautological one-form is given by



Equivalently, any coordinates on phase space which preserve this structure for the canonical one-form, up to a total differential (exact form), may be called canonical coordinates; transformations between different canonical coordinate systems are known as canonical transformations.
The canonical symplectic form, also known as the Poincaré two-form, is given by



The extension of this concept to general fibre bundles is known as the solder form.
Coordinate-free definition
The tautological 1-form can also be defined rather abstractly as a form on phase space. Let 
 
 
 
  be a manifold and 
 
 
 
  be the cotangent bundle or phase space. Let



be the canonical fiber bundle projection, and let



be the induced tangent map. Let m be a point on M. Since M is the cotangent bundle, we can understand m to be a map of the tangent space at 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .
That is, we have that m is in the fiber of q. The tautological one-form 
 
 
 
  at point m is then defined to be


 
 .
It is a linear map



and so


 
 .
Properties
The tautological one-form is the unique horizontal one-form that "cancels" a pullback. That is, let



be any 1-form on Q, and (considering it as a map from Q to T*Q ) let 
 
 
 
  be its pullback. Then


 
 ,
which can be most easily understood in terms of coordinates:



So, by the commutation between the pull-back and the exterior derivative,


 
 .
Action
If H is a Hamiltonian on the cotangent bundle and 
 
 
 
  is its Hamiltonian flow, then the corresponding action S is given by


 
 .
In more prosaic terms, the Hamiltonian flow represents the classical trajectory of a mechanical system obeying the Hamilton-Jacobi equations of motion. The Hamiltonian flow is the integral of the Hamiltonian vector field, and so one writes, using traditional notation for action-angle variables:



with the integral understood to be taken over the manifold defined by holding the energy 
 
 
 
  constant
 
 
 
  .
On metric spaces
If the manifold Q has a Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian metric g, then corresponding definitions can be made in terms of generalized coordinates. Specifically, if we take the metric to be a map


 
 ,
then define



and



In generalized coordinates 
 
 
 
  on TQ, one has



and



The metric allows one to define a unit-radius sphere in 
 
 
 
 . The canonical one-form restricted to this sphere forms a contact structure; the contact structure may be used to generate the geodesic flow for this metric.
See also

fundamental class
solder form

References

Ralph Abraham and Jerrold E. Marsden, Foundations of Mechanics, (1978) Benjamin-Cummings, London ISBN 0-8053-0102-X See section 3.2.

"
Category:Symplectic geometry Category:Hamiltonian mechanics Category:Lagrangian mechanics


