


Singleton bound




Singleton bound

In coding theory, the Singleton bound, named after Richard Collom Singleton, is a relatively crude bound on the size of an arbitrary block code

 
  with block length 
 
 
 
 , size 
 
 
 
  and minimum distance 
 
 
 
 
 .
Statement of the bound
The minimum distance of a set 
 
 
 
  of codewords of length 
 
 
 
  is defined as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Hamming distance between 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The expression 
 
 
 
  represents the maximum number of possible codewords in a q-ary block code of length 
 
 
 
  and minimum distance 
 
 
 
 .
Then the Singleton bound states that



Proof
First observe that the number of 
 
 
 
 -ary words of length 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , since each letter in such a word may take one of 
 
 
 
  different values, independently of the remaining letters.
Now let 
 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary q-ary block code of minimum distance 
 
 
 
 . Clearly, all codewords 
 
 
 
  are distinct. If we puncture the code by deleting the first 
 
 
 
  letters of each codeword, then all resulting codewords must still be pairwise different, since all of the original codewords in 
 
 
 
  have Hamming distance at least 
 
 
 
 
  from each other. Thus the size of the altered code is the same as the original code.
The newly obtained codewords each have length


 
 ,
and thus, there can be at most 
 
 
 
  of them. Since 
 
 
 
  was arbitrary, this bound must hold for the largest possible code with these parameters, thus:1



Linear codes
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a linear code with block length 
 
 
 
 , dimension 
 
 
 
  and minimum distance 
 
 
 
  over the finite field with 
 
 
 
  elements, then the maximum number of codewords is 
 
 
 
 
  and the Singleton bound implies:


 
 , so that


 
 , which is usually written as2


 
 .
In the linear code case a different proof of the Singleton bound can be obtained by observing that rank of the parity check matrix is 
 
 
 
 .3
History
The usual citation given for this result is , but according to  the result can be found in a 1953 paper of Komamiya.4
MDS codes
Linear block codes that achieve equality in the Singleton bound are called MDS (maximum distance separable) codes. Examples of such codes include codes that have only two codewords (the all-zero word and the all-one word, having thus minimum distance n), codes that use the whole of 
 
 
 
 
  (minimum distance 1), codes with a single parity symbol (minimum distance 2) and their dual codes. These are often called trivial MDS codes.
In the case of binary alphabets, only trivial MDS codes exist.56
Examples of non-trivial MDS codes include Reed-Solomon codes and their extended versions.78 In fact, it was proved by Simeon Ball that the only linear q-ary [n,k,d] MDS codes, for ''k 
MDS codes are an important class of block codes since, for a fixed 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , they have the greatest error correcting and detecting capabilities. There are several ways to characterize MDS codes:9
Theorem: Let 
 
 
 
  be a linear [
 
 
 
 ] code over 
 
 
 
 
 . The following are equivalent:



 
  is an MDS code.
Any 
 
 
 
  columns of a generator matrix for 
 
 
 
  are linearly independent.
Any 
 
 
 
  columns of a parity check matrix for 
 
 
 
 
  are linearly independent.


 
  is an MDS code.
If 
 
 
 
  is a generator matrix for 
 
 
 
  in standard form, then every square submatrix of 
 
 
 
  is nonsingular.
Given any 
 
 
 
 
  coordinate positions, there is a (minimum weight) codeword whose support is precisely these positions.

The last of these characterizations permits, by using the MacWilliams identities, an explicit formula for the complete weight distribution of an MDS code.10
Theorem: Let 
 
 
 
  be a linear [
 
 
 
 ] MDS code over 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  denotes the number of codewords in 
 
 
 
 
  of weight 
 
 
 
 , then



Arcs in projective geometry
The linear independence of the columns of a generator matrix of an MDS code permits a construction of MDS codes from objects in finite projective geometry. Let 
 
 
 
  be the finite projective space of (geometric) dimension 
 
 
 
  over the finite field 
 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a set of points in this projective space represented with homogeneous coordinates. Form the 
 
 
 
  matrix 
 
 
 
  whose columns are the homogeneous coordinates of these points. Then,11
Theorem

 
  is a (spacial) m-arc if and only if 
 
 
 
 
  is the generator matrix of an 
 
 
 
  MDS code over 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Gilbert–Varshamov bound
Plotkin bound
Hamming bound
Johnson bound
Griesmer bound

Notes
References









Further reading




"
Category:Coding theory Category:Inequalities Category:Articles containing proofs


















