


Factor theorem




Factor theorem

In algebra, the factor theorem is a theorem linking factors and zeros of a polynomial. It is a special case of the polynomial remainder theorem.1
The factor theorem states that a polynomial 
 
 
 
  has a factor 
 
 
if and only if

 
  (i.e. 
 
 
 
 
  is a root).2
Factorization of polynomials
Two problems where the factor theorem is commonly applied are those of factoring a polynomial and finding the roots of a polynomial equation; it is a direct consequence of the theorem that these problems are essentially equivalent.
The factor theorem is also used to remove known zeros from a polynomial while leaving all unknown zeros intact, thus producing a lower degree polynomial whose zeros may be easier to find. Abstractly, the method is as follows:3

"Guess" a zero 
 
 
 
  of the polynomial 
 
 
 
 . (In general, this can be very hard, but maths textbook problems that involve solving a polynomial equation are often designed so that some roots are easy to discover.)
Use the factor theorem to conclude that 
 
 
 
  is a factor of 
 
 
 
 .
Compute the polynomial 
 
 
 
 
 , for example using polynomial long division or synthetic division.
Conclude that any root 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is a root of 
 
 
 
 . Since the polynomial degree of 
 
 
 
  is one less than that of 
 
 
 
 
 , it is "simpler" to find the remaining zeros by studying 
 
 
 
 .

Example
Find the factors at



To do this you would use trial and error to find the first x value that causes the expression to equal zero. To find out if 
 
 
 
  is a factor, substitute 
 
 
 
  into the polynomial above:









As this is equal to 18 and not 0 this means 
 
 
 
  is not a factor of 
 
 
 
 . So, we next try 
 
 
 
 
  (substituting 
 
 
 
  into the polynomial):



This is equal to 
 
 
 
 . Therefore 
 
 
 
 , which is to say 
 
 
 
 
 , is a factor, and 
 
 
 
  is a root of 
 
 

The next two roots can be found by algebraically dividing 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  to get a quadratic, which can be solved directly, by the factor theorem or by the quadratic formula.



and therefore 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the factors of 
 
 

References
"
Category:Polynomials Category:Theorems in algebra



.↩
.↩
.↩




