   List of stochastic processes topics      List of stochastic processes topics   In the mathematics of probability , a stochastic process is a random function . In practical applications, the domain over which the function is defined as a time interval ( time series ) or a region of space ( random field ).  Familiar examples of time series include stock market and exchange rate fluctuations, signals such as speech, audio and video; medical data such as a patient's EKG , EEG , blood pressure or temperature; and random movement such as Brownian motion or random walks .  Examples of random fields include static images, random topographies (landscapes), or composition variations of an inhomogeneous material.  Stochastic processes topics   This list is currently incomplete. See also :Category:Stochastic processes     Basic affine jump diffusion    Bernoulli process : discrete-time processes with two possible states.  Bernoulli schemes : discrete-time processes with N possible states; every stationary process in N outcomes is a Bernoulli scheme, and vice versa.   Birth-death process    Branching process    Branching random walk    Brownian bridge    Brownian motion    Chinese restaurant process    CIR process    Continuous stochastic process    Cox process    Dirichlet processes  Finite-dimensional distribution    First Passage Time  Galton–Watson process    Gamma process    Gaussian process   – a process where all linear combinations of coordinates are normally distributed random variables.  Gauss–Markov process   (cf. below)   Girsanov's theorem    Homogeneous processes : processes where the domain has some symmetry and the finite-dimensional probability distributions also have that symmetry. Special cases include stationary processes , also called time-homogeneous.  Karhunen–Loève theorem  Lévy process    Local time (mathematics)    Loop-erased random walk    Markov processes are those in which the future is conditionally independent of the past given the present.  Markov chain    Continuous-time Markov process    Markov process    Semi-Markov process    Gauss–Markov processes : processes that are both Gaussian and Markov   Martingales – processes with constraints on the expectation  Onsager–Machlup function    Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process    Percolation theory  Point processes : random arrangements of points in a space   S   S   S   . They can be modelled as stochastic processes where the domain is a sufficiently large family of subsets of S , ordered by inclusion; the range is the set of natural numbers; and, if A is a subset of B , ƒ ( A ) ≤ ƒ ( B ) with probability 1.  Poisson process     Compound Poisson process     Population process    Probabilistic cellular automaton    Queueing theory     Queue     Random field     Gaussian random field    Markov random field     Sample-continuous process    Stationary process    Stochastic calculus     Itō calculus    Malliavin calculus    Semimartingale    Stratonovich integral     Stochastic control    Stochastic differential equation    Stochastic process    Telegraph process    Time series    Wald's martingale    Wiener process     "  Stochastic processes topics  Category:Stochastic processes  Category:Statistics-related lists   