


Elliott–Halberstam conjecture




Elliott–Halberstam conjecture

In number theory, the Elliott–Halberstam conjecture is a conjecture about the distribution of prime numbers in arithmetic progressions. It has many applications in sieve theory. It is named for Peter D. T. A. Elliott and Heini Halberstam, who stated the conjecture in 1968.1
To state the conjecture requires some notation. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the number of primes less than or equal to x. If q is a positive integer and a is coprime to q, we let 
 
 
 
  denote the number of primes less than or equal to x which are equal to a modulo q. Dirichlet's theorem on primes in arithmetic progressions then tells us that



where a is coprime to q and 
 
 
 
  is Euler's totient function. If we then define the error function



where the max is taken over all a coprime to q, then the Elliott–Halberstam conjecture is the assertion that for every θ  0 there exists a constant C > 0 such that



for all x > 2.
This conjecture was proven for all θ  and A. I. Vinogradov2 (the Bombieri–Vinogradov theorem, sometimes known simply as "Bombieri's theorem"); this result is already quite useful, being an averaged form of the generalized Riemann hypothesis. It is known that the conjecture fails at the endpoint θ = 1.3
The Elliott–Halberstam conjecture has several consequences. One striking one is the result announced by Dan Goldston, János Pintz, and Cem Yıldırım,45 which shows (assuming this conjecture) that there are infinitely many pairs of primes which differ by at most 16. In November 2013, James Maynard showed that subject to the Elliott–Halberstam conjecture, one can show the existence of infinitely many pairs of consecutive primes that differ by at most 12.6 In August 2014, Polymath group showed that subject to the generalized Elliott–Halberstam conjecture, one can show the existence of infinitely many pairs of consecutive primes that differ by at most 6.7 Without assuming any form of the conjecture, the lowest proven bound is 246.
See also

Barban–Davenport–Halberstam theorem
Barban–Montgomery theorem
Siegel–Walfisz theorem

Notes
"
Category:Analytic number theory Category:Conjectures about prime numbers



↩
 Corrigendum. ibid. 30 (1966), pages 719-720. (Russian)↩
↩
; see also , .↩
↩
↩
↩




