


Hypoexponential distribution




Hypoexponential distribution

In probability theory the hypoexponential distribution or the generalized Erlang distribution is a continuous distribution, that has found use in the same fields as the Erlang distribution, such as queueing theory, teletraffic engineering and more generally in stochastic processes. It is called the hypoexponetial distribution as it has a coefficient of variation less than one, compared to the hyper-exponential distribution which has coefficient of variation greater than one and the exponential distribution which has coefficient of variation of one.
Overview
The Erlang distribution is a series of k exponential distributions all with rate 
 
 
 
 . The hypoexponential is a series of k exponential distributions each with their own rate 
 
 
 
 , the rate of the 
 
 
 
  exponential distribution. If we have k independently distributed exponential random variables 
 
 
 
 , then the random variable,



is hypoexponentially distributed. The hypoexponential has a minimum coefficient of variation of 
 
 
 
 .
Relation to the phase-type distribution
As a result of the definition it is easier to consider this distribution as a special case of the phase-type distribution. The phase-type distribution is the time to absorption of a finite state Markov process. If we have a k+1 state process, where the first k states are transient and the state k+1 is an absorbing state, then the distribution of time from the start of the process until the absorbing state is reached is phase-type distributed. This becomes the hypoexponential if we start in the first 1 and move skip-free from state i to i+1 with rate 
 
 
 
  until state k transitions with rate 
 
 
 
  to the absorbing state k+1. This can be written in the form of a subgenerator matrix,



For simplicity denote the above matrix 
 
 
 
 . If the probability of starting in each of the k states is



then 
 
 

Two parameter case
Where the distribution has two parameters (
 
 
 
 ) the explicit forms of the probability functions and the associated statistics are1
CDF
 
 

PDF
 
 

Mean
 
 

Variance
 
 

Coefficient of variation
 
 

The coefficient of variation is always \bar{x}) and sample coefficient of variation (
 
 
 
 ) the parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be estimated:




Characterization
A random variable 
 
 
 
  has cumulative distribution function given by,



and density function,



where 
 
 
 
  is a column vector of ones of the size k and 
 
 
 
  is the matrix exponential of A. When 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , the density function can be written as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the Lagrange basis polynomials associated with the points 
 
 
 
 .
The distribution has Laplace transform of



Which can be used to find moments,



General case
In the general case where there are 
 
 
 
  distinct sums of exponential distributions with rates 
 
 
 
  and a number of terms in each sum equals to 
 
 
 
  respectively. The cumulative distribution function for 
 
 
 
  is given by



with


 
  with the additional convention 
 
 
 
 .
Uses
This distribution has been used in population genetics2 and queuing theory34
See also

Phase-type distribution
Coxian distribution

References
Further reading

M. F. Neuts. (1981) Matrix-Geometric Solutions in Stochastic Models: an Algorthmic Approach, Chapter 2: Probability Distributions of Phase Type; Dover Publications Inc.
G. Latouche, V. Ramaswami. (1999) Introduction to Matrix Analytic Methods in Stochastic Modelling, 1st edition. Chapter 2: PH Distributions; ASA SIAM,
Colm A. O'Cinneide (1999). Phase-type distribution: open problems and a few properties, Communication in Statistic - Stochastic Models, 15(4), 731–757.
L. Leemis and J. McQueston (2008). Univariate distribution relationships, The American Statistician, 62(1), 45—53.
S. Ross. (2007) Introduction to Probability Models, 9th edition, New York: Academic Press
S.V. Amari and R.B. Misra (1997) Closed-form expressions for distribution of sum of exponential random variables,IEEE Trans. Reliab. 46, 519–522

zh:Erlang分布"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions



↩
Strimmer K, Pybus OG (2001) "Exploring the demographic history of DNA sequences using the generalized skyline plot", Mol Biol Evol 18(12):2298-305↩
http://www.few.vu.nl/en/Images/stageverslag-calinescu_tcm39-105827.pdf↩
Bekker R, Koeleman PM (2011) "Scheduling admissions and reducing variability in bed demand". Health Care Manag Sci, 14(3):237-249↩




