


Helmholtz coil




Helmholtz coil

  A Helmholtz coil is a device for producing a region of nearly uniform magnetic field, named after the German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz. It consists of two solenoid electromagnets on the same axis. Besides creating magnetic fields, Helmholtz coils are also used in scientific apparatus to cancel external magnetic fields, such as the Earth's magnetic field.
thumb|upright=1.2|A beam of cathode rays in a Cathode Ray Tube bent into a circle within a stabilized Helmholtz Coil.
Description
A Helmholtz pair consists of two identical circular magnetic coils (solenoids) that are placed symmetrically along a common axis, one on each side of the experimental area, and separated by a distance 
 
 
 
  equal to the radius 
 
 
 
  of the coil. Each coil carries an equal electric current in the same direction.1
Setting 
 
 
 
 , which is what defines a Helmholtz pair, minimizes the nonuniformity of the field at the center of the coils, in the sense of setting 
 
 
2 (meaning that the first nonzero derivative is 
 
 
 
  as explained below), but leaves about 7% variation in field strength between the center and the planes of the coils. A slightly larger value of 
 
 
 
  reduces the difference in field between the center and the planes of the coils, at the expense of worsening the field's uniformity in the region near the center, as measured by 
 
 
 
 .3
In some applications, a Helmholtz coil is used to cancel out the Earth's magnetic field, producing a region with a magnetic field intensity much closer to zero.4
Mathematics
   The calculation of the exact magnetic field at any point in space is mathematically complex and involves the study of Bessel functions. Things are simpler along the axis of the coil-pair, and it is convenient to think about the Taylor series expansion of the field strength as a function of 
 
 
 
 , the distance from the central point of the coil-pair along the axis. By symmetry, the odd-order terms in the expansion are zero. By arranging the coils so that the origin 
 
 
 
  is an inflection point for the field strength due to each coil separately, one can guarantee that the order 
 
 
 
  term is also zero, and hence the leading non-constant term is of order 
 
 
 
 . The inflection point for a simple coil is located along the coil axis at a distance 
 
 
 
  from its centre. Thus the locations for the two coils are 
 
 
 
 .
The calculation detailed below gives the exact value of the magnetic field at the center point. If the radius is R, the number of turns in each coil is n and the current through the coils is I, then the magnetic flux density B at the midpoint between the coils will be given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the permeability of free space (
 
 
 
 ).
Derivation
Start with the formula for the on-axis field due to a single wire loop (which is itself derived from the Biot–Savart law):5



Here


 
  = the permeability constant = 
 
 



 
  = coil current, in amperes,


 
  = coil radius, in meters,


 
  = coil distance, on axis, to point, in meters.
The Helmholtz coils consists of n turns of wire, so the equivalent current in a one-turn coil is n times the current I in the n-turn coil. Substituting nI for I in the above formula gives the field for an n-turn coil:



In a Helmholtz coil, a point halfway between the two loops has an x value equal to R/2, so calculate the field strength at that point:



There are also two coils instead of one (the coil above is at x=0; there is a second coil at x=R). From symmetry, the field strength at the midpoint will be twice the single coil value:



Maxwell coils
thumb|upright=1.5|Helmholtz coils (hoops) on three perpendicular axes used to cancel the Earth's magnetic field inside the vacuum tank in a 1957 electron beam experiment
To improve the uniformity of the field in the space inside the coils, additional coils can be added around the outside. James Clerk Maxwell showed in 1873 that a third larger-diameter coil located midway between the two Helmholtz coils can reduce the variance of the field on the axis to zero up to the sixth derivative of position. This is sometimes called a Maxwell coil.
See also

Maxwell coil
Solenoid
Halbach array
A magnetic bottle has the same structure as Helmholtz coils, but with the magnets separated further apart so that the field expands in the middle, trapping charged particles with the diverging field lines. If one coil is reversed, it produces a cusp trap, which also traps charged particles.6

References


External links

On-Axis Field of an Ideal Helmholtz Coil
Axial field of a real Helmholtz coil pair
Helmholtz-Coil Fields by Franz Kraft, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
Kevin Kuns (2007) Calculation of Magnetic Field inside Plasma Chamber, uses elliptic integrals and their derivatives to compute off-axis fields, from PBworks.

Magnetic Fields of Coils
http://physicsx.pr.erau.edu/HelmholtzCoils/

"
Category:Electromagnetic coils Category:Magnetic devices Category:Hermann von Helmholtz



↩
Helmholtz Coil in CGS units↩
Electromagnetism↩
"Earth Field Magnetometer: Helmholtz coil" by Richard Wotiz 2004↩
http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/HBASE/magnetic/curloo.html#c3↩
http://radphys4.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp/asacusa/wiki/index.php?Cusp%20trap↩




