


Von Mangoldt function




Von Mangoldt function

In mathematics, the von Mangoldt function is an arithmetic function named after German mathematician Hans von Mangoldt. It is an example of an important arithmetic function that is neither multiplicative nor additive.
Definition
The von Mangoldt function, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is defined as



The values of 
 
 
 
  for the first nine positive numbers are



which is related to .
The summatory von Mangoldt function, 
 
 
 
 , also known as the Chebyshev function, is defined as



von Mangoldt provided a rigorous proof of an explicit formula for 
 
 
 
  involving a sum over the non-trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function. This was an important part of the first proof of the prime number theorem.
Properties
The von Mangoldt function satisfies the identity12



The sum is taken over all integers

 
  that divide

 
 . This is proved by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, since the terms that are not powers of primes are equal to 
 
 
 
 . For example, consider the case  12 {{=}} 22 × 3}}. Then



By Möbius inversion, we have345



Dirichlet series
The von Mangoldt function plays an important role in the theory of Dirichlet series, and in particular, the Riemann zeta function. In particular, one has



The logarithmic derivative is then



These are special cases of a more general relation on Dirichlet series. If one has



for a completely multiplicative function

 
 , and the series converges for , then



converges for .
Chebyshev function
The second Chebyshev function ψ(x) is the summatory function of the von Mangoldt function:6



The Mellin transform of the Chebyshev function can be found by applying Perron's formula:



which holds for 
 
 
 
 .
Exponential series
(Figure)
Mangoldt-series.svg

Hardy and Littlewood examined the series7



in the limit . Assuming the Riemann hypothesis, they demonstrate that



Curiously, they also show that this function is oscillatory as well, with diverging oscillations. In particular, there exists a value 
 
 
 
  such that



infinitely often. The graphic to the right indicates that this behaviour is not at first numerically obvious: the oscillations are not clearly seen until the series is summed in excess of 100 million terms, and are only readily visible when .
Riesz mean
The Riesz mean of the von Mangoldt function is given by



Here, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are numbers characterizing the Riesz mean. One must take 
 
 
 
 . The sum over 
 
 
 
  is the sum over the zeroes of the Riemann zeta function, and



can be shown to be a convergent series for 
 
 
 
 .
Approximation by Riemann zeta zeros
(Figure)
The first Riemann zeta zero wave in the sum that approximates the von Mangoldt function

The real part of the sum over the zeta zeros:


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -th zeta zero, peaks at primes, as can be seen in the adjoining graph, and can also be verified through numerical computation. It does not sum up to the Von Mangoldt function.8
(Figure)
The Fourier transform of the von Mangoldt function gives a spectrum with imaginary parts of Riemann zeta zeros as spikes at the 
 
 
 
 -axis ordinates (right), while the von Mangoldt function can be approximated by zeta zero waves (left)

The Fourier transform of the von Mangoldt function gives a spectrum with spikes at ordinates equal to imaginary part of the Riemann zeta function zeros. This is sometimes called a duality.
See also

Prime-counting function

References




External links

Allan Gut, Some remarks on the Riemann zeta distribution (2005)

Chris King, Primes out of thin air (2010)
Heike, How plot Riemann zeta zero spectrum in Mathematica? (2012)

"
Category:Arithmetic functions



Apostol (1976) p.32
Tenenbaum (1995) p.30

Apostol (1976) p.33

Apostol (1976) p.246

 Page 346




