


Robinson–Schensted correspondence




Robinson–Schensted correspondence

In mathematics, the Robinson–Schensted correspondence is a bijective correspondence between permutations and pairs of standard Young tableaux of the same shape. It has various descriptions, all of which are of algorithmic nature, it has many remarkable properties, and it has applications in combinatorics and other areas such as representation theory. The correspondence has been generalized in numerous ways, notably by Knuth to what is known as the Robinson–Schensted–Knuth correspondence, and a further generalization to pictures by Zelevinsky.
The simplest description of the correspondence is using the Schensted algorithm , a procedure that constructs one tableau by successively inserting the values of the permutation according to a specific rule, while the other tableau records the evolution of the shape during construction. The correspondence had been described, in a rather different form, much earlier by Robinson , in an attempt to prove the Littlewood–Richardson rule. The correspondence is often referred to as the Robinson–Schensted algorithm, although the procedure used by Robinson is radically different from the Schensted–algorithm, and almost entirely forgotten. Other methods of defining the correspondence include a nondeterministic algorithm in terms of jeu de taquin.
The bijective nature of the correspondence relates it to the enumerative identity:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of partitions of 
 
 
 
  (or of Young diagrams with 
 
 
 
  squares), and  denotes the number of standard Young tableaux of shape 
 
 
 
 .
The Schensted algorithm
The Schensted algorithm starts from the permutation 
 
 
 
  written in two-line notation



where  σ(i)}}, and proceeds by constructing sequentially a sequence of (intermediate) ordered pairs of Young tableaux of the same shape:



where  Q0}} are empty tableaux. The output tableaux are  Pn}} and  Qn}}. Once  is constructed, one forms  by inserting  into , and then  by adding an entry 
 
 
 
  to  in the square added to the shape by the insertion (so that  and  have equal shapes for all 
 
 
 
 ). Because of the more passive role of the tableaux , the final one , which is part of the output and from which the previous  are easily read off, is called the recording tableau; by contrast the tableaux  are called insertion tableaux.
Insertion
 The basic procedure used to insert each  is called Schensted insertion or row-insertion (to distinguish it from a variant procedure called column-insertion). Its simplest form is defined in terms of "incomplete standard tableaux": like standard tableaux they have distinct entries, forming increasing rows and columns, but some values (still to be inserted) may be absent as entries. The procedure takes as arguments such a tableau 
 
 
 
  and a value 
 
 
 
  not present as entry of 
 
 
 
 ; it produces as output a new tableau denoted 
 
 
 
  and a square 
 
 
 
  by which its shape has grown. The value 
 
 
 
  appears in the first row of 
 
 
 
 , either having been added at the end (if no entries larger than 
 
 
 
  were present), or otherwise replacing the first entry 
 
 
 
  in the first row of 
 
 
 
 . In the former case 
 
 
 
  is the square where 
 
 
 
  is added, and the insertion is completed; in the latter case the replaced entry 
 
 
 
  is similarly inserted into the second row of 
 
 
 
 , and so on, until at some step the first case applies (which certainly happens if an empty row of 
 
 
 
  is reached).
More formally, the following pseudocode describes the row-insertion of a new value 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 .1

Set 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to one more than the length of the first row of 
 
 
 
 .
While 
 
 
 
  and , decrease 
 
 
 
  by 1. (Now 
 
 
 
  is the first square in row 
 
 
 
  with either an entry larger than 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , or no entry at all.)
If the square 
 
 
 
  is empty in 
 
 
 
 , terminate after adding 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  in square 
 
 
 
  and setting 
 
 
 
 .
Swap the values 
 
 
 
  and . (This inserts the old 
 
 
 
  into row 
 
 
 
 , and saves the value it replaces for insertion into the next row.)
Increase 
 
 
 
  by 1 and return to step 2.

The shape of 
 
 
 
  grows by exactly one square, namely 
 
 
 
 .
Correctness
The fact that 
 
 
 
  has increasing rows and columns, if the same holds for 
 
 
 
 , is not obvious from this procedure (entries in the same column are never even compared). It can however be seen as follows. At all times except immediately after step 4, the square 
 
 
 
  is either empty in 
 
 
 
  or holds a value greater than 
 
 
 
 ; step 5 re-establishes this property because 
 
 
 
  now is the square immediately below the one that originally contained 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Thus the effect of the replacement in step 4 on the value  is to make it smaller; in particular it cannot become greater than its right or lower neighbours. On the other hand the new value is not less than its left neighbour (if present) either, as is ensured by the comparison that just made step 2 terminate. Finally to see that the new value is larger than its upper neighbour  if present, observe that  holds after step 5, and that decreasing 
 
 
 
  in step 2 only decreases the corresponding value .
Constructing the tableaux
The full Schensted algorithm applied to a permutation 
 
 
 
  proceeds as follows.

Set both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to the empty tableau
For 
 
 
 
  increasing from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  compute  and the square 
 
 
 
  by the insertion procedure; then replace 
 
 
 
  by  and add the entry 
 
 
 
  to the tableau 
 
 
 
  in the square 
 
 
 
 .
Terminate, returning the pair 
 
 
 
 .

The algorithm produces a pair of standard Young tableaux.
Invertibility of the construction
It can be seen that given any pair 
 
 
 
  of standard Young tableaux of the same shape, there is an inverse procedure that produces a permutation that will give rise to 
 
 
 
  by the Schensted algorithm. It essentially consists of tracing steps of the algorithm backwards, each time using an entry of 
 
 
 
  to find the square where the inverse insertion should start, moving the corresponding entry of 
 
 
 
  to the preceding row, and continuing upwards through the rows until an entry of the first row is replaced, which is the value inserted at the corresponding step of the construction algorithm. These two inverse algorithms define a bijective correspondence between permutations of 
 
 
 
  on one side, and pairs of standard Young tableaux of equal shape and containing 
 
 
 
  squares on the other side.
Properties
One of the most fundamental properties, but not evident from the algorithmic construction, is symmetry:

If the Robinson–Schensted correspondence associates tableaux 
 
 
 
  to a permutation 
 
 
 
 , then it associates 
 
 
 
  to the inverse permutation .

This can be proven, for instance, by appealing to Viennot's geometric construction.
Further properties, all assuming that the correspondence associates tableaux 
 
 
 
  to the permutation  (σ1, ..., σn)}}.

In the pair of tableaux 
 
 
 
  associated to the reversed permutation , the tableau 
 
 
 
  is the transpose of the tableau 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a tableau determined by 
 
 
 
 , independently of 
 
 
 
  (namely the transpose of the tableau obtained from 
 
 
 
  by the Schützenberger involution).


The length of the longest increasing subsequence of  is equal to the length of the first row of 
 
 
 
  (and of 
 
 
 
 ).


The length of the longest decreasing subsequence of  is equal to the length of the first column of 
 
 
 
  (and of 
 
 
 
 ), as follows from the previous two properties.


The descent set } of 
 
 
 
  equals the descent set } of 
 
 
 
 .


Identify subsequences of 
 
 
 
  with their sets of indices. It is a theorem of Greene that for any 
 
 
 
 , the size of the largest set that can be written as the union of at most 
 
 
 
  increasing subsequences is . In particular,  equals the largest length of an increasing subsequence of 
 
 
 
 .


If 
 
 
 
  is an involution, then the number of fixed points of 
 
 
 
  equals the number of columns of odd length in 
 
 
 
 .

See also

Viennot's geometric construction, which provides a diagrammatic interpretation of the correspondence.

Notes
References


.


.

.

.

.

.

Further reading



External links



"
Category:Algebraic combinatorics Category:Combinatorial algorithms Category:Permutations Category:Representation theory of finite groups



Adapted from ↩




