   Sulfamic acid      Sulfamic acid   Sulfamic acid / Sulphamic acid (Commonwealth spelling), also known as amidosulfonic acid , amidosulfuric acid , aminosulfonic acid , and sulfamidic acid , is a molecular compound with the formula H 3 NSO 3 . This colorless, water-soluble compound finds many applications. Sulfamic acid melts at 205 °C before decomposing at higher temperatures to H 2 O, SO 3 , SO 2 , and N 2 . 1  Sulfamic acid (H 3 NSO 3 ) may be considered an intermediate compound between sulfuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ), and sulfamide (H 4 N 2 SO 2 ), effectively - though see below - replacing an -OH group with an -NH 2 group at each step. This pattern can extend no further in either direction without breaking down the -SO 2 group. Sulfamates are derivatives of sulfamic acid.  Production  Sulfamic acid is produced industrially by treating urea with a mixture of sulfur trioxide and sulfuric acid (or oleum ). The conversion is conducted in two stages:   OC(NH 2 ) 2 + SO 3 → OC(NH 2 )(NHSO 3 H)  OC(NH 2 )(NHSO 3 H) + H 2 SO 4 → CO 2 + 2 H 3 NSO 3    In this way, approximately 96,000 tons were produced in 1995. 2  Structure and reactivity  The compound is well described by the formula H 3 NSO 3 , not the tautomer H 2 NSO 2 (OH). The relevant bond distances are S=O, 1.44 and S-N 1.77 Å . The greater length of the S-N distance is consistent with a single bond. 3 Furthermore, a neutron diffraction study located the hydrogen atoms, all three of which are 1.03 Å distant from nitrogen. 4 In the solid state, the molecule of sulfamic acid is well described by a zwitterionic form :      (Figure)  Sulfamic-acid-from-xtal-3D-balls.png       Ball-and-stick model of a sulfamic acid zwitterion in the crystal 5      Water solutions are unstable and slowly hydrolyze to ammonium bisulfate , but the crystalline solid is indefinitely stable under ordinary storage conditions. Its behavior resembles that of urea , (H 2 N) 2 CO. Both feature amino groups linked to electron-withdrawing centers that can participate in delocalized bonding . Both liberate ammonia upon heating in water.  Acid-base reactions  Sulfamic acid is a moderately strong acid, K a = 1.01 x 10 −1 . Because the solid is non- hygroscopic , it is used as a standard in acidimetry (quantitative assays of acid content).   H 3 NSO 3 + NaOH → NaH 2 NSO 3 + H 2 O   Double deprotonation can be effected in NH 3 solution to give [HNSO 3 ] 2− . 6   H 3 NSO 3 + 2 NH 3 → [HNSO 3 ] 2− + 2 [NH 4 ] +    Reaction with nitric and nitrous acids  With HNO 2 , sulfamic acid reacts to give N 2 , while with HNO 3 , it affords N 2 O .   HNO 2 + H 3 NSO 3 → H 2 SO 4 + N 2 + H 2 O  HNO 3 + H 3 NSO 3 → H 2 SO 4 + N 2 O + H 2 O   Reaction with hypochlorite  The reaction of excess hypochlorite with sulfamic acid or a sulfamate salt gives rise reversibly to both N-chlorosulfamate and N,N-dichlorosulfamate. 7 8 9   HClO + H 2 NSO 3 H → ClNHSO 3 H + H 2 O  HClO + ClNHSO 3 H   ⇄   normal-⇄   \rightleftarrows   Cl 2 NSO 3 H + H 2 O   Consequently sulfamic acid is used as hypochlorite scavenger in the oxidation of aldehydes with chlorite such as the Pinnick oxidation .  Applications  Sulfamic acid is mainly a precursor to sweet-tasting compounds. Reaction with cyclohexylamine followed by addition of NaOH gives C 6 H 11 NHSO 3 Na, sodium cyclamate . Related compounds are also sweeteners , see acesulfame potassium .  Sulfamates have been used in the design of many types of therapeutic agents such as antibiotics , nucleoside/nucleotide human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reverse transcriptase inhibitors , HIV protease inhibitors (PIs), anti-cancer drugs ( steroid sulfatase and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors), anti- epileptic drugs, and weight loss drugs . 10  Cleaning agent  Sulfamic acid is used as an acidic cleaning agent , sometimes pure or as a component of proprietary mixtures, typically for metals and ceramics . It is frequently used for removing rust and limescale , replacing the more volatile and irritating hydrochloric acid , which is however cheaper. It is often a component of household descaling agents , for example, Lime-A-Way Thick Gel contains up to 8% sulfamic acid and pH 2 - 2.2, 11 or detergents used for removal of limescale . When compared to most of the common strong mineral acids, sulfamic acid has desirable water descaling properties, low volatility, low toxicity. It forms water-soluble salts of calcium and ferric iron.  Importantly, sulfamic acid is preferable to use in household in comparison to hydrochloric acid for its intrinsic safety. If erroneously mixed with hypochlorite based products such as bleach , it does not form chlorine gas, where the most common acids would; the reaction ( neutralization ) with NH 3 , produces a salt as depicted in the section above.  It also finds applications in the industrial cleaning of dairy and brew-house equipment. Although it is considered less corrosive than hydrochloric acid , corrosion inhibitors are often added to commercial cleansers of which it is a component. Some of its domestic use, e.g. Easy-Off , for descaling include home coffee and espresso equipment and in denture cleaners.  Other uses   Catalyst for esterification process  Dye and pigment manufacturing  Herbicide  Coagulator for urea-formaldehyde resins  Ingredient in fire extinguishing media . Sulfamic acid is the main raw material for ammonium sulfamate which is a widely used herbicide and fire retardant material for household product.  Pulp and paper industry as a chloride stabilizer  Synthesis of nitrous oxide by reaction with nitric acid  The deprotonated form (sulfamate) is a common counterion for nickel(II) in electroplating .   Silver polishing  According to the label on the consumer product, the liquid silver cleaning product ''TarnX ''contains thiourea , a detergent , and sulfamic acid.  References  External links       "  Category:Hydrogen compounds  Category:Sulfur oxoacids  Category:Household chemicals  Category:Cleaning product components  Category:Sulfamates     ↩  A. Metzger "Sulfamic Acid" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2012, Wily-VCH, Weinheim. ↩  ↩  ↩   ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     