


Hematopoietic stem cell




Hematopoietic stem cell

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are the blood cells that give rise to all the other blood cells and are derived from mesoderm. They are located in the red bone marrow, which is contained in the core of most bones.
They give rise to the myeloid (monocytes and macrophages, neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, erythrocytes, megakaryocytes/platelets, dendritic cells), and lymphoid lineages (T-cells, B-cells, NK-cells). The definition of hematopoietic stem cells has changed in the last two decades. The hematopoietic tissue contains cells with long-term and short-term regeneration capacities and committed multipotent, oligopotent, and unipotent progenitors. HSCs constitute 1:10.000 of cells in myeloid tissue.
HSCs are a heterogeneous population. Three classes of stem cells exist, distinguished by their ratio of lymphoid to myeloid progeny (L/M) in blood. Myeloid-biased (My-bi) HSC have low L/M ratio (between 0 and 3), whereas lymphoid-biased (Ly-bi) HSC show a large ratio (>10). The third category consists of the balanced (Bala) HSC, whose L/M ratio is between 3 and 10. Only the myeloid-biased and -balanced HSCs have durable self-renewal properties. In addition, serial transplantation experiments have shown that each subtype preferentially re-creates its blood cell type distribution, suggesting an inherited epigenetic program for each subtype.
HSC studies through much of the past half century have led to a much deeper understanding. More recent advances have resulted in the use of HSC transplants in the treatment of cancers and other immune system disorders.1
Sources
(Figure)
Sketch of bone marrow and its cells

HSCs are found in the bone marrow of adults, specially in the pelvis, femur, and sternum. They are also found in umbilical cord blood and, in small numbers, in peripheral blood.2
Stem and progenitor cells can be taken from the pelvis, at the iliac crest, using a needle and syringe.3 The cells can be removed as liquid (to perform a smear to look at the cell morphology) or they can be removed via a core biopsy (to maintain the architecture or relationship of the cells to each other and to the bone).
In order to harvest stem cells from the circulating peripheral blood, blood donors are injected with a cytokine, such as granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), that induces cells to leave the bone marrow and circulate in the blood vessels.
In mammalian embryology, the first definitive HSCs are detected in the AGM (aorta-gonad-mesonephros), and then massively expanded in the fetal liver prior to colonising the bone marrow before birth.4
Functional characteristics
Multipotency and self-renewal
HSCs can replenish all blood cell types (i.e., are multipotent) and self-renew. A small number of HSCs can expand to generate a very large number of daughter HSCs. This phenomenon is used in bone marrow transplantation, when a small number of HSCs reconstitute the hematopoietic system. This process indicates that, subsequent to bone marrow transplantation, symmetrical cell divisions into two daughter HSCs must occur.
Stem cell self-renewal is thought to occur in the stem cell niche in the bone marrow, and it is reasonable to assume that key signals present in this niche will be important in self-renewal. There is much interest in the environmental and molecular requirements for HSC self-renewal, as understanding the ability of HSC to replenish themselves will eventually allow the generation of expanded populations of HSC in vitro that can be used therapeutically.
Stem cell heterogeneity
It was originally believed that all HSCs were alike in their self-renewal and differentiation abilities. This view was first challenged by the 2002 discovery by the Muller-Sieburg group in San Diego, who illustrated that different stem cells can show distinct repopulation patterns that are epigenetically predetermined intrinsic properties of clonal Thy-1lo Sca-1+ lin− c-kit+ HSC.567 The results of these clonal studies led to the notion of lineage bias. Using the ratio 
 
 
 
  of lymphoid (L) to myeloid (M) cells in blood as a quantitative marker, the stem cell compartment can be split into three categories of HSC. Balanced (Bala) HSCs repopulate peripheral white blood cells in the same ratio of myeloid to lymphoid cells as seen in unmanipulated mice (on average about 15% myeloid and 85% lymphoid cells, or 3 ≤ ρ ≤ 10). Myeloid-biased (My-bi) HSCs give rise to very few lymphocytes resulting in ratios 0  10. All three types are normal types of HSC, and they do not represent stages of differentiation. Rather, these are three classes of HSC, each with an epigenetically fixed differentiation program. These studies also showed that lineage bias is not stochastically regulated or dependent on differences in environmental influence. My-bi HSC self-renew longer than balanced or Ly-bi HSC. The myeloid bias results from reduced responsiveness to the lymphopoetin interleukin 7 (IL-7).8
Subsequently, other groups confirmed and highlighted the original findings.9 For example, the Eaves group confirmed in 2007 that repopulation kinetics, long-term self-renewal capacity, and My-bi and Ly-bi are stably inherited intrinsic HSC properties.10 In 2010, the Goodell group provided additional insights about the molecular basis of lineage bias in side population (SP) SCA-1+ lin− c-kit+ HSC.11 As previously shown for IL-7 signaling, it was found that a member of the transforming growth factor family (TGF-beta) induces and inhibits the proliferation of My-bi and Ly-bi HSC, respectively.
Functions
A cobblestone area-forming cell (CAFC) assay is a cell culture-based empirical assay. When plated onto a confluent culture of stromal feeder layer, a fraction of HSCs creep between the gaps (even though the stromal cells are touching each other) and eventually settle between the stromal cells and the substratum (here the dish surface) or trapped in the cellular processes between the stromal cells. Emperipolesis is the in vivo phenomenon in which one cell is completely engulfed into another (e.g. thymocytes into thymic nurse cells); on the other hand, when in vitro, lymphoid lineage cells creep beneath nurse-like cells, the process is called pseudoemperipolesis. This similar phenomenon is more commonly known in the HSC field by the cell culture terminology cobble stone area-forming cells (CAFC), which means areas or clusters of cells look dull cobblestone-like under phase contrast microscopy, compared to the other HSCs, which are refractile. This happens because the cells that are floating loosely on top of the stromal cells are spherical and thus refractile. However, the cells that creep beneath the stromal cells are flattened and, thus, not refractile. The mechanism of pseudoemperipolesis is only recently coming to light. It may be mediated by interaction through CXCR4 (CD184) the receptor for CXC Chemokines (e.g., SDF1) and α4β1 integrins.12
Mobility
HSCs have a higher potential than other immature blood cells to pass the bone marrow barrier, and, thus, may travel in the blood from the bone marrow in one bone to another bone. If they settle in the thymus, they may develop into T cells. In the case of fetuses and other extramedullary hematopoiesis, HSCs may also settle in the liver or spleen and develop.
This ability is the reason why HSCs may be harvested directly from the blood.
Physical characteristics
With regard to morphology, hematopoietic stem cells resemble lymphocytes. They are non-adherent, and rounded, with a rounded nucleus and low cytoplasm-to-nucleus ratio. Since primitive hematopoietic stem cells (PHSCs) cannot be isolated as a pure population, it is not possible to identify them in a microscope. The above description is based on the morphological characteristics of a heterogeneous population, of which PHSCs are a component.
Markers
In reference to phenotype, hematopoeitic stem cells are identified by their small size, lack of lineage (lin) markers, low staining (side population) with vital dyes such as rhodamine 123 (rhodamineDULL, also called rholo) or Hoechst 33342, and presence of various antigenic markers on their surface.
Cluster of differentiation and other markers
Many of these markers belong to the cluster of differentiation series, like: CD34, CD38, CD90, CD133, CD105, CD45, and also c-kit, - the receptor for stem cell factor. The hematopoietic stem cells are negative for the markers that are used for detection of lineage commitment, and are, thus, called Lin-; and, during their purification by FACS, a mixture of up to 14 different mature blood-lineage-marker antibodies are used to deplete the lin+ cells or late multipotent progenitors (MPP)s: e.g., CD13 & CD33 for myeloid, CD71 for erythroid, CD19 for B cells, CD61 for megakaryocytic, etc. for humans; and, B220 (murine CD45) for B cells, Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18) for monocytes, Gr-1 for Granulocytes, Ter119 for erythroid cells, Il7Ra, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8 for T cells, etc. (for mice)
There are many differences between the human and mice hematopoietic cell markers for the commonly accepted type of hematopoietic stem cells.13

Mouse HSC : CD34lo/−, SCA-1+, Thy1.1+/lo, CD38+, C-kit+, lin−
Human HSC : CD34+, CD59+, Thy1/CD90+, CD38lo/−, C-kit/CD117+, lin−

However, not all stem cells are covered by these combinations that, nonetheless, have become popular. In fact, even in humans, there are hematopoietic stem cells that are CD34−/CD38−.1415 Also some later studies suggested that earliest stem cells may lack c-kit on the cell surface.16 For human HSCs use of CD133 was one step ahead as both CD34+ and CD34− HSCs were CD133+.
Traditional purification method used to yield a reasonable purity level of mouse hematopoietic stem cells, in general, requires a large(~10-12) battery of markers, most of which were surrogate markers with little functional significance, and thus partial overlap with the stem cell populations and sometimes other closely related cells that are not stem cells. Also, some of these markers (e.g., Thy1) are not conserved across mouse species, and use of markers like CD34− for HSC purification requires mice to be at least 8 weeks old.
SLAM code
Alternative methods that could give rise to a similar or better harvest of stem cells is an active area of research, and are presently emerging. One such method uses a signature of SLAM family of cell surface molecules. The SLAM (Signaling lymphocyte activation molecule) family is a group of >10 molecules whose genes are located mostly tandemly in a single locus on chromosome 1 (mouse), all belonging to a subset of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, and originally thought to be involved in T-cell stimulation. This family includes CD48, CD150, CD244, etc., CD150 being the founding member, and, thus, also known as slamF1, i.e., SLAM family member 1.
The signature SLAM codes for the hemopoietic hierarchy are:

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) : CD150+CD48−CD244−
Multipotent progenitor cells (MPPs) : CD150−CD48−CD244+
Lineage-restricted progenitor cells (LRPs) : CD150−CD48+CD244+
Common myeloid progenitor (CMP) : lin−SCA-1−c-kit+CD34+CD16/32mid
Granulocyte-macrophage progenitor (GMP) : lin−SCA-1−c-kit+CD34+CD16/32hi
Megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor (MEP) : lin−SCA-1−c-kit+CD34−CD16/32low

For HSCs, CD150+CD48− was sufficient instead of CD150+CD48−CD244− because CD48 is a ligand for CD244, and both would be positive only in the activated lineage-restricted progenitors. It seems that this code was more efficient than the more tedious earlier set of the large number of markers, and are also conserved across the mouse strains; however, recent work has shown that this method excludes a large number of HSCs and includes an equally large number of non-stem cells.17 .Gary Van Zant
   Stem cell markers: less is more!
   Blood 107: 855-856. CD150+CD48− gave stem cell purity comparable to Thy1loSCA-1+lin−c-kit+ in mice.18
LT-HSC/ST-HSC/Early MPP/Late MPP
Irving Weissman's group at Stanford University was the first to isolate mouse hematopoietic stem cells in 1988 and was also the first to work out the markers to distinguish the mouse long-term (LT-HSC) and short-term (ST-HSC) hematopoietic stem cells (self-renew-capable), and the Multipotent progenitors (MPP, low or no self-renew capability — the later the developmental stage of MPP, the lesser the self-renewal ability and the more of some of the markers like CD4 and CD135):

LT-HSC : CD34−, CD38−, SCA-1+, Thy1.1+/lo, C-kit+, lin−, CD135−, Slamf1/CD150+
ST-HSC : CD34+, CD38+, SCA-1+, Thy1.1+/lo, C-kit+, lin−, CD135−, Slamf1/CD150+, Mac-1 (CD11b)lo
Early MPP : CD34+, SCA-1+, Thy1.1−, C-kit+, lin−, CD135+, Slamf1/CD150−, Mac-1 (CD11b)lo, CD4lo
Late MPP : CD34+, SCA-1+, Thy1.1−, C-kit+, lin−, CD135high, Slamf1/CD150−, Mac-1 (CD11b)lo, CD4lo

Nomenclature of hematopoietic colonies and lineages
Between 1948 and 1950, the Committee for Clarification of the Nomenclature of Cells and Diseases of the Blood and Blood-forming Organs issued reports on the nomenclature of blood cells.1920 An overview of the terminology is shown below, from earliest to final stage of development:

[root]blast
pro[root]cyte
[root]cyte
meta[root]cyte
mature cell name

The root for erythrocyte colony-forming units (CFU-E) is "rubri", for granulocyte-monocyte colony-forming units (CFU-GM) is "granulo" or "myelo" and "mono", for lympocyte colony-forming units (CFU-L) is "lympho" and for megakaryocyte colony-forming units (CFU-Meg) is "megakaryo". According to this terminology, the stages of red blood cell formation would be: rubriblast, prorubricyte, rubricyte, metarubricyte, and erythrocyte. However, the following nomenclature seems to be, at present, the most prevalent:




Committee

"lympho"

"rubri"

"granulo" or "myelo"

"mono"

"megakaryo"





Lineage

Lymphoid

Myeloid

Myeloid

Myeloid

Myeloid



CFU

CFU-L

CFU-GEMM→CFU-E

CFU-GEMM→CFU-GM→CFU-G

CFU-GEMM→CFU-GM→CFU-M

CFU-GEMM→CFU-Meg



Process

lymphocytopoiesis

erythropoiesis

granulocytopoiesis

monocytopoiesis

thrombocytopoiesis



[root]blast

Lymphoblast

Proerythroblast

Myeloblast

Monoblast

Megakaryoblast



pro[root]cyte

Prolymphocyte

Polychromatophilic erythrocyte

Promyelocyte

Promonocyte

Promegakaryocyte



[root]cyte

-

Normoblast

Eosino/neutro/basophilic myelocyte


Megakaryocyte



meta[root]cyte

Large lymphocyte

Reticulocyte

Eosinophilic/neutrophilic/basophilic metamyelocyte, Eosinophilic/neutrophilic/basophilic band cell

Early monocyte

-



mature cell name

Small lymphocyte

Erythrocyte

granulocytes (Eosino/neutro/basophil)

Monocyte

thrombocytes (Platelets)



Osteoclasts also arise from hemopoietic cells of the monocyte/neutrophil lineage, specifically CFU-GM.
Colony-forming units
There are various kinds of colony-forming units:

Colony-forming unit lymphocyte (CFU-L)
Colony-forming unit erythrocyte (CFU-E)
Colony-forming unit granulo-monocyte (CFU-GM)
Colony-forming unit megakaryocyte (CFU-Me)
Colony-forming unit Basophil (CFU-B)
Colony-forming unit Eosinophil (CFU-Eo)

The above CFUs are based on the lineage. Another CFU, the colony-forming unit–spleen (CFU–S) was the basis of an in vivo clonal colony formation, which depends on the ability of infused bone marrow cells to give rise to clones of maturing hematopoietic cells in the spleens of irradiated mice after 8 to 12 days. It was used extensively in early studies, but is now considered to measure more mature progenitor or Transit Amplifying Cells rather than stem cells.
HSC repopulation kinetics
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) cannot be easily observed directly, and, therefore, their behaviors need to be inferred indirectly. Clonal studies are likely the closest technique for single cell in vivo studies of HSC. Here, sophisticated experimental and statistical methods are used to ascertain that, with a high probability, a single HSC is contained in a transplant administered to a lethally irradiated host. The clonal expansion of this stem cell can then be observed over time by monitoring the percent donor-type cells in blood as the host is reconstituted. The resulting time series is defined as the repopulation kinetic of the HSC.
The reconstitution kinetics are very heterogeneous. However, using symbolic dynamics, one can show that they fall into a limited number of classes.21 To prove this, several hundred experimental repopulation kinetics from clonal Thy-1lo SCA-1+ lin− c-kit+ HSC were translated into symbolic sequences by assigning the symbols "+", "-", "~" whenever two successive measurements of the percent donor-type cells have a positive, negative, or unchanged slope, respectively. By using the Hamming distance, the repopulation patterns were subjected to cluster analysis yielding 16 distinct groups of kinetics. To finish the empirical proof, the Laplace add-one approach was used to determine that the probability of finding kinetics not contained in these 16 groups is very small. By corollary, this result shows that the hematopoietic stem cell compartment is also heterogeneous by dynamical criteria.
DNA damage and aging
DNA strand breaks accumulate in long term HSCs during aging.22 This accumulation is associated with a broad attenuation of DNA repair and response pathways that depends on HSC quiescence.23 Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) is a pathway that repairs double-strand breaks in DNA. NHEJ is referred to as "non-homologous" because the break ends are directly ligated without the need for a homologous template. The NHEJ pathway depends on several proteins including ligase 4, DNA polymerase mu and NHEJ factor 1 (NHEJ1, also known as Cernunnos or XLF).
DNA ligase 4 (Lig4) has a highly specific role in the repair of double-strand breaks by NHEJ. Lig4 deficiency in the mouse causes a progressive loss of HSCs during aging.24 Deficiency of lig4 in pluripotent stem cells results in accumulation of DNA double-strand breaks and enhanced apoptosis.25
In polymerase mu mutant mice, hematopoietic cell development is defective in several peripheral and bone marrow cell populations with about a 40% decrease in bone marrow cell number that includes several hematopoietic lineages.26 Expansion potential of hematopoietic progenitor cells is also reduced. These characteristics correlate with reduced ability to repair double-strand breaks in hematopoietic tissue.
Deficiency of NHEJ factor 1 in mice leads to premature aging of hematopoietic stem cells as indicated by several lines of evidence including evidence that long-term repopulation is defective and worsens over time.27 Using a human induced pluripotent stem cell model of NHEJ1 deficiency, it was shown that NHEJ1 has an important role in promoting survival of the primitive hematopoietic progenitors.28 These NHEJ1 deficient cells possess a weak NHEJ1-mediated repair capacity that is apparently incapable of coping with DNA damages induced by physiological stress, normal metabolism, and ionizing radiation.29
The sensitivity of haematopoietic stem cells to Lig4, DNA polymerase mu and NHEJ1 deficiency suggests that NHEJ is a key determinant of the ability of stem cells to maintain themselves against physiological stress over time.30 Rossi et al.31 found that endogenous DNA damage accumulates with age even in wild type HSCs, and suggested that DNA damage accrual may be an important physiological mechanism of stem cell aging.
See also

Hematopoiesis
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Americord Registry

References
Additional images
File:Hematopoiesis (human) diagram.png|Hematopoiesis
External links

Fact sheet about blood stem cells on EuroStemCell


"
Category:Hematopoietic stem cells Category:Stem cells Category:Blood cells Category:Leukocytes



"5. Hematopoietic Stem Cells." Stem Cell Information. National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 17 Jun 2011. Web. 9 Nov 2013. 
http://cordadvantage.com/cord-blood-101/hematopoietic-stem-cell

Dzierzak & Speck, Of lineage and legacy: the development of mammalian hematopoietic stem cells, Nature Immunology, 2008
Muller-Sieburg CE, Cho RH, Thoman M, Adkins B, Sieburg HB, "Deterministc regulation of haematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and differentiation" Blood 2002; 100; 1302-9



Schroeder, T. Haematopoietic Stem Cell Heterogeneity: Subtypes, Not Unpredictable Behavior. Cell Stem Cell 2010. 

Challen, G., Boles, NC, Chambers, SM, Goodell, MA. Distinct Haematopoietic Stem Cell Subtypes Are Differentially Regulated by TGF-beta1. Cell Stem Cel 2010. 
Burger JA, Spoo A, Dwenger A, Burger M, Behringer D. CXCR4 chemokine receptors (CD184) and alpha4beta1 integrins mediate spontaneous migration of human CD34+ progenitors and acute myeloid leukaemia cells beneath marrow stromal cells (pseudoemperipolesis).
http://stemcells.nih.gov/info/scireport/chapter5.asp



David C Weksberg, Stuart M Chambers, Nathan C Boles, and Margaret A Goodell CD150 negative Side Population cells represent a functionally distinct population of long-term haematopoietic stem cells" Blood 2007 : blood-2007-09-115006v1


















