


Weinberg angle




Weinberg angle

(Figure)
The pattern of weak isospin, T3, and weak hypercharge, YW, of the known elementary particles, showing electric charge, Q, along the Weinberg angle. The neutral Higgs field (circled) breaks the electroweak symmetry and interacts with other particles to give them mass. Three components of the Higgs field become part of the massive W and Z bosons.

The Weinberg angle or weak mixing angle is a parameter in the Weinberg–Salam theory of the electroweak interaction, and is usually denoted as θW. It is the angle by which spontaneous symmetry breaking rotates the original  and B0 vector boson plane, producing as a result the  boson, and the photon.



It also gives the relationship between the masses of the W and Z bosons (denoted as mW and mZ):



The angle can be expressed in terms of the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  coupling constants (g and g', respectively):


 
  and 
 
 

As the value of the mixing angle is currently determined empirically, it has been mathematically defined as:1



The value of θW varies as a function of the momentum transfer, Q, at which it is measured. This variation, or 'running', is a key prediction of the electroweak theory. The most precise measurements have been carried out in electron-positron collider experiments at a value of , corresponding to the mass of the Z boson, mZ.
In practice the quantity sin2θW is more frequently used. The 2004 best estimate of sin2θW, at , in the 

 
  scheme is . Atomic parity violation experiments yield values for sin2θW at smaller values of Q, below 0.01 GeV/c, but with much lower precision. In 2005 results were published from a study of parity violation in Møller scattering in which a value of  0.2397 ± 0.0013}} was obtained at , establishing experimentally the 'running' of the weak mixing angle. These values correspond to a Weinberg angle of ~30°.
Note, however, that the specific value of the angle is not a prediction of the standard model: it is an open, unfixed parameter. At this time, there is no generally accepted theory that explains why the measured value is what it is.
See also

Cabibbo angle

References




E158: A Precision Measurement of the Weak Mixing Angle in Møller Scattering
Q-weak: A Precision Test of the Standard Model and Determination of the Weak Charges of the Quarks through Parity-Violating Electron Scattering

"
Category:Electroweak theory



↩




