


Light dressed state




Light dressed state

In the fields of atomic, molecular, and optical science, the term light dressed state refers to a quantum state of an atomic or molecular system interacting with a laser light in terms of the Floquet picture, i.e. roughly like an atom or a molecule plus a photon. The Floquet picture is based on the Floquet theorem in differential equations with periodic coefficients.
Mathematical formulation
The Hamiltonian of a system of charged particles interacting with a laser light can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the vector potential of the electromagnetic field of the laser; 
 
 
 
  is periodic in time as 
 
 
 
 . The position and momentum of the 
 
 
 
 -th particle are denoted as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, while its mass and charge are symbolized as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. 
 
 
 
  is the speed of light. By virtue of this time-periodicity of the laser field, the total Hamiltonian is also periodic in time as


 
  The Floquet theorem guarantees that any solution 
 
 
 
  of the Schrödinger equation with this type of Hamiltonian,


 
  can be expressed in the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  has the same time-periodicity as the Hamiltonian, 
 
 
 
  Therefore, this part can be expanded in a Fourier series, obtaining


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the frequency of the laser field. This expression (2) reveals that a quantum state of the system governed by the Hamiltonian (1) can be specified by a real number 
 
 
 
  and an integer 
 
 
 
 .
The integer 
 
 
 
  in eq. (2) can be regarded as the number of photons absorbed from (or emitted to) the laser field. In order to prove this statement, we clarify the correspondence between the solution (2), which is derived from the classical expression of the electromagnetic field where there is no concept of photons, and one which is derived from a quantized electromagnetic field (see quantum field theory). (It will be verified that 
 
 
 
  is equal to the expectation value of the absorbed photon number at the limit of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the initial number of total photons: This part is under construction.)
References

J.H. Shirley, Phys. Rev. 138, B979 (1965).
H. Sambe, Phys. Rev. A 7, 2203 (1973).
S. Guerin, F. Monti, J-M. Dupont, and H.R. Jauslin, J. Phys. A 30, 7193 (1997).
S. Guerin and H.R. Jauslin, Adv. Chem. Phys. 125 147 (2003).
F.H.M. Faisal, Theory of Multiphoton Processes, Plenum (New York) 1987 ISBN 0-306-42317-0.

See also

Quantum mechanics
Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)

"
Category:Quantum mechanics


