


Electric potential energy




Electric potential energy

Electric potential energy, or electrostatic potential energy, is a potential energy (measured in joules) that results from conservative Coulomb forces and is associated with the configuration of a particular set of point charges within a defined system. An object may have electric potential energy by virtue of two key elements: its own electric charge and its relative position to other electrically charged objects.
The term "electric potential energy" is used to describe the potential energy in systems with time-variant electric fields, while the term "electrostatic potential energy" is used to describe the potential energy in systems with time-invariant electric fields.
Definition
We define the electric potential energy of a system of point charges as the work required assembling this system of charges by bringing them close together,as in the system from an infinite distance.

The electrostatic potential energy, UE, of one point charge q at position r in the presence of an electric field E is defined as the negative of the work W done by the electrostatic force to bring it from the reference position rref1 to that position r.234



where E is the electrostatic field and ds is the displacement vector in a curve from the reference position rref to the final position r.
 

The electrostatic potential energy can also be defined from the electric potential as follows:

The electrostatic potential energy, UE, of one point charge q at position r in the presence of an electric potential

 
  is defined as the product of the charge and the electric potential.
 


where 
 
 
 
  is the electric potential generated by the charges, which is a function of position r.
 

Units
The SI unit of electric potential energy is the joule (named after the English physicist James Prescott Joule). In the CGS system the erg is the unit of energy, being equal to 10−7 J. Also electronvolts may be used, 1 eV = 1.602×10−19 J.
Electrostatic potential energy of one point charge
One point charge q in the presence of one point charge Q
(Figure)
A point charge q in the electric field of another charge Q.|thumb|434px

The electrostatic potential energy, UE, of one point charge q at position r in the presence of a point charge Q, taking an infinite separation between the charges as the reference position, is:
where 
 
 
 
  is Coulomb's constant, r is the distance between the point charges q & Q, and q & Q are the signed values of the charges (not the modules of the charges. For example, an electron would have a negative value of charge when placed in the formula). The following outline of proof states the derivation from the definition of electric potential energy and Coulomb's law to this formula.






Outline of proof





The electrostatic force F acting on a charge q can be written in terms of the electric field E as


 
 , By definition, the electrostatic potential energy, UE, of one point charge q at position r in the presence of an electric field E is the negative of the work done by the electrostatic force to bring it from the reference position rref to that position r.


 
 . where:

r = position in 3d space of the charge q, using cartesian coordinates r = (x, y, z), taking the position of the Q charge at r = (0,0,0), the scalar r = |r| is the norm of the position vector,
ds = differential displacement vector along a path C going from rref to r,


 
  is the work done by the electrostatic force to bring the charge from the reference position rref to r,

Usually UE is set to zero when rref is infinity:


 
  so


 
  When the curl  is zero, the line integral above does not depend on the specific path C chosen but only on its endpoints. This happens in time-invariant electric fields. When talking about electrostatic potential energy, time-invariant electric fields are always assumed so, in this case, the electric field is conservative and Coulomb's law can be used. Using Coulomb's law, it is known that the electrostatic force F and the electric field '''E ''' created by a discrete point charge Q are radially directed from Q. By the definition of the position vector r and the displacement vector s, it follows that r and s are also radially directed from Q. So, E and ds must be parallel:


 
  Using Coulomb's law, the electric field is given by


 
  and the integral can be easily evaluated:








One point charge q in the presence of n point charges Qi
 The electrostatic potential energy, UE, of one point charge q in the presence of n point charges Qi, taking an infinite separation between the charges as the reference position, is:
where 
 
 
 
  is Coulomb's constant, ri is the distance between the point charges q & Qi, and q & Qi are the signed values of the charges.
Electrostatic potential energy stored in a system of point charges
The electrostatic potential energy UE stored in a system of N charges q1, q2, ..., qN at positions r1, r2, ..., rN respectively, is: 
|1}}
where, for each i value, Φ(ri) is the electrostatic potential due to all point charges except the one at ri,5 and is equal to:


 
 ,
where rij is the distance between qj and ri.






Outline of proof





The electrostatic potential energy UE stored in a system of two charges is equal to the electrostatic potential energy of a charge in the electrostatic potential generated by the other. That is to say, if charge q1 generates an electrostatic potential Φ1, which is a function of position r, then


 
  Doing the same calculation with respect to the other charge, we obtain


 
  This can be generalized to say that the electrostatic potential energy UE stored in a system of N charges q1, q2, ..., qN at positions r1, r2, ..., rN respectively, is: 
 
 
 
 .





Energy stored in a system of one point charge
The electrostatic potential energy of a system containing only one point charge is zero, as there are no other sources of electrostatic potential against which an external agent must do work in moving the point charge from infinity to its final location.
Energy stored in a system of two point charges
Consider bringing a point charge, q, into its final position in the vicinity of a point charge, Q1. The electrostatic potential Φ(r) due to Q1 is



Hence we obtain, the electric potential energy of q in the potential of Q1 as



where r1is the separation between the two point charges.
Energy stored in a system of three point charges
The electrostatic potential energy of a system of three charges should not be confused with the electrostatic potential energy of Q1 due to two charges Q2 and Q3, because the latter doesn't include the electrostatic potential energy of the system of the two charges Q2 and Q3.
The electrostatic potential energy stored in the system of three charges is:









Outline of proof





Using the formula given in (), the electrostatic potential energy of the system of the three charges will then be:


 
  Where 
 
 
 
  is the electric potential in r1 created by charges Q2 and Q3, 
 
 
 
  is the electric potential in r2 created by charges Q1 and Q3, and 
 
 
 
  is the electric potential in r3 created by charges Q1 and Q2. The potentials are:








 
  Where rab is the distance between charge Qa and Qb. If we add everything:


 
  Finally, we get that the electrostatic potential energy stored in the system of three charges:








Energy stored in an electrostatic field distribution
The energy density, or energy per unit volume, 
 
 
 
 , of the electrostatic field of a continuous charge distribution is:









Outline of proof





One may take the equation for the electrostatic potential energy of a continuous charge distribution and put it in terms of the electrostatic field. Since Gauss' law for electrostatic field in differential form states


 
  where



 
  is the electric field vector


 
  is the total charge density including dipole charges bound in a material


 
  is the permittivity of free space,

then,


 
 
  so, now using the following divergence vector identity


 
  we have


 
  using the divergence theorem and taking the area to be at infinity where 
 
 



 
 
  So, the energy density, or energy per unit volume 
 
 
 
 
  of the electrostatic field is:








Energy in electronic elements
 Some elements in a circuit can convert energy from one form to another. For example, a resistor converts electrical energy to heat, this is known as the Joule effect. A capacitor stores it in its electric field. The total electric potential energy stored in a capacitor is given by



where C is the capacitance, V is the electric potential difference, and Q the charge stored in the capacitor.
Notes
References
"
Category:Forms of energy Category:Electrostatics Category:Electricity Category:Electric power



The reference zero is usually taken to be a state in which the individual point charges are very well separated ("are at infinite separation") and are at rest.
Electromagnetism (2nd edition), I.S. Grant, W.R. Phillips, Manchester Physics Series, 2008 ISBN 0-471-92712-0

Alternatively, it can also be defined as the work W done by the an external force to bring it from the reference position rref to some position r. Nonetheless, both definitions yield the same results.
The factor of one half accounts for the 'double counting' of charge pairs. For example, consider the case of just two charges.




