   A major      A major   A major (or the key of A ) is a major scale based on A, with the pitches A , B , C , D , E , F , and G . Its key signature has three sharps .  Its relative minor is F-sharp minor and its parallel minor is A minor . The key of A major is the only key where a Neapolitan sixth chord on    2  ^     normal-^  2    \hat{2}   requires both a flat and a natural accidental.  In the treble, alto, and bass clefs, the G in the key signature is placed higher than C. However, in the tenor clef, it would require a ledger line and so G is placed lower than C.  Although not as rare in the symphonic literature as sharper keys, examples of symphonies in A major are not as numerous as for D major or G major . Beethoven 's Symphony No. 7 , Bruckner 's Symphony No. 6 and Mendelssohn 's Symphony No. 4 comprise a nearly complete list of symphonies in this key in the Romantic era. Mozart 's Clarinet Concerto and Clarinet Quintet are both in A major, and generally Mozart was more likely to use clarinets in A major than in any other key besides E-flat major . 1  A major is often thought of as the simplest key for violin and other orchestra instruments and beginning violin students' first pieces are usually simple ones in this key.  A major occurs frequently in chamber music. Franz Schubert 's Piano Quintet known as the Trout Quintet and Antonín Dvořák 's Piano Quintet No. 2 are both in A major. Johannes Brahms , César Franck , and Gabriel Fauré wrote violin sonatas in A major. In connection to Beethoven's Kreutzer Sonata , Peter Cropper said that A major "is the fullest sounding key for the violin." 2  According to Christian Friedrich Daniel Schubart , A major is a key suitable for "declarations of innocent love, ... hope of seeing one's beloved again when parting; youthful cheerfulness and trust in God." 3  (Figure)  Ascending and descending A major scale .   For orchestral works in A major, the timpani are typically set to A and E a fifth apart, rather than a fourth apart as for most other keys. Hector Berlioz complained about the custom of his day in which timpani tuned to A and E a fifth apart were notated C and G a fourth apart, a custom which survived as late as the music of Franz Berwald . 4  Notable compositions in A major   Violin Concerto No. 5 in A major, K. 219 – Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart  Symphony No. 29 in A Major, K. 201 – Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart  Piano Concerto No. 23 in A major, K. 488 – Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart  Clarinet Concerto in A major, K. 622 – Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart  Symphony No. 7 in A major, Op. 92 – Ludwig van Beethoven  String Quartet No. 2 in A major, Op. 68 – Dmitri Shostakovich  Symphony No. 15 in A major, Op. 141 – Dmitri Shostakovich  Piano Concerto No. 2 in A major, S.125 – Franz Liszt  Polonaises, Op. 40 – Frédéric Chopin  Symphony No. 6 in A major – Anton Bruckner  Symphony No. 4 in A major, Op. 90 "Italian" – Felix Mendelssohn  Violin Sonata No. 2 in A major "Thun", Op. 100 – Johannes Brahms  Piano Sonata in A major, D. 664 – Franz Schubert  Piano Sonata No. 6 in A major, Op. 82 – Sergei Prokofiev  Trout Quintet – Franz Schubert   References  Further reading   Colin Lawson, Mozart: Clarinet Concerto , A Cambridge Music Handbook, Cambridge University Press, 1996.   External links     "  Category:Musical keys  Category:Major scales       ↩  Peter Cropper "Beethoven's Violin Sonata in A major, Op.47 'Kreutzer': First Movement" The Strad March 2009, p. 64 ↩  Rita Steblin (1996) A History of Key Characteristics in the Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries , University of Rochester Press, p. 123, ISBN 0835714187. ↩  N. D. Mar (1981). Anatomy of the Orchestra University of California Press, p. 349, ISBN 0520045009. ↩     