


Vlasov equation




Vlasov equation
The '''Vlasov equation''' is a differential equation describing ti
 me evolution of the distribution function of plasma consisting of charged particles with long-range (for example, Coulomb) interaction. The equation was first suggested for description of plasma by Anatoly Vlasov in 19381 (see also 2) and later discussed by him in detail in a monograph.3
Difficulties of the standard kinetic approach
First, Vlasov argues that the standard kinetic approach based on the Boltzmann equation has difficulties when applied to a description of the plasma with long-range Coulomb interaction. He mentions the following problems arising when applying the kinetic theory based on pair collisions to plasma dynamics:

Theory of pair collisions disagrees with the discovery by Rayleigh, Irving Langmuir and Lewi Tonks of natural vibrations in electron plasma.
Theory of pair collisions is formally not applicable to Coulomb interaction due to the divergence of the kinetic terms.
Theory of pair collisions cannot explain experiments by Harrison Merrill and Harold Webb on anomalous electron scattering in gaseous plasma.4

Vlasov suggests that these difficulties originate from the long-range character of Coulomb interaction. He starts with the collisionless Boltzmann equation (sometimes anachronistically called the Vlasov equation in this context), in generalized coordinates:



explicitly a PDE:



and adapted it to the case of a plasma, leading to the systems of equations shown below.5
The Vlasov–Maxwell system of equations (gaussian units)
Instead of collision-based kinetic description for interaction of charged particles in plasma, Vlasov utilizes a self-consistent collective field created by the charged plasma particles. Such a description uses distribution functions

 
  and 
 
 
 
  for electrons and (positive) plasma ions. The distribution function 
 
 
 
  for species 
 
 
 
  describes the number of particles of the species 
 
 
 
  having approximately the momentum

 
  near the position

 
  at time 
 
 
 
 . Instead of the Boltzmann equation, the following system of equations was proposed for description of charged components of plasma (electrons and positive ions):






Here 
 
 
 
  is the electron charge, 
 
 
 
  is the speed of light,  is the mass of the ion, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent collective self-consistent electromagnetic field created in the point 
 
 
 
  at time moment 
 
 
 
  by all plasma particles. The essential difference of this system of equations from equations for particles in an external electromagnetic field is that the self-consistent electromagnetic field depends in a complex way on the distribution functions of electrons and ions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The Vlasov–Poisson equation
The Vlasov–Poisson equations are an approximation of the Vlasov–Maxwell equations in the nonrelativistic zero-magnetic field limit:



and Poisson's equation for self-consistent electric field:



Here  is the particle's electric charge,  is the particle's mass, 
 
 
 
  is the self-consistent electric field, 
 
 
 
  the self-consistent electric potential and 
 
 
 
  is the electric charge density.
Vlasov–Poisson equations are used to describe various phenomena in plasma, in particular Landau damping and the distributions in a double layer plasma, where they are necessarily strongly non-Maxwellian, and therefore inaccessible to fluid models.
Moment equations
In fluid descriptions of plasmas (see plasma modeling and magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)) one does not consider the velocity distribution. This is achieved by replacing 
 
 
 
  with plasma moments such as number density

 
 , flow velocity

 
  and pressure 
 
 
 
 .6 They are named plasma moments because the 
 
 
 
 -th moment of 
 
 
 
  can be found by integrating 
 
 
 
  over velocity. These variables are only functions of position and time, which means that some information is lost. In multifluid theory, the different particle species are treated as different fluids with different pressures, densities and flow velocities. The equations governing the plasma moments are called the moment or fluid equations.
Below the two most used moment equations are presented (in SI units). Deriving the moment equations from the Vlasov equation requires no assumptions about the distribution function.
Continuity equation
The continuity equation describes how the density changes with time. It can be found by integration of the Vlasov equation over the entire velocity space.



After some calculations, one ends up with



The number density 
 
 
 
 , and the momentum density

 
 , are zeroth and first order moments:






Momentum equation
The rate of change of momentum of a particle is given by the Lorentz equation:



By using this equation and the Vlasov Equation, the momentum equation for each fluid becomes


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the pressure tensor. The material derivative is



The pressure tensor is defined as the particle mass times the covariance matrix of the velocity:



The frozen-in approximation
As for ideal MHD, the plasma can be considered as tied to the magnetic field lines when certain conditions are fulfilled. One often says that the magnetic field lines are frozen into the plasma. The frozen-in conditions can be derived from Vlasov equation.
We introduce the scales 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for time, distance and speed respectively. They represent magnitudes of the different parameters which give large changes in 
 
 
 
 . By large we mean that



We then write



Vlasov equation can now be written



So far no approximations have been done. To be able to proceed we set 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the gyro frequency and 
 
 
 
  is the gyroradius. By dividing by , we get



If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the two first terms will be much less than 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  due to the definitions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  above. Since the last term is of the order of 
 
 
 
 , we can neglect the two first terms and write



This equation can be decomposed into a field aligned and a perpendicular part:



The next step is to write 
 
 
 
 , where



It will soon be clear why this is done. With this substitution, we get



If the parallel electric field is small,



This equation means that the distribution is gyrotropic.7 The mean velocity of a gyrotropic distribution is zero. Hence, 
 
 
 
  is identical with the mean velocity, 
 
 
 
 , and we have



To summarize, the gyro period and the gyro radius must be much smaller than the typical times and lengths which give large changes in the distribution function. The gyro radius is often estimated by replacing 
 
 
 
  with the thermal velocity or the Alfvén velocity. In the latter case 
 
 
 
  is often called the inertial length. The frozen-in conditions must be evaluated for each particle species separately. Because electrons have much smaller gyro period and gyro radius than ions, the frozen-in conditions will more often be satisfied.
See also

A. A. Vlasov, Many-Particle Theory and Its Application to Plasma, Gordon and Breach, 1961.
List of plasma (physics) articles

References
"
Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Non-equilibrium thermodynamics Category:Plasma physics Category:Equations







"Vlasov equation?", M. Hénon, Astronomy and Astrophysics 114, #1 (October 1982), pp. 211-212, 
W. Baumjohann and R. A. Treumann, Basic Space Plasma Physics, Imperial College Press, 1997
P. C. Clemmow and J. Dougherty, Electrodynamics of Particles and Plasmas, Addison-Wesley series in advanced physics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1969




