   New York Yacht Club      New York Yacht Club   The New York Yacht Club is a private social club and yacht club based in New York City and Newport, Rhode Island . It was founded in 1844 by nine prominent sportsmen. The members have contributed to the sport of yachting and yacht design. The organization has over 3,000 members as of 2011. Membership in the club is by invitation only. Its officers include a Commodore , vice-commodore, rear-commodore, secretary and treasurer.  Clubhouses  In 1845, the club’s first clubhouse was established — a modest, Gothic-revival building in Hoboken, New Jersey , on land donated by Commodore John Cox Stevens. After outgrowing its cramped quarters, the club moved to several other locations, including Staten Island , Glen Cove, New York and Mystic, Connecticut .  Its primary clubhouse is a six-storied Beaux-Arts  landmark with a nautical-themed limestone facade, located at 37 West 44th Street in midtown Manhattan . Opened in 1901, it was designed by Warren and Wetmore (1898), architects of the exterior of Grand Central Terminal . 1 The centerpiece of the clubhouse is the "Model Room", which contains a notable collection of full and half hull models including a scale model history of all New York Yacht Club America's Cup challenges. It was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1987. 2 3 4  In addition to its Manhattan headquarters, which are located inland, the club maintains "Harbour Court", a clubhouse opened in 1988 on the water in Newport.  History  The New York Yacht Club was founded on July 30, 1844 by nine gentlemen. John Cox Stevens , the leader of this group, and a prominent citizen of New York with a passion for sports, was elected commodore. George L. Schuyler and Hamilton Wilkes were also NYYC founders that, together with Stevens and two others, created the syndicate that built and raced the great schooner-yacht, America . Wilkes served as the club’s first vice-commodore. Schuyler played a key role in the founding of the America's Cup  regatta , and served as its unofficial consultant until his death in 1890.  In 1845, the club’s burgee was designed. The waters off Newport have been a key sailing venue for the NYYC since the beginning of its history. Indeed, the day the club was founded in 1844, its members resolved to sail from the Battery to Newport. Two days later they did, with several stops on the way, and trials of speed.  During the first decades of the club's history, racing for prize money was the objective among most members. In 1851, a syndicate of NYYC enthusiasts built and raced America , capturing the "One Hundred Sovereign Cup" at the annual regatta of the Royal Yacht Squadron . On July 8, 1857, the coveted trophy was donated to the NYYC, to serve as a challenge cup for sportsmanlike competition between nations. The "America's Cup Race", named for its first winner, played a central role in the history of the club.  In 1865, the Club was incorporated, adopting the Latin motto: "Nos agimur tumidis velis" -- "We go with swelling sails" (adapted from the verse of the famous Roman poet Horace, "Non agimur tumidis uelis", "We do not go with swelling sails", in Epistles , 2, 2, 201). During this time, membership transformed from the "old guard" to a new generation of yachtsmen, who built large schooner yachts captained by professionals. Marking this transition was the 1866 resignation of Commodore Edwin Augustus Stevens , brother of founder John Cox Stevens and member of the America syndicate.  The year 1866 is remembered in club annals for the legendary "Transatlantic Race". In December, the NYYC schooners Henrietta , Fleetwing , and Vesta raced from Sandy Hook to the Needles, Isle of Wight for a $90,000 winner-take-all prize. The Henrietta , owned by 21-year-old James Gordon Bennett, Jr. , and skippered by Captain Samuel S. Samuels, a professional, won the race in 13 days, 21 hours and 55 minutes. Bennett would be elected commodore in 1871.  In 1876, the Mohawk , a large centre-board schooner, capsized due to its sheets being "made fast" (fastened securely) when a freak squall struck. Vice-Commodore William T. Garner, his wife and crew died in the accident. It is believed that this tragedy led to the extinction of the great centerboard schooner yachts. The Mohawk was later sold to the U.S. Navy and recommissioned as the U.S. Eagre.  New York Yacht Club Stations circa 1894  By 1894, the New York Yacht Club had a number of Clubhouses: Station 1 in Bay Ridge; 2 in New York NY; 3 in Whitestone NY; 4 in New London Conn; 5 in Shelter Island NY; 6 in Newport RI; 7 in Vineyard Haven Mass and at Rendezvous Glen Cove. In 1868 the club bought a big mansion used as Station 2 at roesebank Staten Island. This building still stands and is known as the Macfarlane Bredt House .  File:New York Yacht Club Station 1 Bay Ridge c 1894.JPG| Clubhouse "Station No. 1" of the New York Yacht Club c 1894 at Bay Ridge File:New York Yacht Club station 3 Whitestone c 1894.JPG |Clubhouse "Station No. 3" of the New York Yacht Club c 1894 at Whitestone, NY File:New York Yacht Club Station 4 New London c 1894.JPG |Clubhouse "Station No. 4" of the New York Yacht Club c 1894 at New London, Conn File:New York Yacht Club station 5 Shelter Island.JPG |Clubhouse "Station No. 5" of the New York Yacht Club c 1894 at Shelter Island, NY File:New York Yacht Club station 6 Newport c 1894.JPG |Clubhouse "Station No. 6" of the New York Yacht Club c. 1890s at Newport, RI File:New York Yacht Club station 7 Vineyard Haven c 1894.JPG |Clubhouse "Station No. 7" of the New York Yacht Club c 1894 at Vineyard Haven, Mass File:New York Yacht Club Rendezvous Glen Cove c 1894.JPG| Clubhouse of the New York Yacht Club c 1894 at Rendezvous Glen Cove  In 1895, Richard H. Barker composed 'The yacht club march: march and two-step: for piano' in honour of the New York Yacht Club. 5  In 1994, as part of the Club's 150th celebrations, Melissa H. Harrington wrote 'The New York Yacht Club, 1844-1994,' 6  Racing rules  Following the disastrous Bay of Quinte America's Cup challenge in 1881, the Club's committee voted a new rule to govern its races: 7      Rating  =     2  ⋅  Load Waterline Length   +   Sail Area    3       Rating       normal-⋅  2  Load Waterline Length     Sail Area    3     \text{Rating}=\frac{2\cdot\text{Load Waterline Length}+\sqrt{\text{Sail Area}}%
 }{3}     The America's Cup challenges of 1885, 1886 and 1887 used this rule with a  waterline length limit. In 1887, the NYYC adopted the Seawanhaka Corinthian Yacht Club 's rating rule, which handicaped length comparatively less. Then, in 1903, the NYYC changed its rating system to the "Herreshoff Rule", devised by the yacht designer, Nathanael Herreshoff . Later renamed the " Universal Rule ", it would be adopted by the majority of leading American yacht clubs. The rule governed yacht design for almost forty years.  The America's Cup was held for 132 years, until Australia II defeated Dennis Conner 's Liberty off Newport, Rhode Island in 1983. This record remains the longest continuous winning streak in sports history.  Since the loss of the Cup the NYYC has been forced to reinvent itself and the Club has become involved in team racing , dinghy racing , youth sailing, and international regattas. In 2002 the Club hosted the Intercollegiate Sailing Association Sloop North American Championships. In 2006 the Club hosted the Blind Sailing World Championships .  Regattas   2005 Rolex Transatlantic Challenge  "New York Yacht Club Cruise", an annual series of races held in July or August  "Annual Regatta", started in 1846  "Queen's Cup Trophy"  "12-metre Worlds"  "Una Cup"  "Corsair Cup"  "Astor Cups"  "Solution Trophy"   (Figure)  Engraving of spectators watching the annual regatta, late 19th century   Notable members   Winthrop W. Aldrich  Brooke Astor  John Jacob Astor , real estate mogul  Vincent Astor  George Fisher Baker  August Belmont  James Gordon Bennett, Jr. , newspaper publisher  Michael Bloomberg , Mayor of New York  John Nicholas Brown II , philanthropist  Frederick Gilbert Bourne  William F. Buckley , author and commentator  William A. Chanler , explorer, soldier and US Congressman  Robert H. Conn , Assistant Secretary of the Navy  Dennis Conner , racing yacht captain  William P. Cronan , 19th Naval Governor of Guam  Walter Cronkite , newscaster  Chris Dodd , United States senator  Pete DuPont , governor of Delaware  Elbridge Thomas Gerry  Jay Gould , railroad tycoon  Alfred Walton Hinds , 17th Naval Governor of Guam  Charles Oliver Iselin  Arthur Curtiss James  Gary Jobson  Edward Kennedy, Jr. , United States senator  Dennis Kozlowski (resigned)  Lewis Cass Ledyard  John Lehman , Secretary of the Navy  Bernard Madoff (resigned)  J. P. Morgan , financier  J. P. Morgan, Jr.  Junius Spencer Morgan III  Emil Mosbacher  Robert Mosbacher  Frank F. Olney (1851—1903), 18th Mayor of Providence, Rhode Island 8  Trenor Luther Park elected 1883, owned the Sultana  David Rockefeller , banker  Franklin D. Roosevelt , 32nd President of the United States  Gary Roughead , 29th Chief of Naval Operations, US Navy  Alfred P. Sloan  John Cox Stevens  Olin Stephens , yacht designer  Ted Turner , media mogul  Cornelius Vanderbilt III , Army general  Harold Stirling Vanderbilt , railroad executive  Thomas Watson, Jr.   See also   List of American gentlemen's clubs   References   New York Yacht Club by New York Yacht Club and Rarebooksclub.com (Mar 4 2012) ISBN 1130831000   External links    Photographs of Manhattan clubhouse interior  The history of yachting, 1600-1815 by Arthur H. Clark; pub. under authority and direction of the New York Yacht Club (New York ; London : G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1904)   "    Category:Cultural infrastructure completed in 1901  Category:America's Cup yacht clubs  Category:Clubhouses on the National Register of Historic Places in Manhattan  Category:Clubs and societies in New York City  Category:National Historic Landmarks in New York City  Category:Traditional gentlemen's clubs in New York City  Category:Warren and Wetmore buildings  Category:Yacht clubs in the United States  Category:Midtown Manhattan  Category:1844 establishments in New York  Category:Art Nouveau architecture in New York City  Category:Beaux-Arts architecture in New York     http://dictionaryofarchitectsincanada.org/architects/view/310 Whitney Warren Dictionary of Architects in Canada ↩   ↩  ↩  Richard H. Barker 'The yacht club march: march and two-step: for piano' (Toronto : Whaley, Royce & Co., c1895) ↩  Melissa H. Harrington 'The New York Yacht Club, 1844-1994'(Lyme, Conn. : Greenwich Pub. Group, 1994) ↩  ↩  ↩     