


List of knot theory topics




List of knot theory topics

Knot theory is the study of mathematical knots. While inspired by knots which appear in daily life in shoelaces and rope, a mathematician's knot differs in that the ends are joined together so that it cannot be undone. In precise mathematical language, a knot is an embedding of a circle in 3-dimensional Euclidean space, R3. Two mathematical knots are equivalent if one can be transformed into the other via a deformation of R3 upon itself (known as an ambient isotopy); these transformations correspond to manipulations of a knotted string that do not involve cutting the string or passing the string through itself.
Overview
History
Knots, links, braids

Knot (mathematics) gives a general introduction to the concept of a knot.
 
Two classes of knots: torus knots and pretzel knots
Cinquefoil knot also known as a (5, 2) torus knot.
Figure-eight knot (mathematics) the only 4-crossing knot
Granny knot (mathematics) and Square knot (mathematics) are a connected sum of two Trefoil knots
Perko pair, two entries in a knot table that were later shown to be identical.
Stevedore knot (mathematics), a prime knot with crossing number 6
Solomon's knot
Three-twist knot is the twist knot with three-half twists, also known as the 52 knot.
Trefoil knot A knot with crossing number 3
Unknot



Knot complement, a compact 3 manifold obtained by removing an open neighborhood of a proper embedding of a tame knot from the 3-sphere.
Knots and graphs general introduction to knots with mention of Reidemeister moves

Notation used in knot theory:

Conway notation (knot theory)
Dowker notation

General knot types

2-bridge knot
Alternating knot; a knot that can be represented by an alternating diagram (i.e. the crossing alternate over and under as one traverses the knot).
Berge knot a class of knots related to Lens space surgeries and defined in terms of their properties with respect to a genus 2 Heegaard surface.
Cable knot, see Satellite knot  
Chiral knot is knot which is not equivalent to its mirror image.
Double torus knot, a knot that can be embedded in a double torus (a genus 2 surface).
Fibered knot
Framed knot
Invertible knot
Prime knot
Legendrian knot are knots embedded in 
 
 
 
  tangent to the standard contact structure.
Lissajous knot
Ribbon knot
Satellite knot
Slice knot
Torus knot
Transverse knot
Twist knot
Virtual knot
Wild knot

Links

Borromean rings
Brunnian link
Hopf link
Whitehead link
Unlink

General types of links:

Algebraic link
Hyperbolic link
Pretzel link
Split link
String link

Tangles

Tangle (mathematics)  
Algebraic tangle  

Braids

Braid theory

Braid group


Operations

Band sum
Flype
Fox n-coloring

Tricolorability

Knot sum
Reidemeister move

Invariants and properties

Knot invariant   is an invariant defined on knots which is invariant under ambient isotopies of the knot.
Finite type invariant   is a knot invariant that can be extended to an invariant of certain singular knots


Knot polynomial is a knot invariant in the form of a polynomial whose coefficients encode some of the properties of a given knot.
 
Alexander polynomial and the associated Alexander matrix; The first knot polynomial (1923). Sometimes called the Alexander–Conway polynomial
Bracket polynomial is a polynomial invariant of framed links. Related to the Jones polynomial. Also known as the Kauffman bracket.
Conway polynomial uses Skein relations.
Homfly polynomial or HOMFLYPT polynomial.
Jones polynomial assigns a Laurent polynomial in the variable t1/2 to the knot or link.
Kauffman polynomial is a 2-variable knot polynomial due to Louis Kauffman.



Arf invariant of a knot
Average crossing number
Bridge number
Crosscap number
Crossing number (knot theory)
Hyperbolic volume (knot)
Kontsevich invariant
Linking number
Milnor invariants
Racks and quandles and Biquandle
Ropelength
Seifert surface
Self-linking number
Signature of a knot
Skein relation
Slice genus
Tunnel number, the number of arcs that must be added to make the knot complement a handlebody
Writhe

Mathematical problems

Berge conjecture  
Birman–Wenzl algebra  
Clasper (mathematics)  
Eilenberg–Mazur swindle  
Fary–Milnor theorem  
Gordon–Luecke theorem  
Khovanov homology  
Knot group  
Knot tabulation  
Knot theory  
Knotless embedding  
Linkless embedding  
Link concordance  
Link group  
Link (knot theory)  
Milnor conjecture (topology)  
Milnor map  
Möbius energy
Mutation (knot theory)
Physical knot theory
Planar algebra
Smith conjecture
Tait conjectures
Temperley–Lieb algebra
Thurston–Bennequin number
Tricolorability
Unknotting number
Unknotting problem
Volume conjecture

Lists

List of mathematical knots and links

List of prime knots


"
Knot theory Category:Knot theory Knot theory


