


Schwarz–Christoffel mapping




Schwarz–Christoffel mapping

In complex analysis, a Schwarz–Christoffel mapping is a conformal transformation of the upper half-plane onto the interior of a simple polygon. Schwarz–Christoffel mappings are used in potential theory and some of its applications, including minimal surfaces and fluid dynamics. They are named after Elwin Bruno Christoffel and Hermann Amandus Schwarz.
Definition
Consider a polygon in the complex plane. The Riemann mapping theorem implies that there is a bijective biholomorphic mapping f from the upper half-plane


 
  to the interior of the polygon. The function f maps the real axis to the edges of the polygon. If the polygon has interior angles

 
 , then this mapping is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a constant, and 
 
 
 
  are the values, along the real axis of the 
 
 
 
  plane, of points corresponding to the vertices of the polygon in the 
 
 
 
  plane. A transformation of this form is called a Schwarz–Christoffel mapping.
It is often convenient to consider the case in which the point at infinity of the 
 
 
 
  plane maps to one of the vertices of the 
 
 
 
  plane polygon (conventionally the vertex with angle 
 
 
 
 ). If this is done, the first factor in the formula is effectively a constant and may be regarded as being absorbed into the constant 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Consider a semi-infinite strip in the  plane. This may be regarded as a limiting form of a triangle with vertices  0}},  π i}}, and  (with  real), as  tends to infinity. Now 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the limit. Suppose we are looking for the mapping  with  Q}},  P}}, and  R}}. Then  is given by



Evaluation of this integral yields





where  is a (complex) constant of integration. Requiring that  Q}} and  P}} gives  0}} and  1}}. Hence the Schwarz–Christoffel mapping is given by





This transformation is sketched below.
(Figure)
Schwarz–Christoffel mapping of the upper half-plane to the semi-infinite strip

Other simple mappings
Triangle
A mapping to a plane triangle with angles 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is given by



Square
The upper half-plane is mapped to the square by


 
  where F is the incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind.
General triangle
The upper half-plane is mapped to a triangle with circular arcs for edges by the Schwarz triangle map.
See also

The Schwarzian derivative appears in the theory of Schwarz–Christoffel mappings.

References




Further reading


.

External links


Schwarz–Christoffel Module by John H. Mathews
Schwarz–Christoffel toolbox (software for MATLAB)

"
Category:Conformal mapping


