


Hyperbolic triangle




Hyperbolic triangle

In hyperbolic geometry, a hyperbolic triangle is a triangle in the hyperbolic plane. It consists of three line segments called sides or edges and three points called angles or vertices.
Just as in the Euclidean case, three points of a hyperbolic space of an arbitrary dimension always lie on the same plane. Hence planar hyperbolic triangles also describe triangles possible in any higher dimension of hyperbolic spaces. 
Definition
A hyperbolic triangle consists of three non-collinear points and the three segments between them.1
The relations among the angles and sides are analogous to those of spherical trigonometry
In a hyperbolic triangle the sum of the angles A, B, C (respectively opposite to the side with the corresponding letter) is strictly less than two right angles. This is contrasted to Euclidean triangles where this sum is always equal to the straight angle, as well as to spherical triangles where this sum is greater.
The difference between the measure of two right angles. and the sum of the measures of a triangle's angles is called the defect of the triangle.
Other properties
As in Euclidean geometry each hyperbolic triangle has an inscribed circle.
But if its vertices lie on an horocycle or hypercycle, the triangle has no circumscribed circle.
As in spherical geometry the only similar triangles are congruent triangles.
Triangles with Ideal vertices
(Figure)
Three ideal triangles in the Poincaré disk model

The definition of a triangle can be generalized, permitting vertices on the ideal boundary of the plane while keeping the sides within the plane. If a pair of sides is asymptotic (i.e. the distance between them vanishes but they do not intersect), then they end at an ideal vertex represented as an omega point.
Such a pair of sides may also be said to form an angle of zero.
A triangle with a zero angle is impossible in Euclidean geometry for straight sides lying on distinct lines. However, such zero angles are common with tangent circles.
A triangle with one ideal vertex is called an omega triangle. If all three vertices are ideal, then the resulting figure is called an ideal triangle. The latter is characterized by a zero sum of the angles.
Standardized Gaussian curvature
The relations among the angles and sides are analogous to those of spherical trigonometry; the length scale for both spherical geometry and hyperbolic geometry can for example be defined as the length of a side of an equilateral triangles with fixed angles.
The length scale is most conveniently if the lengths are measured in terms of the absolute length (a special unit oflength analogous to a relations between distances in spherical geometry).
This choice for this length scale makes formulas as simpler.2
In terms of the (constant and negative) Gaussian curvature

 
  of a hyperbolic plane this unit is given by








In a hyperbolic triangle the sum of the angles A, B, C (respectively opposite to the side with the corresponding letter) is strictly less than a straight angle. The difference between the measure of a straight angle and the sum of the measures of a triangle's angles is called the defect of the triangle. The area of a hyperbolic triangle is equal to its defect multiplied by the square of 
 
 
 
 
 :








This theorem, first proven by Johann Heinrich Lambert,3 is related to Girard's theorem in spherical geometry.
In all the formulas stated below the sides 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  must be measured in this unit. In other words, 
 
 
 
 
  is supposed to be equal to 1 and 
 
 
 
  is supposed to be equal to -1.
Trigonometry
In all the formulas stated below the sides 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  must be measured in a unit so that the Gaussian curvature

 
 
  of the plane is −1. In other words, 
 
 
 
  is supposed to be equal to 1.
Trigonometric formulas for hyperbolic triangles depend on the hyperbolic functions sinh, cosh, and tanh.
Trigonometry of right triangles
If C is a right angle then:

The sine of angle A is the ratio of the hyperbolic sine of the side opposite the angle to the hyperbolic sine of the hypotenuse.










The cosine of angle A is the ratio of the hyperbolic tangent of the adjacent leg to the hyperbolic tangent of the hypotenuse.










The tangent of angle A is the ratio of the hyperbolic tangent of the opposite leg to the hyperbolic sine of the adjacent leg.










The '''hyperbolic cosine ''' of the hypotenuse is the product of '''hyperbolic cosine ''' of the adjacent leg and the hyperbolic cosine of the opposite leg.










The hyperbolic cosine of the adjacent leg to angle A is the ratio of the cosine of angle B to the sine of angle A.










The hyperbolic cosine of the hypotenuse is the ratio of the product of the cosines of the angles to the product of their sines.4









The instance of an omega triangle with an right angle provides the configuration to examine the angle of parallelism in the triangle.
In this case angle B is 
 
 
 
 , c = 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  resulting in.








General trigonometry
Whether C is a right angle or not, the following relationships hold: The hyperbolic law of cosines is as follows:








Its dual is








There is also a law of sines:



and a four-parts formula:








See also

Pair of pants (mathematics)
Triangle group

For hyperbolic trigonometry:

Hyperbolic law of sines
Hyperbolic law of cosines

References
Further reading

Svetlana Katok (1992) Fuchsian Groups, University of Chicago Press ISBN 0-226-42583-5

"
Triangle Category:Triangles



, interactive instructional website

title=Foundations of Hyperbolic Manifolds|volume=149|series=Graduate Texts in Mathematics|first=John|last=Ratcliffe|publisher=Springer|year=2006|isbn=9780387331973|page=99|url=http://books.google.com/books?id=JV9m8o-ok6YC&pg;;=PA99|quotation=That the area of a hyperbolic triangle is proportional to its angle defect first appeared in Lambert's monograph Theorie der Parallellinien, which was published posthumously in 1786.





