


Washburn's equation




Washburn's equation
In [[physics]], '''Washburn's equation''' describes [[capillary action|capillary flow]] in a bundle of parallel cylindrical tubes; it is extended with some issues also to imbibition
 into porous materials. The equation is named after Edward Wight Washburn;1 also known as Lucas–Washburn equation, considering that Richard Lucas2 wrote a similar paper three years earlier, or the Bell-Cameron-Lucas-Washburn equation, considering J.M. Bell and F.K. Cameron's discovery of the form of the equation fifteen years earlier.3
Derivation
In case of a fully wettable capillary, it is



where 
 
 
 
  is the time for a liquid of dynamic viscosity

 
  and surface tension

 
  to penetrate a distance 
 
 
 
 
  into the capillary whose pore diameter is 
 
 
 
 . In case of a porous materials many issues have been raised both about the physical meaning of the calculated pore diameter 
 
 
4 and the real possibility to use this equation for the calculation of the contact angle of the solid.5
The equation is derived for capillary flow in a cylindrical tube in the absence of a gravitational field, but according to physicist Len Fisher can be extremely accurate for more complex materials including biscuits (see dunk (biscuit)). Following National biscuit dunking day, some newspaper articles quoted the equation as Fisher's equation. 
In his paper from 1921 Washburn applies Poiseuille's Law for fluid motion in a circular tube. Inserting the expression for the differential volume in terms of the length 
 
 
 
  of fluid in the tube 
 
 
 
 , one obtains



where 
 
 
 
  is the sum over the participating pressures, such as the atmospheric pressure 
 
 
 
 , the hydrostatic pressure 
 
 
 
  and the equivalent pressure due to capillary forces 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 
  is the viscosity of the liquid, and 
 
 
 
  is the coefficient of slip, which is assumed to be 0 for wetting materials. 
 
 
 
  is the radius of the capillary. The pressures in turn can be written as






where 
 
 
 
 
  is the density of the liquid and 
 
 
 
  its surface tension. 
 
 
 
  is the angle of the tube with respect to the horizontal axis. 
 
 
 
  is the contact angle of the liquid on the capillary material. Substituting these expressions leads to the first-order differential equation for the distance the fluid penetrates into the tube 
 
 
 
 :



Washburn's constant
The Washburn constant may be included in Washburn's equation.
It is calculated as follows:


67
Applications
Inkjet printing
The penetration of a liquid into the substrate flowing under its own capillary pressure can be calculated using a simplified version of Washburn's equation:89


 
  where the surface tension-to-viscosity ratio 
 
 
 
  represents the speed of ink penetration into the substrate.
References
"
Category:Equations of fluid dynamics Category:Porous media



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Micromeritics, "Autopore IV User Manual", September (2000). Section B, Appendix D: Data Reduction, page D-1. (Note that the addition of 1N/m2 is not given in this reference, merely implied)↩
Micromeritics, "A new method of interpolation and smooth curve fitting based on local procedures", Journal of the Association of Computing Machinery (1970). Volume 17(4), pp.589-602.↩
↩
↩




