


Pretzel link




Pretzel link

 In knot theory, a branch of mathematics, a pretzel link is a special kind of link. A pretzel link which is also a knot (i.e. a link with one component) is a pretzel knot.
In the standard projection of the 
 
 
 
  pretzel link, there are 
 
 
 
  left-handed crossings in the first tangle, 
 
 
 
  in the second, and, in general, 
 
 
 
  in the nth.
A pretzel link can also be described as a Montesinos link with integer tangles.
Some basic results
The 
 
 
 
  pretzel link is a knot iff both 
 
 
 
  and all the 
 
 
 
  are odd or exactly one of the 
 
 
 
  is even.1
The 
 
 
 
  pretzel link is split if at least two of the 
 
 
 
  are zero; but the converse is false.
The 
 
 
 
  pretzel link is the mirror image of the 
 
 
 
  pretzel link.
The 
 
 
 
  pretzel link is link-equivalent (i.e. homotopy-equivalent in S3) to the 
 
 
 
  pretzel link. Thus, too, the 
 
 
 
  pretzel link is link-equivalent to the 
 
 
 
  pretzel link.2
The 
 
 
 
  pretzel link is link-equivalent to the 
 
 
 
  pretzel link. However, if one orients the links in a canonical way, then these two links have opposite orientations.
Some examples
The (−1, −1, −1) pretzel knot is the trefoil; the (0, 3, −1) pretzel knot is its mirror image.
The (5, −1, −1) pretzel knot is the stevedore knot (61).
If p, q, r are distinct odd integers greater than 1, then the (p, q, r) pretzel knot is a non-invertible knot.
The (2p, 2q, 2r) pretzel link is a link formed by three linked unknots.
The (−3, 0, −3) pretzel knot (square knot (mathematics)) is the connected sum of two trefoil knots.
The (0, q, 0) pretzel link is the split union of an unknot and another knot.
Utility
 (−2, 3, 2n + 1) pretzel links are especially useful in the study of 3-manifolds. Many results have been stated about the manifolds that result from Dehn surgery on the (−2,3,7) pretzel knot in particular.
References
Further reading

Trotter, Hale F.: Non-invertible knots exist, Topology, 2 (1963), 272–280.

"
  Category:3-manifolds



Kawauchi, Akio (1996). A survey of knot theory. Birkhäuser. ISBN 3-7643-5124-1↩





