


Time-invariant system




Time-invariant system

A time-invariant (TIV) system is a system whose output does not depend explicitly on time. Such systems are regarded as a class of systems in the field of system analysis. Lack of time dependence is captured in the following mathematical property of such a system:

If the input signal 
 
 
 
  produces an output 
 
 
 
  then any time shifted input, 
 
 
 
 , results in a time-shifted output 
 
 



This property can be satisfied if the transfer function of the system is not a function of time except expressed by the input and output.
In the context of a system schematic, this property can also be stated as follows:

If a system is time-invariant then the system block commutes with an arbitrary delay.


If a time-invariant system is also linear, it is the subject of LTI system theory (linear time-invariant) with direct applications in NMR spectroscopy, seismology, circuits, signal processing, control theory, and other technical areas. Nonlinear time-invariant systems lack a comprehensive, governing theory. Discrete time-invariant systems are known as shift-invariant systems. Systems which lack the time-invariant property are studied as time-variant systems.
Simple example
To demonstrate how to determine if a system is time-invariant, consider the two systems:

System A
 
 

System B
 
 


Since system A explicitly depends on t outside of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it is not time-invariant. System B, however, does not depend explicitly on t so it is time-invariant.
Formal example
A more formal proof of why system A & B from above differ is now presented. To perform this proof, the second definition will be used.
System A:

Start with a delay of the input 
 
 







Now delay the output by 
 
 







Clearly 
 
 
 
 , therefore the system is not time-invariant.
 

System B:

Start with a delay of the input 
 
 







Now delay the output by 
 
 







Clearly 
 
 
 
 , therefore the system is time-invariant.
 

Abstract example
We can denote the shift operator by 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the amount by which a vector's index set should be shifted. For example, the "advance-by-1" system



can be represented in this abstract notation by



where 
 
 
 
  is a function given by



with the system yielding the shifted output



So 
 
 
 
  is an operator that advances the input vector by 1.
Suppose we represent a system by an operator

 
 . This system is time-invariant if it commutes with the shift operator, i.e.,



If our system equation is given by



then it is time-invariant if we can apply the system operator 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  followed by the shift operator 
 
 
 
 , or we can apply the shift operator 
 
 
 
  followed by the system operator 
 
 
 
 , with the two computations yielding equivalent results.
Applying the system operator first gives



Applying the shift operator first gives



If the system is time-invariant, then



See also

Finite impulse response
Sheffer sequence
State space (controls)
Signal-flow graph
LTI system theory

"
Category:Control theory Category:Signal processing


