


Free particle




Free particle

In physics, a free particle is a particle that, in some sense, is not bound by an external force, or equivalently not in a region where its potential energy varies. In classical physics, this means the particle is present in a "field-free" space. In quantum mechanics, it means a region of uniform potential, usually set to zero in the region of interest since potential can be arbitrarily set to zero at any point (or surface in three dimensions) in space.
Classical Free Particle
The classical free particle is characterized simply by a fixed velocity v. The momentum is given by



and the kinetic energy (equal to total energy) by



where m is the mass of the particle and v is the vector velocity of the particle.
Non-Relativistic Quantum Free Particle
(Figure)
"290px"|right|thumb|Propagation of de Broglie waves in 1d - real part of the complex amplitude is blue, imaginary part is green. The probability (shown as the colour opacity) of finding the particle at a given point x is spread out like a waveform, there is no definite position of the particle. As the amplitude increases above zero the curvature decreases, so the decreases again, and vice versa - the result is an alternating amplitude: a wave. Top: Plane wave. Bottom: Wave packet.

Mathematical description
A free quantum particle is described by the Schrödinger equation:



where ψ is the wavefunction of the particle at position r and time t. The solution for a particle with momentum p or wave vector k, at angular frequency ω or energy E, is given by the complex plane wave:



with amplitude A. As for all quantum particles free or bound, the Heisenberg uncertainty principles



(similarly for the y and z directions), and the De Broglie relations:



apply. Since the potential energy is (set to) zero, the total energy E is equal to the kinetic energy, which has the same form as in classical physics:



Measurement and calculations
The integral of the probability density function



where * denotes complex conjugate, over all space is the probability of finding the particle in all space, which must be unity if the particle exists:



This is the normalization condition for the wave function. The wavefunction is not normalizable for a plane wave, but is for a wavepacket.
{{-}}

{{-}}
In this case, the free particle wavefunction may be represented by a superposition of free particle momentum eigenfunctions ϕ(k), the Fourier transform of the momentum space wavefunction:



where the integral is over all k-space, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (to ensure that the wavepacket is a solution of the free particle Schrödinger equation). Note that here we abuse notation and denote 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with the same symbol, when we should denote 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the p-space and 
 
 
 
  the k-space function.
The expectation value of the momentum p for the complex plane wave is



and for the general wavepacket it is



The expectation value of the energy E is (for both plane wave and general wave packet; here one can observe the special status of time and hence energy in quantum mechanics as opposed to space and momentum)



For the plane wave, solving for k and ω and substituting into the constraint equation yields the familiar relationship between energy and momentum for non-relativistic massive particles



In general, the identity holds in the form



where p = |p| is the magnitude of the momentum vector.
The group velocity of the plane wave is defined as



which turns out to be the classical velocity of the particle. The phase velocity of the plane wave is defined as



Relativistic free particle
There are a number of equations describing relativistic particles: see relativistic wave equations.
See also

Particle in a box
Finite square well
Delta potential
Wave packet

Sources

Quantum Mechanics Demystified, D. McMahon, Mc Graw Hill (USA), 2006, ISBN(10-) 0-07-145546 9
Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei, and Particles (2nd Edition), R. Eisberg, R. Resnick, John Wiley & Sons, 1985, ISBN 978-0-471-87373-0
Quantum Mechanics, E. Abers, Pearson Ed., Addison Wesley, Prentice Hall Inc, 2004, ISBN 978-0-13-146100-0
Elementary Quantum Mechanics, N.F. Mott, Wykeham Science, Wykeham Press (Taylor & Francis Group), 1972, ISBN 0-85109-270-5
Stationary States, A. Holden, College Physics Monographs (USA), Oxford University Press, 1971, ISBN 0-19-851121-3
Quantum mechanics, E. Zaarur, Y. Peleg, R. Pnini, Schaum’s Oulines, Mc Graw Hill (USA), 1998, ISBN (10-) 007-0540187

Further reading

The New Quantum Universe, T.Hey, P.Walters, Cambridge University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-521-56457-1.
Quantum Field Theory, D. McMahon, Mc Graw Hill (USA), 2008, ISBN 978-0-07-154382-8
Quantum mechanics, E. Zaarur, Y. Peleg, R. Pnini, Schaum’s Easy Oulines Crash Course, Mc Graw Hill (USA), 2006, ISBN (10-)007-145533-7 ISBN (13-)978-007-145533-6

"
Category:Concepts in physics Category:Classical mechanics Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum models


