


Electrostriction




Electrostriction

Electrostriction (cf. magnetostriction) is a property of all electrical non-conductors, or dielectrics, that causes them to change their shape under the application of an electric field.
Explanation
Electrostriction is a property of all dielectric materials, and is caused by a slight displacement of ions in the crystal lattice upon being exposed to an external electric field. Positive ions will be displaced in the direction of the field, while negative ions will be displaced in the opposite direction. This displacement will accumulate throughout the bulk material and result in an overall strain (elongation) in the direction of the field. The thickness will be reduced in the orthogonal directions characterized by Poisson's ratio. All insulating materials consisting of more than one type of atoms will be ionic to some extent due to the difference of electronegativity of the atoms, and therefore exhibit electrostriction.
The resulting strain (ratio of deformation to the original dimension) is proportional to the square of the polarization. Reversal of the electric field does not reverse the direction of the deformation.
More formally, the electrostriction coefficient is a fourth rank tensor (
 
 
 
 ), relating second order strain (
 
 
 
 ) and first order polarization tensors (
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 ).



The related piezoelectric effect occurs only in a particular class of dielectrics. Electrostriction applies to all crystal symmetries, while the piezoelectric effect only applies to the 20 piezoelectric point groups. Electrostriction is a quadratic effect, unlike piezoelectricity, which is a linear effect.
Materials
Although all dielectrics exhibit some electrostriction, certain engineered ceramics, known as relaxor ferroelectrics, have extraordinarily high electrostrictive constants. The most commonly used are

lead magnesium niobate (PMN)
lead magnesium niobate-lead titanate (PMN-PT)
lead lanthanum zirconate titanate (PLZT)

Magnitude of effect
Electrostriction can produce a strain of 0.1% at a field strength of 2 million volts per meter (2 MV/m) for the material called PMN-15 (TRS website listed in the references below). The effect appears to be quadratic at low field strengths (up to 0.3 MV/m) and roughly linear after that, up to a maximum field strength of 4 MV/m . Therefore, devices made of such materials are normally operated around a bias voltage in order to behave nearly linearly. This will probably cause deformations to lead to a change of electric charge, but this is unconfirmed.
Applications

Sonar projectors for submarines and surface vessels
Actuators for small displacements

See also

Magnetostriction
Piezomagnetism
Piezoelectricity
Relaxor ferroelectric

References

"Electrostriction." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service. 19 July 2006
Mini dictionary of physics (1988) Oxford University Press
"Electrostrictive Materials" from TRS Technologies
"Electronic Materials" by Prof. Dr. Helmut Föll

External links
"
Category:Materials science Category:Electric and magnetic fields in matter


