


Metabolic acidosis




Metabolic acidosis

Metabolic acidosis is a condition that occurs when the body produces excessive quantities of acid or when the kidneys are not removing enough acid from the body. If unchecked, metabolic acidosis leads to acidemia, i.e., blood pH is low (less than 7.35) due to increased production of hydrogen ions by the body or the inability of the body to form bicarbonate (HCO3−) in the kidney. Its causes are diverse, and its consequences can be serious, including coma and death. Together with respiratory acidosis, it is one of the two general causes of acidemia.
Terminology

Acidosis refers to a process that causes a low pH in blood and tissues.
Acidemia refers specifically to a low pH in the blood.

In most cases, acidosis occurs first for reasons explained below. Free hydrogen ions then diffuse into the blood, lowering the pH. Arterial blood gas analysis detects acidemia (pH lower than 7.35). When acidemia is present, acidosis is presumed.
Signs and symptoms
Symptoms are not specific, and diagnosis can be difficult unless the patient presents with clear indications for arterial blood gas sampling. Symptoms may include chest pain, palpitations, headache, altered mental status such as severe anxiety due to hypoxia, decreased visual acuity, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, altered appetite and weight gain, muscle weakness, bone pain and joint pain. Those in metabolic acidosis may exhibit deep, rapid breathing called Kussmaul respirations which is classically associated with diabetic ketoacidosis. Rapid deep breaths increase the amount of carbon dioxide exhaled, thus lowering the serum carbon dioxide levels, resulting in some degree of compensation. Over compensation via respiratory alkalosis to form an alkalemia does not occur.
Extreme acidemia leads to neurological and cardiac complications:

Neurological: lethargy, stupor, coma, seizures.
Cardiac: arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia), decreased response to epinephrine; both lead to hypotension (low blood pressure).

Physical examination occasionally reveals signs of disease, but is otherwise normal. Cranial nerve abnormalities are reported in ethylene glycol poisoning, and retinal edema can be a sign of methanol (methyl alcohol) intoxication. Longstanding chronic metabolic acidosis leads to osteoporosis and can cause fractures.
Diagnosis
Arterial blood gas sampling is essential for the diagnosis. If the pH is low (under 7.35) and the bicarbonate levels are decreased (+] + [K+] ) − ( [Cl−] + [HCO3−] )
As sodium is the main extracellular cation, and chloride and bicarbonate are the main anions, the result should reflect the remaining anions. Normally, this concentration is about 8-16 mmol/l (12±4). An elevated anion gap (i.e. > 16 mmol/l) can indicate particular types of metabolic acidosis, particularly certain poisons, lactate acidosis and ketoacidosis.
As the differential diagnosis is made, certain other tests may be necessary, including toxicological screening and imaging of the kidneys. It is also important to differentiate between acidosis-induced hyperventilation and asthma; otherwise, treatment could lead to inappropriate bronchodilation.[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez/17906597?dopt=Abstract&holding;;=f1000,f1000m,isrctn]
Causes
Metabolic acidosis occurs when the body produces too much acid, or when the kidneys are not removing enough acid from the body. There are several types of metabolic acidosis. The main causes are best grouped by their influence on the anion gap.
It bears noting that the anion gap can be spuriously normal in sampling errors of the sodium level, e.g. in extreme hypertriglyceridemia. The anion gap can be increased due to relatively low levels of cations other than sodium and potassium (e.g. calcium or magnesium).
Increased anion gap
Causes include:

lactic acidosis
ketoacidosis
chronic renal failure (accumulation of sulfates, phosphates, urea)
intoxication:
 
organic acids (salicylates, ethanol, methanol, formaldehyde, ethylene glycol, paraldehyde, INH)
sulfates, metformin (Glucophage)

massive rhabdomyolysis

A Mnemonic can also be used - MUDPILES 1

M-Methanol
U-Uremia (chronic kidney failure)
D-Diabetic ketoacidosis
P-Propylene glycol ("P" used to stand for Paraldehyde but this substance is not commonly used today)
I-Infection, Iron, Isoniazid, Inborn errors of metabolism
L-Lactic acidosis
E-Ethylene glycol (Note: Ethanol is sometimes included in this mnemonic as well, although the acidosis caused by ethanol is actually primarily due to the increased production of lactic acid found in such intoxication.)
S-Salicylates

Many other mnemonics have been created to help with diagnosis and management. Frequently, they take into account symptoms and lab results to remind clinicians of certain methods of treatment or management.2
Normal anion gap
Causes include:3

longstanding diarrhea (bicarbonate loss)
bicarbonate loss due to taking topiramate
pancreatic fistula
uretero-sigmoidostomy
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
intoxication:
 
ammonium chloride
acetazolamide (Diamox)
bile acid sequestrants
isopropyl alcohol

renal failure (occasionally)
inhalant abuse
toluene

Pathophysiology
Compensatory mechanisms
Metabolic acidosis is either due to increased generation of acid or an inability to generate sufficient bicarbonate. The body regulates the acidity of the blood by four buffering mechanisms.

bicarbonate buffering system
Intracellular buffering by absorption of hydrogen atoms by various molecules, including proteins, phosphates and carbonate in bone.
Respiratory compensation
Renal compensation

Buffer
The decreased bicarbonate that distinguishes metabolic acidosis is therefore due to two separate processes: the buffer (from water and carbon dioxide) and additional renal generation. The buffer reactions are:



The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation mathematically describes the relationship between blood pH and the components of the bicarbonate buffering system:




Using Henry's Law, we can say that [CO2]=0.03xPaCO2

(PaCO2 is the pressure of CO2 in arterial blood)
 
Adding the other normal values, we get
 










Treatment
A pH under 7.1 is an emergency, due to the risk of cardiac arrhythmias, and may warrant treatment with intravenous bicarbonate. Bicarbonate is given at 50-100 mmol at a time under scrupulous monitoring of the arterial blood gas readings. This intervention, however, has some serious complications in lactic acidosis and, in those cases, should be used with great care.
If the acidosis is particularly severe and/or there may be intoxication, consultation with the nephrology team is considered useful, as dialysis may clear both the intoxication and the acidosis.
See also

Trauma triad of death
Metabolic alkalosis
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory alkalosis
Winter's formula
Delta Ratio

References
ru:Ацидоз"
Category:Acid–base disturbances



↩
↩
↩




