


Butterfly theorem




Butterfly theorem

(Figure)
Butterfly theorem.svg

The butterfly theorem is a classical result in Euclidean geometry, which can be stated as follows:1
Let M be the midpoint of a chord PQ of a circle, through which two other chords AB and CD are drawn; AD and BC intersect chord PQ at X and Y correspondingly. Then M is the midpoint of XY.
Proof
A formal proof of the theorem is as follows: Let the perpendiculars

 
  and 
 
 
 
  be dropped from the point 
 
 
 
  on the straight lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively. Similarly, let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be dropped from the point 
 
 
 
  perpendicular to the straight lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively.  Now, since












































From the preceding equations, it can be easily seen that















since 
 
 
 
  = 
 
 

Now,



So, it can be concluded that 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is the midpoint of 
 
 

An alternate proof using projective geometry can be found in problem 8 of the link below.
http://www.imomath.com/index.php?options=628&lmm;;=0
History
Proving the butterfly theorem was posed as a problem by William Wallace in The Gentlemen's Mathematical Companion (1803). Three solutions were published in 1804, and in 1805 Sir William Herschel posed the question again in a letter to Wallace. Rev. Thomas Scurr asked the same question again in 1814 in the Gentlemen's Diary or Mathematical Repository.2
References
Bibliography
H. S. M. Coxeter, S. L. Greitzer, Geometry Revisited, MAA, 1967.
External links

The Butterfly Theorem at cut-the-knot
A Better Butterfly Theorem at cut-the-knot
[http://planetmath.org/?op=getobj&from;;=objects&id;=3613 Proof of Butterfly Theorem] at PlanetMath
The Butterfly Theorem by Jay Warendorff, the Wolfram Demonstrations Project.


"
Category:Euclidean plane geometry Category:Theorems in geometry Category:Articles containing proofs



Johnson, Roger A., Advanced Euclidean Geometry, Dover Publ., 2007 (orig. 1929).↩
William Wallace's 1803 Statement of the Butterfly Theorem, cut-the-knot, retrieved 2015-05-07.↩




