


Seifert surface




Seifert surface

(Figure)
A Seifert surface bounded by a set of Borromean rings.

In mathematics, a Seifert surface (named after German mathematician Herbert Seifert12) is a surface whose boundary is a given knot or link.
Such surfaces can be used to study the properties of the associated knot or link. For example, many knot invariants are most easily calculated using a Seifert surface. Seifert surfaces are also interesting in their own right, and the subject of considerable research.
Specifically, let L be a tame oriented knot or link in Euclidean 3-space (or in the 3-sphere). A Seifert surface is a compact, connected, oriented surface S embedded in 3-space whose boundary is L such that the orientation on L is just the induced orientation from S, and every connected component of S has non-empty boundary.
Note that any compact, connected, oriented surface with nonempty boundary in Euclidean 3-space is the Seifert surface associated to its boundary link. A single knot or link can have many different inequivalent Seifert surfaces. A Seifert surface must be oriented. It is possible to associate unoriented (and not necessarily orientable) surfaces to knots as well.
Examples
 The standard Möbius strip has the unknot for a boundary but is not considered to be a Seifert surface for the unknot because it is not orientable.
The "checkerboard" coloring of the usual minimal crossing projection of the trefoil knot gives a Mobius strip with three half twists. As with the previous example, this is not a Seifert surface as it is not orientable. Applying Seifert's algorithm to this diagram, as expected, does produce a Seifert surface; in this case, it is a punctured torus of genus g=1, and the Seifert matrix is



Existence and Seifert matrix
It is a theorem that any link always has an associated Seifert surface. This theorem was first published by Frankl and Pontrjagin in 1930.3 A different proof was published in 1934 by Herbert Seifert and relies on what is now called the Seifert algorithm. The algorithm produces a Seifert surface 
 
 
 
 , given a projection of the knot or link in question.
Suppose that link has m components (m=1 for a knot), the diagram has d crossing points, and resolving the crossings (preserving the orientation of the knot) yields f circles. Then the surface 
 
 
 
  is constructed from f disjoint disks by attaching d bands. The homology group 
 
 
 
  is free abelian on 2g generators, where

g = (2 + d − f − m)/2
 

is the genus of 
 
 
 
 . The intersection form Q on 
 
 
 
  is skew-symmetric, and there is a basis of 2g cycles

a1,a2,...,a2g


with

Q=(Q(ai,aj))


the direct sum of g copies of


 
 .
The 2g

2g integer Seifert matrix

V=(v(i,j)) has
 



 
  the linking number in Euclidean 3-space (or in the 3-sphere) of ai and the pushoff of aj out of the surface, with


*


where V*=(v(j,i)) the transpose matrix. Every integer 2g

2g matrix 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
*

 
  arises as the Seifert matrix of a knot with genus g Seifert surface.
The Alexander polynomial is computed from the Seifert matrix by 
 
 
*), which is a polynomial in the indeterminate 
 
 
 
  of degree 
 
 
 
 . The Alexander polynomial is independent of the choice of Seifert surface 
 
 
 
 , and is an invariant of the knot or link.
The signature of a knot is the signature of the symmetric Seifert matrix 
 
 
 
 . It is again an invariant of the knot or link.
Genus of a knot
Seifert surfaces are not at all unique: a Seifert surface S of genus g and Seifert matrix V can be modified by a surgery, to be replaced by a Seifert surface S' of genus g+1 and Seifert matrix

V'=V

\oplus \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 \end{pmatrix}.
The genus of a knot K is the knot invariant defined by the minimal genus g of a Seifert surface for K.
For instance:

An unknot—which is, by definition, the boundary of a disc—has genus zero. Moreover, the unknot is the only knot with genus zero.
The trefoil knot has genus one, as does the figure-eight knot.
The genus of a (p,q)-torus knot is (p − 1)(q − 1)/2
The degree of the Alexander polynomial is a lower bound on twice the genus of the knot.

A fundamental property of the genus is that it is additive with respect to the knot sum:



See also

Crosscap number
Arf invariant of a knot

References
External links

The SeifertView programme of Jack van Wijk visualizes the Seifert surfaces of knots constructed using Seifert's algorithm.

"
Category:Geometric topology Category:Knot theory Category:Surfaces



 

 




