


Shannon's source coding theorem




Shannon's source coding theorem

In information theory, Shannon's source coding theorem (or noiseless coding theorem) establishes the limits to possible data compression, and the operational meaning of the Shannon entropy.
The source coding theorem shows that (in the limit, as the length of a stream of independent and identically-distributed random variable (i.i.d.) data tends to infinity) it is impossible to compress the data such that the code rate (average number of bits per symbol) is less than the Shannon entropy of the source, without it being virtually certain that information will be lost. However it is possible to get the code rate arbitrarily close to the Shannon entropy, with negligible probability of loss.
The source coding theorem for symbol codes places an upper and a lower bound on the minimal possible expected length of codewords as a function of the entropy of the input word (which is viewed as a random variable) and of the size of the target alphabet.
Statements
Source coding is a mapping from (a sequence of) symbols from an information source to a sequence of alphabet symbols (usually bits) such that the source symbols can be exactly recovered from the binary bits (lossless source coding) or recovered within some distortion (lossy source coding). This is the concept behind data compression.
Source coding theorem
In information theory, the source coding theorem (Shannon 1948)1 informally states that (MacKay 2003, pg. 81,2 Cover:Chapter 53):



i.i.d. random variables each with entropy

 
  can be compressed into more than 
 
 
bits with negligible risk of information loss, as 
 
 
 
 ; but conversely, if they are compressed into fewer than 
 
 
 
  bits it is virtually certain that information will be lost.

Source coding theorem for symbol codes
Let  denote two finite alphabets and let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote the set of all finite words from those alphabets (respectively).
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a random variable taking values in  and let 
 
 
 
  be a uniquely decodable code from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  where Σ2{{!}} {{=}} a}}. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the random variable given by the word length 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is optimal in the sense that it has the minimal expected word length for 
 
 
 
 , then (Shannon 1948):



Proof: Source coding theorem
Given 
 
 
 
  is an i.i.d. source, its time series  is i.i.d. with entropy

 
  in the discrete-valued case and differential entropy in the continuous-valued case. The Source coding theorem states that for any 
 
 
 
  for any rate larger than the entropy of the source, there is large enough 
 
 
 
  and an encoder that takes 
 
 
 
  i.i.d. repetition of the source, , and maps it to 
 
 
 
  binary bits such that the source symbols  are recoverable from the binary bits with probability at least 
 
 
 
 .
Proof of Achievability. Fix some 
 
 
 
 , and let



The typical set, 
 
 
 
 , is defined as follows:



The Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP) shows that for large enough 
 
 
 
 , the probability that a sequence generated by the source lies in the typical set, 
 
 
 
 , as defined approaches one. In particular there for large enough 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  (See AEP for a proof):
The definition of typical sets implies that those sequences that lie in the typical set satisfy:



Note that:

The probability of a sequence from 
 
 
 
  being drawn from 
 
 
 
  is greater than 
 
 
 
 .




 
  since the probability of the whole set 
 
 
 
  is at most one.




 
 . For the proof, use the upper bound on the probability of each term in typical set and the lower bound on the probability of the whole set 
 
 
 
 .

Since 
 
 
 
  bits are enough to point to any string in this set.
The encoding algorithm: The encoder checks if the input sequence lies within the typical set; if yes, it outputs the index of the input sequence within the typical set; if not, the encoder outputs an arbitrary 
 
 
 
  digit number. As long as the input sequence lies within the typical set (with probability at least 
 
 
 
 ), the encoder doesn't make any error. So, the probability of error of the encoder is bounded above by 
 
 
 
 .
Proof of Converse. The converse is proved by showing that any set of size smaller than 
 
 
 
  (in the sense of exponent) would cover a set of probability bounded away from 
 
 
 
 .
Proof: Source coding theorem for symbol codes
For 
 
 
 
  let  denote the word length of each possible . Define 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is chosen so that  1}}. Then



where the second line follows from Gibbs' inequality and the fifth line follows from Kraft's inequality:



so 
 
 
 
 .
For the second inequality we may set



so that



and so



and



and so by Kraft's inequality there exists a prefix-free code having those word lengths. Thus the minimal 
 
 
 
  satisfies



Extension to non-stationary independent sources
Fixed Rate lossless source coding for discrete time non-stationary independent sources
Define typical set 
 
 
 
  as:



Then, for given 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
  large enough, 
 
 
 
 . Now we just encode the sequences in the typical set, and usual methods in source coding show that the cardinality of this set is smaller than 
 
 
 
 . Thus, on an average,  bits suffice for encoding with probability greater than 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be made arbitrarily small, by making 
 
 
 
  larger.
See also

Channel coding
Noisy Channel Coding Theorem
Error exponent
Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP)

References
"
Category:Information theory Category:Coding theory Category:Data compression Category:Presentation layer protocols Category:Mathematical theorems in theoretical computer science Category:Articles containing proofs










