


Partial isometry




Partial isometry

In functional analysis a partial isometry is a linear map between Hilbert spaces such that it is an isometry on the orthogonal complement of its kernel.
The orthogonal complement of its kernel is called the initial subspace and its range is called the final subspace.
Partial isometries appear in the polar decomposition.
General
The concept of partial isometry can be defined in other equivalent ways. If U is an isometric map defined on a closed subset H1 of a Hilbert space H then we can define an extension W of U to all of H by the condition that W be zero on the orthogonal complement of H1. Thus a partial isometry is also sometimes defined as a closed partially defined isometric map.
Partial isometries (and projections) can be defined in the more abstract setting of a semigroup with involution; the definition coincides with the one herein.
Operator Algebras
For operator algebras one introduces the initial and final subspaces:



C*-Algebras
For C*-algebras one has the chain of equivalences due to the C*-property:


 
  So one defines partial isometries by either of the above and declares the initial resp. final projection to be W*W resp. WW*.
A pair of projections are partioned by the equivalence relation:


 
  It plays an important role in K-theory for C*-algebras and in the Murray-von Neumann theory of projections in a von Neumann algebra.
Special Classes
Projections
Any orthogonal projection is one with common initial and final subspace:



Embeddings
Any isometric embedding is one with full initial subspace:



Unitaries
Any unitary operator is one with full initial and final subspace:



(Apart from these there are far more partial isometries.)
Examples
Nilpotents
On the two-dimensional complex Hilbert space the matrix



is a partial isometry with initial subspace



and final subspace



Leftshift and Rightshift
On the square summable sequences the operators






which are related by



are partial isometries with initial subspace



and final subspace:


 
 .
References

John B. Conway (1999). "A course in operator theory", AMS Bookstore, ISBN 0-8218-2065-6
Alan L. T. Paterson (1999). "Groupoids, inverse semigroups, and their operator algebras", Springer, ISBN 0-8176-4051-7
Mark V. Lawson (1998). "Inverse semigroups: the theory of partial symmetries". World Scientific ISBN 981-02-3316-7

External links

Important properties and proofs
Alternative proofs

"
Category:Operator theory Category:C*-algebras Category:Semigroup theory


