   Sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe      Sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe   The Sensitive High Resolution Ion Microprobe ( SHRIMP ) is a large-diameter, double-focusing secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) sector instrument produced by Australian Scientific Instruments in Canberra, Australia . Like other SIMS instruments, the SHRIMP microprobe bombards a sample under vacuum with a beam of primary ions that sputters  secondary ions that are focused, filtered, and measured according to their energy and mass.  The SHRIMP is primarily used for geological and geochemical applications. It can measure the isotopic and elemental abundances in minerals at a 30 micrometre-scale and is therefore well-suited for the analysis of complex minerals, as often found in metamorphic terrains, some igneous rocks , and for relatively rapid analysis of statistical valid sets of detrital minerals from sedimentary rocks. The most common application of the instrument is in uranium-thorium-lead  geochronology , although the SHRIMP can be used to measure some other isotopic and elemental abundances.  History and scientific impact  The SHRIMP originated in 1973 with a proposal by Prof. Bill Compston , 1 trying to build an ion microprobe at the Research School of Earth Sciences of the Australian National University that exceeded the sensitivity and resolution of ion probes available at the time in order to analyse individual mineral grains. 2 Optic designer Steve Clement based the prototype instrument (now referred to as 'SHRIMP-I') on a design by Matsuda 3 which minimised aberrations in transmitting ions through the various sectors. 4 The instrument was built from 1975 and 1977 with testing and redesigning from 1978. The first successful geological applications occurred in 1980. 5  The first major scientific impact was the discovery of Hadean (>4000 million year old) zircon grains at Mt. Narryer in Western Australia 6 and then later at the nearby Jack Hills . 7 These results and the SHRIMP analytical method itself were initially questioned 8 9 but subsequent conventional analysis were partially confirmed. 10 11 SHRIMP-I also pioneered ion microprobe studies of titanium , 12  hafnium 13 and sulfur 14 isotopic systems.  Growing interest from commercial companies and other academic research groups, notably Prof. John de Laeter of Curtin University (Perth, Western Australia), led to the project in 1989 to build a commercial version of the instrument, the SHRIMP-II, in association with ANUTECH, the Australian National University's commercial arm. Refined ion optic designs in the mid-1990s prompted development and construction of the SHRIMP-RG (Reverse Geometry) with improved mass resolution. Further advances in design have also led to multiple ion collection systems (already introduced in the market by a French company years before), negative-ion stable isotope measurements and on-going work in developing a dedicated instrument for light stable isotopes. 15  Fifteen SHRIMP instruments have now been installed around the world 16 17 and SHRIMP results have been reported in more than 2000 peer reviewed scientific papers. SHRIMP is an important tool for understanding early Earth history having analysed some of the oldest terrestrial material including the Acasta Gneiss 18 19 and further extending the age of zircons from the Jack Hills. 20 Other significant milestones include the first U/Pb ages for lunar zircon 21 and Martian apatite 22 dating. More recent uses include the determination of Ordovician  sea surface temperature , 23 the timing of snowball Earth events 24 and development of stable isotope techniques. 25 26  Design and operation  Primary column  In a typical U-Pb geochronology analytical mode, a beam of (O 2 ) 1− primary ions are produced from a high-purity oxygen gas discharge in the hollow Ni cathode of a duoplasmatron . The ions are extracted from the plasma and accelerated at 10 kV. The primary column uses Köhler illumination to produce a uniform ion density across the target spot. The spot diameter can vary from ~5 µm to over 30 µm as required. Typical ion beam density on the sample is ~10 pA/µm 2 and an analysis of 15–20 minutes creates an ablation pit of less than 1 µm. 27  Sample chamber  The primary beam is 45° incident to the plane of the sample surface with secondary ions extracted at 90° and accelerated at 10 kV. Three quadrapole lenses focus the secondary ions onto a source slit and the design aims to maximise transmission of ions rather than preserving an ion image unlike other ion probe designs. 28 A Schwarzschild objective lens provides reflected-light direct microscopic viewing of the sample during analysis. 29 30  Electrostatic analyzer  The secondary ions are filtered and focussed according to their kinetic energy by a 1272 mm radius 90° electrostatic sector . A mechanically-operated slit provides fine-tuning of the energy spectrum transmitted into the magnetic sector 31 and an electrostatic quadrapole lens is used to reduce aberrations in transmitting the ions to the magnetic sector. 32  Magnetic sector  The electromagnet has a 1000 mm radius through 72.5° to focus the secondary ions according to their mass/charge ratio according to the principles of the Lorentz force . Essentially, the path of a less massive ion will have a greater curvature through the magnetic field than the path of a more massive ion. Thus, altering the current in the electromagnet focuses a particular mass species at the detector.  Detectors  The ions pass through a collector slit in the focal plane of the magnetic sector and the collector assembly can be moved along an axis to optimise the focus of a given isotopic species. In typical U-Pb zircon analysis, a single secondary electron multiplier is used for ion counting.  Vacuum system  Turbomolecular pumps evacuate the entire beam path of the SHRIMP to maximise transmission and reduce contamination. The sample chamber also employs a cryopump to trap contaminants, especially water. Typical pressures inside the SHRIMP are between ~7 x 10 −9 mbar in the detector and ~1 x 10 −6 mbar in the primary column. 33  Mass resolution and sensitivity  In normal operations, the SHRIMP achieves mass resolution of 5000 with sensitivity >20 counts/sec/ppm/nA for lead from zircon. 34 35  Applications  Isotope dating  For U-Th-Pb geochronology a beam of primary ions (O 2 ) 1− are accelerated and collimated towards the target where it sputters “secondary” ions from the sample. These secondary ions are accelerated along the instrument where the various isotopes of uranium , lead and thorium are measured successively, along with reference peaks for Zr 2 O + , ThO + and UO + . Since the sputtering yield differs between ion species and relative sputtering yield increases or decreases with time depending on the ion species (due to increasing crater depth, charging effects and other factors), the measured relative isotopic abundances do not relate to the real relative isotopic abundances in the target. Corrections are determined by analysing unknowns and reference material (matrix-matched material of known isotopic composition), and determining an analytical-session specific calibration factor. 36 37 38  SHRIMP instruments around the world      Instrument number   Institution   Location   SHRIMP model   Year of commissioning       1   Australian National University   Canberra   I   1980 (retired 2011)     2   Australian National University   Canberra   II/mc   1992     3   Curtin University of Technology   Perth   II   1993     4   Geological Survey of Canada   Ottawa   II   1995     5   Hiroshima University   Hiroshima   II   1996     6   Australian National University   Canberra   RG   1998     7   USGS & Stanford University   Stanford   RG   1998     8   National Institute of Polar Research   Tokyo   II   1999     9   Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences   Beijing   II   2001     10   All Russian Geological Research Institute   St. Petersburg   II/mc   2003     11   Curtin University of Technology   Perth   II/mc   2003     12   Geoscience Australia   Canberra   IIe   2008     13   Korea Basic Science Institute   Ochang   IIe/mc   2009     14   University of São Paulo   São Paulo   II/mc   2010     15   University of Granada   Granada   IIe/mc   2011     16   Australian National University   Canberra   SI/mc   2012     17   Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences   Beijing   IIe/mc   2013     18   National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology   Tsukuba   IIe/amc   2013     19   Polish Geological Institute - National Research Institute   Warsaw   IIe/mc   2014     20   National Institute of Polar Research   Tokyo   IIe/amc   2014     References  External links   Founding SHRIMP Lab at Australian National University  Australian Scientific Instruments   "  Category:Geochronological dating methods  Category:Mass spectrometry                                              