


Pregeometry (model theory)




Pregeometry (model theory)

Pregeometry, and in full combinatorial pregeometry, are essentially synonyms for "matroid". They were introduced by G.-C. Rota with the intention of providing a less "ineffably cacophonous" alternative term. Also, the term combinatorial geometry, sometimes abbreviated to geometry, was intended to replace "simple matroid". These terms are now infrequently used in the study of matroids.
In the branch of mathematical logic called model theory, infinite finitary matroids, there called "pregeometries" (and "geometries" if they are simple matroids), are used in the discussion of independence phenomena.
It turns out that many fundamental concepts of linear algebra – closure, independence, subspace, basis, dimension – are preserved in the framework of abstract geometries.
The study of how pregeometries, geometries, and abstract closure operators influence the structure of first-order models is called geometric stability theory.
Definitions
Pregeometries and geometries
A combinatorial pregeometry (also known as a finitary matroid), is a second-order structure
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  (called the closure map) satisfies the following axioms. For all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 :



 
  is an homomorphism in the category of partial orders (monotone increasing), and dominates

 
  (I.e.

 
  implies 
 
 
 
 .) and is idempotent.
Finite character: For each 
 
 
 
 
  there is some finite 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 .
Exchange principle: If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  (and hence by monotonicity and idempotence in fact 
 
 
 
 
 ).

A geometry is a pregeometry in which The closure of singletons are singletons and the closure of the empty set is the empty set.
Independence, bases and dimension
Given sets 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is independent over

 
  if 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 
 .
A set 
 
 
 
  is a basis for

over

 
  if it is independent over 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 .
Since a pregeometry satisfies the Steinitz exchange property all bases are of the same cardinality, hence the definition of the dimension of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  has no ambiguity.
The sets 
 
 
 
  are independent over 
 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
  is a finite subset of 
 
 
 
 . Note that this relation is symmetric.
In minimal sets over stable theories the independence relation coincides with the notion of forking independence.
Geometry automorphism
A geometry automorphism of a geometry 
 
 
 
  is a bijection 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .
A pregeometry 
 
 
 
  is said to be homogeneous if for any closed 
 
 
 
  and any two elements 
 
 
 
 
  there is an automorphism of 
 
 
 
  which maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and fixes 
 
 
 
  pointwise.
The associated geometry and localizations
Given a pregeometry 
 
 
 
 
  its associated geometry (sometimes referred in the literature as the canonical geometry) is the geometry 
 
 
 
  where



 
 , and
For any 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 


Its easy to see that the associated geometry of a homogeneous pregeometry is homogeneous.
Given 
 
 
 
 
  the localization of 
 
 
 
  is the geometry 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .
Types of pregeometries
Let 
 
 
 
  be a pregeometry, then it is said to be:

trivial (or degenerate) if 
 
 
 
 
 ,
modular if any two closed finite dimensional sets 
 
 
 
  satisfy the equation 

\text{dim}(X\cup Y) = \text{dim}(X) + \text{dim}(Y) - \text{dim}(X\cap Y)  (or equivalently that 
 
 
 
  is independent of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 .

locally modular if it has a localization at a singleton which is modular

4. (locally) projective if it is non-trivial and (locally) modular 5. locally finite if closures of finite sets are finite
Triviality, modularity and local modularity pass to the associated geometry and are preserved under localization.
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a locally modular homogeneous pregeometry and 
 
 
 
  then the localization of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is modular.
The geometry 
 
 
 
  is modular if and only if whnever 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
The trivial example
If 
 
 
 
 
  is any set we may define 
 
 
 
 . This pregeometry is a trivial, homogeneous, locally finite geometry.
Vector spaces and projective spaces
Let 
 
 
 
  be a field (a division ring actually suffices) and let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space over 
 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is a pregeometry where closures of sets are defined to be their span.
This pregeometry is homogeneous and modular. Vector spaces are considered to be the prototypical example of modularity.


 
  is locally finite if and only if 
 
 
 
  is finite.


 
  is not a geometry, as the closure of any nontrivial vector is a subspace of size at least 
 
 
 
 
 .
The associated geometry of a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space over 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional projective space over 
 
 
 
 . It is easy to see that this pregeometry is a projective geometry.
Affine spaces
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional affine space over a field 
 
 
 
 . Given a set define its closure to be its affine hull (i.e. the smallest affine subspace containing it).
This forms a homogeneous 
 
 
 
 -dimensional geometry.
An affine space is not modular (for example, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  be parallel lines then the formula in the definition of modularity fails). However, it is easy to check that all localizations are modular.
Algebraically closed fields
Let 
 
 
 
  be an algebraically closed field with 
 
 
 
 , and define the closure of a set to be its algebraic closure.
While vector spaces are modular and affine spaces are "almost" modular (i.e. everywhere locally modulare), algebraically closed fields are examples of the other extremity, not being even locally modular (i.e. none of the localizations is modular).
References
H.H. Crapo and G.-C. Rota (1970), On the Foundations of Combinatorial Theory: Combinatorial Geometries. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Pillay, Anand (1996), Geometric Stability Theory. Oxford Logic Guides. Oxford University Press.
"
Category:Matroid theory * Category:Model theory


