


Classical electron radius




Classical electron radius

The classical electron radius, also known as the Lorentz radius or the Thomson scattering length, is based on a classical (i.e. non-quantum) relativistic model of the electron. According to modern research, the electron is assumed to be a point particle with a point charge and no spatial extent.1 However, the classical electron radius is calculated as



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the electric charge and the mass of the electron, 
 
 
 
  is the speed of light, and 
 
 
 
  is the permittivity of free space.2
In cgs units, this becomes more simply



with (to three significant digits)



Using classical electrostatics, the energy required to assemble a sphere of constant charge density, of radius 
 
 
 
  and charge 
 
 
 
  is



If the charge is on the surface the energy is



If the charge has a distribution 
 
 
 
  for r≤R
The energy is
 
 

Ignoring the factors 3/5 or 1/2, if this is equated to the relativistic energy of the electron (
 
 
 
 ) and solved for 
 
 
 
 , the above result is obtained.
In simple terms, the classical electron radius is roughly the size the electron would need to have for its mass to be completely due to its electrostatic potential energy – not taking quantum mechanics into account. We now know that quantum mechanics, indeed quantum field theory, is needed to understand the behavior of electrons at such short distance scales, thus the classical electron radius is no longer regarded as the actual size of an electron. Still, the classical electron radius is used in modern classical-limit theories involving the electron, such as non-relativistic Thomson scattering and the relativistic Klein–Nishina formula. Also, the classical electron radius is roughly the length scale at which renormalization becomes important in quantum electrodynamics.
The classical electron radius is one of a trio of related units of length, the other two being the Bohr radius

 
  and the Compton wavelength of the electron 
 
 
 
 . The classical electron radius is built from the electron mass

 
 , the speed of light

 
  and the electron charge

 
 . The Bohr radius is built from 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and Planck's constant

 
 . The Compton wavelength is built from 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Any one of these three lengths can be written in terms of any other using the fine structure constant

 
 :



Extrapolating from the initial equation, any charged mass can be imagined to have an 'electromagnetic radius' similar to the electron's classical radius.



where 
 
 
 
  is Coulomb's constant, 
 
 
 
  is the charge of the object, 
 
 
 
  is its mass, 
 
 
 
  is the fine structure constant and 
 
 
 
  is the reduced Planck's constant.
References



CODATA value for the classical electron radius at NIST.
Arthur N. Cox, Ed. "Allen's Astrophysical Quantities", 4th Ed, Springer, 1999.

External links

Length Scales in Physics: the Classical Electron Radius

"
Category:Physical constants Category:Atomic physics Category:Electron




David J. Griffiths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Prentice-Hall, 1995, p. 155. ISBN 0-13-124405-1




