


Noncentral F-distribution




Noncentral F-distribution

In probability theory and statistics, the noncentral F-distribution is a continuous probability distribution that is a generalization of the (ordinary) F-distribution. It describes the distribution of the quotient (X/n1)/(Y/n2), where the numerator X has a noncentral chi-squared distribution with n1 degrees of freedom and the denominator Y has a central chi-squared distribution n2 degrees of freedom. It is also required that X and Y are statistically independent of each other.
It is the distribution of the test statistic in analysis of variance problems when the null hypothesis is false. The noncentral F-distribution is used to find the power function of such a test.
Occurrence and specification
If 
 
 
 
  is a noncentral chi-squared random variable with noncentrality parameter 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom, and 
 
 
 
 
  is a chi-squared random variable with 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom that is statistically independent of 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  is a noncentral F-distributed random variable. The probability density function (pdf) for the noncentral F-distribution is1


 
  when 
 
 
 
  and zero otherwise. The degrees of freedom 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are positive. The noncentrality parameter 
 
 
 
  is nonnegative. The term 
 
 
 
  is the beta function, where



The cumulative distribution function for the noncentral F-distribution is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the regularized incomplete beta function.
The mean and variance of the noncentral F-distribution are


 
  and



Differential equation
The pdf of the noncentral F-distribution is a solution of the following differential equation:



Special cases
When λ = 0, the noncentral F-distribution becomes the F-distribution.
Related distributions
Z has a noncentral chi-squared distribution if



where F has a noncentral F-distribution.
Implementations
The noncentral F-distribution is implemented in the R language (e.g., pf function), in MATLAB (ncfcdf, ncfinv, ncfpdf, ncfrnd and ncfstat functions in the statistics toolbox) in Mathematica (NoncentralFRatioDistribution function), in NumPy (random.noncentral_f), and in Boost C++ Libraries.2
A collaborative wiki page implements an interactive online calculator, programmed in the R language, for the noncentral t, chi-squared, and F distributions, at the Institute of Statistics and Econometrics, School of Business and Economics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.3
Notes


References



External links
"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions



S. Kay, Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Detection Theory, (New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 29.






