


Functional (mathematics)




Functional (mathematics)

 
In mathematics, and particularly in functional analysis and the calculus of variations, a functional is a function from a vector space into its underlying scalar field, or a set of functions of the real numbers. In other words, it is a function that takes a vector as its input argument, and returns a scalar. Commonly the vector space is a space of functions, thus the functional takes a function for its input argument, then it is sometimes considered a function of a function. Its use originates in the calculus of variations where one searches for a function that minimizes a certain functional. A particularly important application in physics is searching for a state of a system that minimizes the energy functional.
Functional details
Duality
The mapping


 
  is a function, where 
 
 
 
  is an argument of a function 
 
 
 
 . At the same time, the mapping of a function to the value of the function at a point


 
  is a functional, here 
 
 
 
  is a parameter.
Provided that f is a linear function from a linear vector space to the underlying scalar field, the above linear maps are dual to each other, and in functional analysis both are called linear functionals.
Definite integral
Integrals such as


 
  form a special class of functionals. They map a function f into a real number, provided that H is real-valued. Examples include

the area underneath the graph of a positive function f










Lp norm of functions










the arclength of a curve in 2-dimensional Euclidean space









Vector scalar product
Given any vector 
 
 
 
  in a vector space 
 
 
 
 , the scalar product with another vector 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , is a scalar. The set of vectors such that this product is zero is a vector subspace of 
 
 
 
 , called the null space or kernel of 
 
 
 
 .
Locality
If a functional's value can be computed for small segments of the input curve and then summed to find the total value, the functional is called local. Otherwise it is called non-local. For example:


 
  is local while


 
  is non-local. This occurs commonly when integrals occur separately in the numerator and denominator of an equation such as in calculations of center of mass.
Functional equation
The traditional usage also applies when one talks about a functional equation, meaning an equation between functionals: an equation 
 
 
 
  between functionals can be read as an 'equation to solve', with solutions being themselves functions. In such equations there may be several sets of variable unknowns, like when it is said that an additive function 
 
 
 
  is one satisfying the functional equation


 
 .
Functional derivative and functional integration
Functional derivatives are used in Lagrangian mechanics. They are derivatives of functionals: i.e. they carry information on how a functional changes when the input function changes by a small amount.
Richard Feynman used functional integrals as the central idea in his sum over the histories formulation of quantum mechanics. This usage implies an integral taken over some function space.
See also

Linear functional
Optimization (mathematics)
Tensor

References





"
Category:Types of functions


