


Zeckendorf's theorem




Zeckendorf's theorem

 Zeckendorf's theorem, named after Belgian mathematician Edouard Zeckendorf, is a theorem about the representation of integers as sums of Fibonacci numbers.
Zeckendorf's theorem states that every positive integer can be represented uniquely as the sum of one or more distinct Fibonacci numbers in such a way that the sum does not include any two consecutive Fibonacci numbers. More precisely, if 
 
 
 
  is any positive integer, there exist positive integers , with , such that



where  is the 
 
 
th Fibonacci number. Such a sum is called the Zeckendorf representation of 
 
 
 
 . The Fibonacci coding of 
 
 
 
  can be derived from its Zeckendorf representation.
For example, the Zeckendorf representation of 100 is



 
 .
 

There are other ways of representing 100 as the sum of Fibonacci numbers – for example








but these are not Zeckendorf representations because 1 and 2 are consecutive Fibonacci numbers, as are 34 and 55.
For any given positive integer, a representation that satisfies the conditions of Zeckendorf's theorem can be found by using a greedy algorithm, choosing the largest possible Fibonacci number at each stage.
History
While the theorem is named after the eponymous author who published his paper in 1972, the same result had been published 20 years earlier by Lekkerkerker.1 As such, the theorem is an example of Stigler's Law of Eponymy.
Proof
Zeckendorf's theorem has two parts:

Existence: every positive integer 
 
 
 
  has a Zeckendorf representation.
Uniqueness: no positive integer 
 
 
 
  has two different Zeckendorf representations.

The first part of Zeckendorf's theorem (existence) can be proven by induction. For 
 
 
 
  it is clearly true (as these are Fibonacci numbers), for 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
 . Now suppose each 
 
 
 
  has a Zeckendorf representation. If 
 
 
 
  is a Fibonacci number then we're done, else there exists 
 
 
 
  such that . Now consider . Since 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  has a Zeckendorf representation (by the induction hypothesis). At the same time,  and since  Fj + Fj − 1}} (by definition of Fibonacci numbers), , so the Zeckendorf representation of 
 
 
 
  does not contain . As a result, 
 
 
 
  can be represented as the sum of  and the Zeckendorf representation of 
 
 
 
 .
The second part of Zeckendorf's theorem (uniqueness) requires the following lemma:

Lemma: The sum of any non-empty set of distinct, non-consecutive Fibonacci numbers whose largest member is  is strictly less than the next largest Fibonacci number .
 

The lemma can be proven by induction on 
 
 
 
 .
Now take two non-empty sets of distinct non-consecutive Fibonacci numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  which have the same sum. Consider sets  and  which are equal to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  from which the common elements have been removed (i.e.  and ). Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  had equal sum, and we have removed exactly the elements from 
 
 


 
  from both sets,  and  must have the same sum as well.
Now we will show by contradiction that at least one of  and  is empty. Assume the contrary, i.e. that  and  are both non-empty and let the largest member of  be  and the largest member of  be . Because  and  contain no common elements, . Without loss of generality, suppose . Then by the lemma, the sum of  is strictly less than  and so is strictly less than , whereas the sum of  is clearly at least . This contradicts the fact that  and  have the same sum, and we can conclude that either  or  must be empty.
Now assume (again without loss of generality) that  is empty. Then  has sum 0, and so must . But since  can only contain positive integers, it must be empty too. To conclude:  ∅ which implies 
 
 
 
 , proving that each Zeckendorf representation is unique.
Fibonacci multiplication
One can define the following operation 
 
 
 
  on natural numbers 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 : given the Zeckendorf representations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we define the Fibonacci product


For example, the Zeckendorf representation of 2 is 
 
 
 
 , and the Zeckendorf representation of 4 is 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  is disallowed from representations), so 
 
 

A simple rearrangement of sums shows that this is a commutative operation; however, Donald Knuth proved the surprising fact that this operation is also associative.
Representation with negafibonacci numbers
The Fibonacci sequence can be extended to negative index 
 
 
 
  using the re-arranged recurrence relation


 
  which yields the sequence of "negafibonacci" numbers satisfying



Any integer can be uniquely represented2 as a sum of negafibonacci numbers in which no two consecutive negafibonacci numbers are used. For example:





0 is represented by the empty sum.

Note that , for example, so the uniqueness of the representation does depend on the condition that no two consecutive negafibonacci numbers are used.
This gives a system of coding integers, similar to the representation of Zeckendorf's theorem. In the string representing the integer 
 
 
 
 , the 
 
 
th digit is 1 if  appears in the sum that represents 
 
 
 
 ; that digit is 0 otherwise. For example, 24 may be represented by the string 100101001, which has the digit 1 in places 9, 6, 4, and 1, because . The integer 
 
 
 
  is represented by a string of odd length if and only if

 
 .
See also

Fibonacci coding
Ostrowski numeration

References




External links



Zeckendorf's theorem at cut-the-knot



de:Fibonacci-Folge#Zeckendorf-Theorem"
Category:Fibonacci numbers Category:Theorems in number theory Category:Articles containing proofs



Historical note on the name Zeckendorf Representation by R Knott, University of Surrey
Knuth, Donald. "Negafibonacci Numbers and the Hyperbolic Plane" Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Mathematical Association of America, The Fairmont Hotel, San Jose, CA. 2008-12-11 




