


Representation theory of SU(2)




Representation theory of SU(2)

In the study of the representation theory of Lie groups, the study of representations of SU(2) is fundamental to the study of representations of semisimple Lie groups. It is the first case of a Lie group that is both a compact group and a non-abelian group. The first condition implies the representation theory is discrete: representations are direct sums of a collection of basic irreducible representations (governed by the Peter–Weyl theorem). The second means that there will be irreducible representations in dimensions greater than 1.
SU(2) is the universal covering group of SO(3), and so its representation theory includes that of the latter. This also specifies importance of SU(2) for description of non-relativistic spin in theoretical physics; see below for other physical and historical context.
As shown below, the finite-dimensional irreducible representations of SU(2) are indexed by a integer or half-integer

 
 , with dimension

 
 .
Lie algebra representations
The representations of the group are found by considering representations of 
 
 
 
 , the Lie algebra of SU(2). In principle this is the 'infinitesimal version' of SU(2); Lie algebras consist of infinitesimal transformations, and their Lie groups to 'integrated' transformations. In what follows, we shall consider the complex Lie algebra (i.e. the complexification of the Lie algebra), which doesn't affect the representation theory.
The Lie algebra is spanned by three elements 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with the Lie brackets









(These elements may be expressed in terms of matrices ,  and  which are related to the Pauli matrices by multiplication by a factor of 
 
 
 
 . , , and .)
Since 
 
 
 
  is semisimple, the representation 
 
 
 
  is always diagonalizable (for complex number scalars). Its eigenvalues are called the weights. Its eigenvectors can be taken as a basis for the vector space the group acts upon. The dimension of the representation can be determined by counting the number of these eigenvectors.
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvector of weight 
 
 
 
 . Then,









In other words, 
 
 
 
  raises the weight by one and 
 
 
 
  reduces the weight by one. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are referred to as ladder operators, taking us between eigenvectors or to 0. A consequence is that



is a Casimir invariant and commutes with the generators of the algebra. By Schur's lemma, its action is proportional to the identity map, for irreducible representations. It is convenient to write the constant of proportionality as 
 
 
 
 . (The expression 
 
 
 
  is equal to 
 
 
 
  defined as 
 
 
 
 , which is related to the magnitude of angular momentum operator in quantum physics.)
Weights
Finite-dimensional representations only have finitely many weights, and have a greatest and least weight. (They are both highest weight representations and lowest weight representations.)
Let  be a weight which is greater than all the other weights. Let 
 
 
 
  be an 
 
 
 
 -eigenvector of eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 . If the representation is irreducible, using the commutation relations we can calculate that 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is nonzero, 
 
 
 
  is either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
Likewise, let  be a weight which is lower than all the other weights. Let 
 
 
 
  be an eigenvector of , so 
 
 
 
 . If the representation is irreducible, using the commutation relations 
 
 
 
 , and so 
 
 
 
  is either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
For an irreducible finite-dimensional representation, the highest weight can't be less than the lowest weight. In addition, the difference between them has to be an integer because if the difference isn't an integer, there will always be a weight which is one more or one less than any given weight, contradicting the assumption of finite-dimensionality.
Since 
 
 

Furthermore, each weight has multiplicity one. If this were not the case, we could define a proper subrepresentation generated by an eigenvector of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  applied to it any number of times, contradicting the assumption of irreducibility.
This construction also shows for any given nonnegative integer multiple of half 
 
 
 
 , all finite-dimensional irreps with 
 
 
 
  as its highest weight are equivalent (just make an identification of a highest weight eigenvector of one with one of the other).
Another approach
See under the example for Borel–Bott–Weil theorem.
Properties
All irreps for a half-integer (not integer) 
 
 
 
  are faithful. All irreps for an integer 
 
 
 
  have the kernel

 
  and are virtually representations of SO(3), faithful ones for 
 
 
 
 .
Most important irreducible representations and their applications
As stated above, representations of SU(2) describe non-relativistic spin due to double covering of the rotation group of Euclidean 3-space. Relativistic spin is described with representation theory of SL2(C), a supergroup of SU(2), which in the similar way covers SO+(1;3), the relativistic version of rotation group. SU(2) symmetry also supports concepts of isobaric spin and weak isospin, collectively known as isospin.


 
  
 
 
 
  gives the 2 representation, the fundamental representation of SU(2). When an element of SU(2) is written as a complex

matrix, it is simply a multiplication of column 2-vectors. It is known in physics as the spin-½ and, historically, as the multiplication of quaternions (more precisely, multiplication by a unit quaternion).


 
  gives the 3 representation, the adjoint representation. It describes 3-d rotations, the standard representation of SO(3), so real numbers are sufficient for it. Physicists use it for the description of massive spin-1 particles, such as vector mesons, but its importance for the spin theory is much higher because it anchors spin states to the geometry of the physical 3-space. This representation emerged simultaneously with the 2 when William Rowan Hamilton introduced versors, his term for elements of SU(2). Note that Hamilton did not use standard group theory terminology since he preceded Lie group developments.
The $ λ =$ $\frac{3}{2}$ representation is used in particle physics for certain baryons, such as the Δ.
See also

Rotation operator (vector space)
Rotation operator (quantum mechanics)
representation theory of SL2(R)
Electroweak interaction
Rotation group SO(3)#A note on representations

References

Gerard 't Hooft (2007), Lie groups in Physics, Chapter 5 "Ladder operators"

"
Category:Representation theory of Lie groups Category:Rotation in three dimensions


