


Corwin Hansch




Corwin Hansch

Corwin Herman Hansch (October 6, 1918 – May 8, 20111) was a Professor of Chemistry at Pomona College in California. He became known as the 'father of computer-assisted molecule design.'
Early life and childhood
He was born on October 6, 1918 in Kenmare, North Dakota.
Education
He earned a B.S. from the University of Illinois in 1940 and a Ph.D. from New York University in 1944.
Career
Hansch taught Organic Chemistry for many years at Pomona College, and was known for giving complex lectures without using notes. His course in Physical Bio-Organic Medicinal Chemistry was ground-breaking at an undergraduate level.
Hansch may be best known as the father of the concept of quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR), the quantitative correlation of the physicochemical properties of molecules with their biological activities.
He is also noted for the Hansch equation, which is used in

Multivariate Statistics - Multivariate statistics is a set of statistical tools to analyse data (e.g., chemical and biological) matrices using regression and/or pattern recognition techniques.


Hansch Analysis - Hansch analysis is the investigation of the quantitative relationship between the biological activity of a series of compounds and their physicochemical substituent or global parameters representing hydrophobic, electronic, steric and other effects using multiple regression correlation methodology.


Hansch-Fujita 
 
 
 
  constant - The Hansch-Fujita 
 
 
 
  constant describes the contribution of a substituent to the lipophilicity of a compound.

Research Interests: Organic Chemistry; Interaction of organic chemicals with living organisms, Quantitative Structure Activity Relationships (QSAR).

Fragment based regression analysis for quantitative structure-activity relationship (Hansch-analysis)

Death
He died of pneumonia on May 8, 2011 in Claremont, California at 92.2
See also

Hammett equation
Craig plot

Notes

Book: Exploring QSAR - Corwin Hansch, Albert Leo and David Hoekman
Reviews: 23 Reviews3
Journal articles: Co-authored more than 265 articles

His research group at Pomona College worked on QSAR studies and in building and expanding the database of chemical and physical data as C-QSAR and Bioloom. His postgraduate associates were Rajni Garg, Cynthia D Selassie, Suresh Babu Mekapati, and Alka Kurup.
References
External links

Example for Hansch equation and Hansch-Fujita 
 
 
 
  constant
Pomona College homepage
Biography, The QSAR and Modelling Society News, October 1998

"
Category:American pharmacologists Category:American academics Category:2011 deaths Category:1918 births Category:People from Ward County, North Dakota Category:Guggenheim Fellows



http://www.latimes.com/news/obituaries/la-me-corwin-hansch-20110523,0,7063064.story
http://www.latimes.com/news/obituaries/la-me-corwin-hansch-20110523,0,7063064.story
PubMed: "hansch c"[author]




