


Generic polynomial




Generic polynomial

In Galois theory, a branch of modern algebra, a generic polynomial for a finite group G and field F is a monic polynomial P with coefficients in the field L = F(t1, ..., tn) of F with n indeterminates adjoined, such that the splitting field M of P has Galois group G over L, and such that every extension K/F with Galois group G can be obtained as the splitting field of a polynomial which is the specialization of P resulting from setting the n indeterminates to n elements of F. This is sometimes called F-generic relative to the field F, with a Q-generic polynomial, generic relative to the rational numbers, being called simply generic.
The existence, and especially the construction, of a generic polynomial for a given Galois group provides a complete solution to the inverse Galois problem for that group. However, not all Galois groups have generic polynomials, a counterexample being the cyclic group of order eight.
Groups with generic polynomials

The symmetric group Sn. This is trivial, as




is a generic polynomial for Sn.

Cyclic groups Cn, where n is not divisible by eight. Lenstra showed that a cyclic group does not have a generic polynomial if n is divisible by eight, and Smith explicitly constructs such a polynomial in case n is not divisible by eight.


The cyclic group construction leads to other classes of generic polynomials; in particular the dihedral group Dn has a generic polynomial if and only if n is not divisible by eight.


The quaternion group Q8.


Heisenberg groups

 
  for any odd prime p.


The alternating group A4.


The alternating group A5.


Reflection groups defined over Q, including in particular groups of the root systems for E6, E7, and E8.


Any group which is a direct product of two groups both of which have generic polynomials.


Any group which is a wreath product of two groups both of which have generic polynomials.

Examples of generic polynomials




Group

Generic Polynomial





C2







C3







S3







V







C4







D4







S4







D5







S5







Generic polynomials are known for all transitive groups of degree 5 or less.
Generic Dimension
The generic dimension for a finite group G over a field F, denoted 
 
 
 
 , is defined as the minimal number of parameters in a generic polynomial for G over F, or 
 
 
 
  if no generic polynomial exists.
Examples:






























Publications

Jensen, Christian U., Ledet, Arne, and Yui, Noriko, Generic Polynomials, Cambridge University Press, 2002

"
Category:Field theory Category:Galois theory


