


CCR and CAR algebras




CCR and CAR algebras

In mathematics and physics CCR algebras (after canonical commutation relations) and CAR algebras (after canonical anticommutation relations) arise from the quantum mechanical study of bosons and fermions respectively. They play a prominent role in quantum statistical mechanics1 and quantum field theory.
CCR and CAR as *-algebras
Let 
 
 
 
  be a real vector space equipped with a nonsingular real antisymmetric bilinear form

 
  (i.e. a symplectic vector space). The unital *-algebra generated by elements of 
 
 
 
  subject to the relations






for any 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is called the canonical commutation relations (CCR) algebra. The uniqueness of the representations of this algebra when 
 
 
 
  is finite dimensional is discussed in the Stone–von Neumann theorem.
If 
 
 
 
  is equipped with a nonsingular real symmetric bilinear form

 
  instead, the unital *-algebra generated by the elements of 
 
 
 
  subject to the relations





 
  for any 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is called the canonical anticommutation relations (CAR) algebra.
The C*-algebra of CCR
Let 
 
 
 
  be a real symplectic vector space with nonsingular symplectic form 
 
 
 
 . In the theory of operator algebras the CCR algebra over 
 
 
 
  is the unital C*-algebra generated by elements 
 
 
 
  subject to





 
  These are called the Weyl form of the canonical commutation relations and, in particular, they imply that each 
 
 
 
  is unitary and 
 
 
 
 . It is well known that the CCR algebra is a simple non-separable algebra and is unique up to isomorphism.2
When 
 
 
 
  is a Hilbert space and 
 
 
 
  is given by the imaginary part of the inner-product, the CCR algebra is faithfully represented on the symmetric Fock space over 
 
 
 
  by setting


 
  for any 
 
 
 
 . The field operators 
 
 
 
  are defined for each 
 
 
 
  as the generator of the one-parameter unitary group 
 
 
 
  on the symmetric Fock space. These are self-adjoint unbounded operators, however they formally satisfy


 
  As the assignment 
 
 
 
  is real-linear, so the operators 
 
 
 
  define a CCR algebra over 
 
 
 
  in the sense of Section 1.
The C*-algebra of CAR
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hilbert space. In the theory of operator algebras the CAR algebra is the unique C*-completion of the complex unital *-algebra generated by elements 
 
 
 
  subject to the relations











 
  for any 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  is separable the CAR algebra is an AF algebra and in the special case 
 
 
 
  is infinite dimensional it is often written as 
 
 
 
 .3
Let 
 
 
 
  be the antisymmetric Fock space over 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the orthogonal projection onto antisymmetric vectors:


 
  The CAR algebra is faithfully represented on 
 
 
 
  by setting


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The fact that these form a C*-algebra is due to the fact that creation and annihilation operators on antisymmetric Fock space are bona-fide bounded operators. Moreover the field operators 
 
 
 
  satisfy


 
  giving the relationship with Section 1.
Superalgebra generalization
Let 
 
 
 
  be a real 
 
 
 
 -graded vector space equipped with a nonsingular antisymmetric bilinear superform 
 
 
 
  (i.e. 
 
 
 
  ) such that 
 
 
 
  is real if either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is an even element and imaginary if both of them are odd. The unital *-algebra generated by the elements of 
 
 
 
  subject to the relations






for any two pure elements 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is the obvious superalgebra generalization which unifies CCRs with CARs: if all pure elements are even, one obtains a CCR, while if all pure elements are odd, one obtains a CAR.
The graded generalizations of Weyl and Clifford algebras allow the basis-free formulation of the canonical commutation and anticommutation relations in terms of a symplectic and a symmetric non-degenerate bilinear form. In addition the binary elements in this graded Weyl algebra give a basis-free version of the commutation relations of the symplectic and pseudo-orthogonal Lie algebras.4
See also

Bose–Einstein statistics
Fermi–Dirac statistics
Glossary of string theory
Heisenberg group
Bogoliubov transformation
(−1)F

References


"
Category:Quantum field theory Category:Functional analysis Category:Algebras Category:C*-algebras





.





