


Midpoint method




Midpoint method

 In numerical analysis, a branch of applied mathematics, the midpoint method is a one-step method for numerically solving the differential equation,


 
 . The explicit midpoint method is given by the formula


 
  the implicit midpoint method by


 
  for 
 
 
 
  Here, 
 
 
 
  is the step size — a small positive number, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the computed approximate value of 
 
 
 
  The explicit midpoint method is also known as the modified Euler method,1 the implicit method is the most simple collocation method, and, applied to Hamiltionian dynamics, a symplectic integrator.
The name of the method comes from the fact that in the formula above the function 
 
 
 
  giving the slope of the solution is evaluated at 
 
 
 
  which is the midpoint between 
 
 
 
  at which the value of y(t) is known and 
 
 
 
  at which the value of y(t) needs to be found.
The local error at each step of the midpoint method is of order 
 
 
 
 , giving a global error of order 
 
 
 
 . Thus, while more computationally intensive than Euler's method, the midpoint method generally gives more accurate results.
The methods are examples of a class of higher-order methods known as Runge-Kutta methods.
Derivation of the midpoint method
 
The midpoint method is a refinement of the Euler's method


 
  and is derived in a similar manner. The key to deriving Euler's method is the approximate equality


 
  which is obtained from the slope formula


 
  and keeping in mind that 
 
 

For the midpoint methods, one replaces (3) with the more accurate


 
  when instead of (2) we find



One cannot use this equation to find 
 
 
 
  as one does not know 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 . The solution is then to use a Taylor series expansion exactly as if using the Euler method to solve for 
 
 
 
 :


 
  which, when plugged in (4), gives us


 
  and the explicit midpoint method (1e).
The implicit method (1i) is obtained by approximating the value at the half step 
 
 
 
  by the midpoint of the line segment from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 



 
  and thus


 
  Inserting the approximation 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  results in the implicit Runge-Kutta method


 
 
  which contains the implicit Euler method with step size 
 
 
 
  as its first part.
Because of the time symmetry of the implicit method, all terms of even degree in 
 
 
 
  of the local error cancel, so that the local error is automatically of order 
 
 
 
 
 . Replacing the implicit with the explicit Euler method in the determination of 
 
 
 
  results again in the explicit midpoint method.
See also

Rectangle method
Heun's method
Leapfrog integration and Verlet integration

Notes
References



.

"
Category:Numerical differential equations Category:Runge–Kutta methods








