


Bas van Fraassen




Bas van Fraassen

Bastiaan Cornelis van Fraassen (born 5 April 1941) is a Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at San Francisco State University and the McCosh Professor of Philosophy Emeritus at Princeton University, teaching courses in the philosophy of science, philosophical logic and the role of models in scientific practice.12 He previously taught at Yale University, the University of Southern California (USC), the University of Toronto and, from 1982 to 2008, at Princeton University.3 He coined the term "constructive empiricism" in his 1980 book The Scientific Image, in which he argued for agnosticism about the reality of unobservable entities. Van Fraassen earned his B.A. (1963) from the University of Alberta and his M.A. (1964) and Ph.D. (1966, under the direction of Adolf Grünbaum) from the University of Pittsburgh.
He is an adult convert to the Roman Catholic Church4 and is one of the founders of the Kira Institute. He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences; an overseas member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences since 1995;5 and a member of the Académie Internationale de Philosophie des Sciences ("International Academy of the Philosophy of Science").6 In 1986, van Fraassen received the Lakatos Award for his contributions to the philosophy of science and, in 2012, the Philosophy of Science Association's inaugural Hempel Award for lifetime achievement in philosophy of science.7
Philosophical Work
His 1980 book The Scientific Image was "widely credited with rehabilitating scientific anti-realism."8 As the Stanford Encyclopedia explains: "The constructive empiricist follows the logical positivists in rejecting metaphysical commitments in science, but she parts with them regarding their endorsement of the verificationist criterion of meaning, as well as their endorsement of the suggestion that theory-laden discourse can and should be removed from science. Before van Fraassen's The Scientific Image, some philosophers had viewed scientific anti-realism as dead, because logical positivism was dead. Van Fraassen showed that there were other ways to be an empiricist with respect to science, without following in the footsteps of the logical positivists."9
In his 1989 book Laws and Symmetry, van Fraassen, a philosopher of science, attempted to lay the ground-work for explaining physical phenomena without assuming that such phenomena are caused by rules or laws which can be said to cause or govern their behavior. Focusing on the problem of underdetermination, he argued for the possibility that theories could have empirical equivalence but differ in their ontological commitments. He rejects the notion that the aim of science is to produce an account of the physical world that is literally true, but rather that its aim is to produce theories that are empirically adequate.10 Van Fraassen has also studied the philosophy of quantum mechanics, philosophical logic, and epistemology.
van Fraassen has been the editor of the Journal of Philosophical Logic and co-editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic.11
Among his many students are the philosophers Elisabeth Lloyd at Indiana University and Anja Jauernig at the University of Pittsburgh.
In his paper Singular Terms, Truth-value Gaps, and Free Logic, van Fraassen opens with a very brief introduction of the problem of non-referring names.
Instead of any unique formalization, though, he simply adjusts the axioms of a standard predicate logic such as that found in Quine's Methods of Logic. Instead of an axiom like 
 
 
 
  he uses 
 
 
 
 ; this will naturally be true if the existential claim of the antecedent is false. If a name fails to refer, then an atomic sentence containing it, that is not an identity statement, can be assigned a truth value arbitrarily. Free logic is proved to be complete under this interpretation.
He indicates that, however, he sees no good reason to call statements which employ them either true or false. Some have attempted to solve this problem by means of many-valued logics; van Fraassen offers in their stead the use of supervaluations. Questions of completeness change when supervaluations are admitted, since they allow for valid arguments that do not correspond to logically true conditionals 12
In his essay "The Anti-Realist Epistemology of van Fraassen's The Scientific Image ", Paul M. Churchland, one of van Fraassen's critics, contrasted van Fraassen's idea of unobservable phenomena with the idea of merely unobserved phenomena.13
Published books

Scientific Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective, OUP, 2008.
The Empirical Stance, Yale University Press, 2002.
Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View, Oxford University Press, 1991.
Laws and Symmetry, Oxford University Press 1989.
 
French translation and introduction by C. Chevalley. Paris: Vrin, 1994.
 

The Scientific Image, Oxford University Press 1980.
 
Co-winner, Franklin J. Matchette Prize for Philosophical Books, 1982.
 
Co-winner, Imre Lakatos Award for 1986.
 
Italian Edition, with new preface, Bologna 1985.
 
Japanese Edition, with new preface, Tokyo 1987.
 
Spanish Edition, Mexico, 1995.
 
Chinese Edition, Shanghai, 2002
 
Portuguese Edition, São Paulo, 2007
 
Greek Edition, Athens, 2007
 

Derivation and Counterexample: An Introduction to Philosophical Logic (with Karel Lambert), Dickenson Publishing Company, Inc. 1972.
Formal Semantics and Logic, Macmillan, New York 1971
 
Spanish Translation, Mexico (Universitat Nacional Autonoma de Mexico), tr. J.A. Robles, 1987.
 

An Introduction to the Philosophy of Time and Space, Random House, New York 1970.
 
Spanish Translation, Barcelona (Editorial Labor, S.A.), tr. J-P.A. Goicoechea, 1978.
 
Second edition, with new preface and postscript. Columbia University Press, 1985.
 


See also

American philosophy
List of American philosophers

Notes
External links

van Fraassen's homepage at Princeton.
van Fraassen's faculty page (2009) at the Department of Philosophy, San Francisco State University.

"
Category:1941 births Category:Living people Category:20th-century philosophers Category:21st-century philosophers Category:American logicians Category:American philosophers Category:American Roman Catholics Category:Christian philosophers Category:Converts to Roman Catholicism Fraassen, Bas van Fraassen, Bas van Fraassen, Bas van Fraassen, Bas van Fraassen, Bas van Category:Princeton University faculty Category:Roman Catholic philosophers Category:University of Alberta alumni Category:University of Pittsburgh alumni Category:University of Southern California faculty Category:University of Toronto faculty Category:Yale University faculty Category:San Francisco State University faculty Category:Analytic philosophers Category:Philosophers of science Category:Philosophy of physics



SF State News at SFSU
SF State Campus Memo: New tenure-track faculty 2008-09
http://www.princeton.edu/~fraassen/cv/index.htm
New Blackfriars Vol. 80, No. 938, 1999.

LES MEMBRES ACTUELS DE L'A.I.P.S.
Hempel Award recipients
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/constructive-empiricism/
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/constructive-empiricism/

Bas C. van Fraassen, Curriculum Vitae
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 63, No. 17, (Sept. 15, 1966), pp. 481–495
Churchland, Paul M., "The anti-realist epistemology of van Fraassen's The Scientific Image.", ''The Los Angeles Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 63.3 (1982): 226-235.




