


Weak derivative




Weak derivative

In mathematics, a weak derivative is a generalization of the concept of the derivative of a function (strong derivative) for functions not assumed differentiable, but only integrable, i.e. to lie in the Lp space

 
 . See distributions for an even more general definition.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a function in the Lebesgue space 
 
 
 
 . We say that 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is a weak derivative of 
 
 
 
  if,



for all infinitely differentiable functions

 
  with 
 
 
 
 . This definition is motivated by the integration technique of Integration by parts.
Generalizing to 
 
 
 
  dimensions, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are in the space 
 
 
 
  of locally integrable functions for some open set

 
 , and if 
 
 
 
  is a multi-index, we say that 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -weak derivative of 
 
 
 
  if



for all 
 
 
 
 , that is, for all infinitely differentiable functions 
 
 
 
  with compact support in 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  has a weak derivative, it is often written 
 
 
 
  since weak derivatives are unique (at least, up to a set of measure zero, see below).
Examples

The absolute value function u : [−1, 1] → [0, 1], u(t) = |t|, which is not differentiable at t = 0, has a weak derivative v known as the sign function given by





This is not the only weak derivative for u: any w that is equal to v almost everywhere is also a weak derivative for u. Usually, this is not a problem, since in the theory of Lp spaces and Sobolev spaces, functions that are equal almost everywhere are identified.
 


The characteristic function of the rational numbers 
 
 
 
  is nowhere differentiable yet has a weak derivative. Since the Lebesgue measure of the rational numbers is zero,










Thus 
 
 
 
  is the weak derivative of 
 
 
 
 . Note that this does agree with our intuition since when considered as a member of an Lp space, 
 
 
 
  is identified with the zero function.
 

Properties
If two functions are weak derivatives of the same function, they are equal except on a set with Lebesgue measure zero, i.e., they are equal almost everywhere. If we consider equivalence classes of functions, where two functions are equivalent if they are equal almost everywhere, then the weak derivative is unique.
Also, if u is differentiable in the conventional sense then its weak derivative is identical (in the sense given above) to its conventional (strong) derivative. Thus the weak derivative is a generalization of the strong one. Furthermore, the classical rules for derivatives of sums and products of functions also hold for the weak derivative.
Extensions
This concept gives rise to the definition of weak solutions in Sobolev spaces, which are useful for problems of differential equations and in functional analysis.
See also

Subderivative

References





"
Category:Generalized functions Category:Functional analysis Category:Generalizations of the derivative


