


Helly's theorem




Helly's theorem

 Helly's theorem is a basic result in discrete geometry describing the ways that convex sets may intersect each other. It was discovered by Eduard Helly in 1913,1 but not published by him until 1923, by which time alternative proofs by  and  had already appeared. Helly's theorem gave rise to the notion of a Helly family.
Statement
Let  be a finite collection of convex subsets of , with 
 
 
 
 . If the intersection of every 
 
 
 
  of these sets is nonempty, then the whole collection has a nonempty intersection; that is,



For infinite collections one has to assume compactness:
Let  be a collection of compact convex subsets of , such that every subcollection of cardinality at most 
 
 
 
  has nonempty intersection, then the whole collection has nonempty intersection.
Proof
We prove the finite version, using Radon's theorem as in the proof by . The infinite version then follows by the finite intersection property characterization of compactness: a collection of closed subsets of a compact space has a non-empty intersection if and only if every finite subcollection has a non-empty intersection (once you fix a single set, the intersection of all others with it are closed subsets of a fixed compact space).
The proof is based on induction:
Base Case: Let 
 
 
 
 . By our assumptions, for every 
 
 
 
  there is a point  that is in the common intersection of all  with the possible exception of . Now we apply Radon's theorem to the set  which furnishes us with disjoint subsets  of 
 
 
 
  such that the convex hull of  intersects the convex hull of . Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a point in the intersection of these two convex hulls. We claim that



Indeed, consider any  We shall prove that  Note that the only element of 
 
 
 
  that may not be in  is . If , then , and therefore . Since  is convex, it then also contains the convex hull of  and therefore also . Likewise, if , then , and by the same reasoning . Since 
 
 
 
  is in every , it must also be in the intersection.
Above, we have assumed that the points  are all distinct. If this is not the case, say  xk}} for some 
 
 
 
 , then  is in every one of the sets , and again we conclude that the intersection is nonempty. This completes the proof in the case 
 
 
 
 .
Inductive Step: Suppose 
 
 
 
  and that the statement is true for 
 
 
 
 . The argument above shows that any subcollection of 
 
 
 
  sets will have nonempty intersection. We may then consider the collection where we replace the two sets  and  with the single set . In this new collection, every subcollection of 
 
 
 
  sets will have nonempty intersection. The inductive hypothesis therefore applies, and shows that this new collection has nonempty intersection. This implies the same for the original collection, and completes the proof.
See also

Carathéodory's theorem
Shapley–Folkman lemma
Krein–Milman theorem
Choquet theory
Radon's theorem

Notes
References


.

.

.
Heinrich Guggenheimer (1977) Applicable Geometry, page 137, Krieger, Huntington ISBN 0-88275-368-1 .

.

.

.

"
Category:Theorems in convex geometry Category:Theorems in discrete geometry Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Geometric transversal theory



.↩




