


Mediant (mathematics)




Mediant (mathematics)


For mediant in music, see mediant. "Mediant" should not be confused with median.


In mathematics, the mediant of two fractions



is



that is to say, the numerator and denominator of the mediant are the sums of the numerators and denominators of the given fractions, respectively. It is sometimes called the freshman sum, as it is a common mistake in the usual addition of fractions.
In general, this is an operation on fractions rather than on rational numbers. That is to say, for two rational numbers q1, q2, the value of the mediant depends on how the rational numbers are expressed using integer pairs. For example, the mediant of 1/1 and 1/2 is 2/3, but the mediant of 2/2 and 1/2 is 3/4.
A way around this, where required, is to specify that both rationals are to be represented as fractions in their lowest terms (with c > 0, d > 0). With such a restriction, mediant becomes a well-defined binary operation on rationals.
The Stern-Brocot tree provides an enumeration of all positive rational numbers, in lowest terms, obtained purely by iterative computation of the mediant according to a simple algorithm.
Properties

The mediant inequality: An important property (also explaining its name) of the mediant is that it lies strictly between the two fractions of which it is the mediant: If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then










This property follows from the two relations
 








and
 










Assume that the pair of fractions a/c and b/d satisfies the determinant relation 
 
 
 
 . Then the mediant has the property that it is the simplest fraction in the interval (a/c, b/d), in the sense of being the fraction with the smallest denominator. More precisely, if the fraction 
 
 
 
  with positive denominator c' lies (strictly) between a/c and b/d, then its numerator resp. denominator can be written as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with two positive real (in fact rational) numbers 
 
 
 
 . To see why the 
 
 
 
  must be positive note that









and
 










must be positive. The determinant relation
 
 



then implies that both 
 
 
 
  must be integers, solving the system of linear equations
 
 






for 
 
 
 
 . Therefore 
 
 



The converse is also true: assume that the pair of reduced fractions a/c interior of lattice points (strictly) inside the triangle and the number vboundary of lattice points on the boundary of the triangle. Consider the triangle 
 
 
 
  with the three vertices v1 = (0, 0), v2 = (a, c), v3 = (b, d). Its area is equal to








A point 
 
 
 
  inside the triangle can be parametrized as
 
 :




where
 
 



The Pick formula
 
 :




now implies that there must be a lattice point q = (q1, q2) lying inside the triangle different from the three vertices if bc − ad >1 (then the area of the triangle is 
 
 
 
 ). The corresponding fraction q1/q2 lies (strictly) between the given (by assumption reduced) fractions and has denominator
 






as
 
 





Relatedly, if p/q and r/s are reduced fractions on the unit interval such that |ps − rq| = 1 (so that they are adjacent elements of a row of the Farey sequence) then





where ? is Minkowski's question mark function.
 


In fact, mediants commonly occur in the study of continued fractions and in particular, Farey fractions. The nth Farey sequence Fn is defined as the (ordered with respect to magnitude) sequence of reduced fractions a/b (with coprime a, b) such that b ≤ n. If two fractions a/c n then the determinant relation 
 
 
 
  mentioned above is generally valid and therefore the mediant is the simplest fraction in the interval (a/c, b/d), in the sense of being the fraction with the smallest denominator. Thus the mediant will then (first) appear in the (c + d)th Farey sequence and is the "next" fraction which is inserted in any Farey sequence between a/c and b/d. This gives the rule how the Farey sequences Fn are successively built up with increasing n.
 

Generalization
The notion of mediant can be generalized to n fractions, and a generalized mediant inequality holds,1 a fact that seems to have been first noticed by Cauchy. More precisely, the weighted mediant 
 
 
 
  of n fractions 
 
 
 
  is defined by 
 
 
 
  (with 
 
 
 
 ). It can be shown that 
 
 
 
  lies somewhere between the smallest and the largest fraction among the 
 
 
 
 .
References
External links

Mediant Fractions at cut-the-knot
MATHPAGES, Kevin Brown: Generalized Mediant

"
Category:Fractions (mathematics) Category:Elementary arithmetic Category:Binary operations








