


Unbounded operator




Unbounded operator

In mathematics, more specifically functional analysis and operator theory, the notion of unbounded operator provides an abstract framework for dealing with differential operators, unbounded observables in quantum mechanics, and other cases.
The term "unbounded operator" can be misleading, since

"unbounded" should sometimes be understood as "not necessarily bounded";
"operator" should be understood as "linear operator" (as in the case of "bounded operator");
the domain of the operator is a linear subspace, not necessarily the whole space;
this linear subspace is not necessarily closed; often (but not always) it is assumed to be dense;
in the special case of a bounded operator, still, the domain is usually assumed to be the whole space.

In contrast to bounded operators, unbounded operators on a given space do not form an algebra, nor even a linear space, because each one is defined on its own domain.
The term "operator" often means "bounded linear operator", but in the context of this article it means "unbounded operator", with the reservations made above. The given space is assumed to be a Hilbert space. Some generalizations to Banach spaces and more general topological vector spaces are possible.
Short history
The theory of unbounded operators developed in the late 1920s and early 1930s as part of developing a rigorous mathematical framework for quantum mechanics.1 The theory's development is due to John von Neumann2 and Marshall Stone.3 Von Neumann introduced using graphs to analyze unbounded operators in 1936.4
Definitions and basic properties
Let 
 
 
 
  be Banach spaces. An unbounded operator (or simply operator) 
 
 
 
  is a linear map

 
  from a linear subspace 
 
 
 
  — the domain of 
 
 
 
  — to the space 
 
 
 
 .5 Contrary to the usual convention, 
 
 
 
  may not be defined on the whole space 
 
 
 
 . Two operators are equal if they have a common domain and they coincide on that common domain.6
An operator 
 
 
 
  is said to be closed if its graph

 
  is a closed set.7 (Here, the graph 
 
 
 
  is a linear subspace of the direct sum

 
 , defined as the set of all pairs 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  runs over the domain of 
 
 
 
  ). Explicitly, this means that for every sequence  of points from the domain of 
 
 
 
  such that  and , it holds that 
 
 
 
  belongs to the domain of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .8 The closedness can also be formulated in terms of the graph norm: an operator 
 
 
 
  is closed if and only if its domain 
 
 
 
  is a complete space with respect to the norm:9



An operator 
 
 
 
  is said to be densely defined if its domain is dense in 
 
 
 
 .10 This also includes operators defined on the entire space 
 
 
 
 , since the whole space is dense in itself. The denseness of the domain is necessary and sufficient for the existence of the adjoint and the transpose; see the next section.
If 
 
 
 
  is closed, densely defined and continuous on its domain, then its domain is all of 
 
 
 
 .11
A densely defined operator 
 
 
 
  on a Hilbert space

 
  is called bounded from below if 
 
 
 
  is a positive operator for some real number 
 
 
 
 . That is, x⟩ ≥ −a {{!!}}x{{!!}}2}} for all 
 
 
 
  in the domain of 
 
 
 
 .12 If both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are bounded from below then 
 
 
 
  is bounded.13
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the space of continuous functions on the interval, and let  denote the space of continuously differentiable functions. Define the classical differentiation operator  by the usual formula:



Every differentiable function is continuous, so . Consequently, 
 
 
 
  is a well-defined unbounded operator, with domain .
This is a linear operator, since a linear combination 
 
 
 
  of two continuously differentiable functions 
 
 
 
  is also continuously differentiable, and



The operator is not bounded. For example,



satisfy



but



The operator is densely defined, and closed.
The same operator can be treated as an operator 
 
 
 
  for many choices of Banach space 
 
 
 
  and not be bounded between any of them. At the same time, it can be bounded as an operator 
 
 
 
  for other pairs of Banach spaces 
 
 
 
 , and also as operator 
 
 
 
  for some topological vector spaces 
 
 
 
 . As an example let 
 
 
 
  be an open interval and consider



where:



Adjoint
The adjoint of an unbounded operator can be defined in two equivalent ways. Let  be an unbounded operator between Hilbert spaces.
First, it can be defined in a way analogous to how we define the adjoint of a bounded operator. Namely, the adjoint  of 
 
 
 
  is defined as an operator with the property:



More precisely,  is defined in the following way. If  is such that 
 
 
 
  is a continuous linear functional on the domain of 
 
 
 
 , then we declare y to be an element of  , and after extending the linear functional to the whole space via the Hahn–Banach theorem, we can find a z in H1 such that



since the dual of a Hilbert space can be identified with the set of linear functionals given by the inner product. For each 
 
 
 
  is uniquely determined if and only if the linear functional that we extended was densely defined; i.e., if 
 
 
 
  is densely defined. Finally, we let  z}}, completing the construction of .14 Note that  exists if and only if 
 
 
 
  is densely defined.
By definition, the domain of  consists of elements 
 
 
 
  in  such that 
 
 
 
  is continuous on the domain of 
 
 
 
 . Consequently, the domain of  could be anything; it could be trivial (i.e., contains only zero).15 It may happen that the domain of T∗ is a closed hyperplane and  vanishes everywhere on the domain.1617 Thus, boundedness of  on its domain does not imply boundedness of 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, if  is defined on the whole space then 
 
 
 
  is bounded on its domain and therefore can be extended by continuity to a bounded operator on the whole space.18 If the domain of  is dense, then it has its adjoint .19 A closed densely defined operator 
 
 
 
  is bounded if and only if  is bounded.20
The other equivalent definition of the adjoint can be obtained by noticing a general fact. Define a linear operator 
 
 
 
  as follows:21



Since 
 
 
 
  is an isometric surjection, it is unitary. We then have:  is the graph of some operator 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is densely defined.22 A simple calculation shows that this "some" 
 
 
 
  satisfies:



for every 
 
 
 
  in the domain of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, 
 
 
 
  is the adjoint of 
 
 
 
 .
It follows immediately from the above definition that the adjoint  is closed.23 In particular, a self-adjoint operator (i.e.,  T ∗}}) is closed. An operator 
 
 
 
  is closed and densely defined if and only if  T}}.24
Some well-known properties for bounded operators generalize to closed densely defined operators. The kernel of a closed operator is closed. Moreover, the kernel of a closed densely defined operator  coincides with the orthogonal complement of the range of the adjoint. That is,25



von Neumann's theorem states that  and  are self-adjoint, and that  and  both have bounded inverses.26 If  has trivial kernel, 
 
 
 
  has dense range (by the above identity.) Moreover:



 
  is surjective if and only if there is a 
 
 
 
  such that  f {{!!}}2 ≤ K {{!!}}T ∗f {{!!}}1}} for all 
 
 
 
  in .If 
 
 
 
  is surjective, then  has bounded inverse, which we denote by 
 
 
 
 . The estimate then follows since
 




Conversely, suppose the estimate holds. Since  has closed range then, we have:  ran(TT *)}}. Since 
 
 
 
  is dense, it suffices to show that  has closed range. If  is convergent, then  is convergent by the estimate since



Say, . Since  is self-adjoint; thus, closed, (von Neumann's theorem), . QED (This is essentially a variant of the so-called closed range theorem.) In particular, 
 
 
 
  has closed range if and only if  has closed range.
In contrast to the bounded case, it is not necessary that we have:  S ∗T ∗}}, since, for example, it is even possible that  doesn't exist. This is, however, the case if, for example, 
 
 
 
  is bounded.27
A densely defined, closed operator 
 
 
 
  is called normal if it satisfies the following equivalent conditions:28

 TT ∗}};


the domain of 
 
 
 
  is equal to the domain of , and Tx{{!!}} {{=}} {{!!}}T ∗x{{!!}}}} for every 
 
 
 
  in this domain;


there exist self-adjoint operators 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 ,  A – iB}}, and Tx{{!!}}2{{=}} {{!!}}Ax{{!!}}2 + {{!!}}Bx{{!!}}2}} for every 
 
 
 
  in the domain of 
 
 
 
 .

Every self-adjoint operator is normal.
Transpose
Let  be an operator between Banach spaces. Then the transpose (or dual) 
 
 
 
  of T is an operator satisfying:


 
  for all x in B1 and y in B2*. Here, we used the notation
 
 
 
 .29
The necessary and sufficient condition for the transpose of T to exist is that T is densely defined (for essentially the same reason as to adjoints, as discussed above.)
For any Hilbert space H, there is the anti-linear isomorphism:


 
  given by Jf = y where 
 
 
 
 . Through this isomorphism, the transpose T' relates to the adjoint T∗ in the following way:


 
 ,30 where 
 
 
 
 . (For the finite-dimensional case, this corresponds to the fact that the adjoint of a matrix is its conjugate transpose.) Note that this gives the definition of adjoint in terms of a transpose.
Closed linear operators
Closed linear operators are a class of linear operators on Banach spaces. They are more general than bounded operators, and therefore not necessarily continuous, but they still retain nice enough properties that one can define the spectrum and (with certain assumptions) functional calculus for such operators. Many important linear operators which fail to be bounded turn out to be closed, such as the derivative and a large class of differential operators.
Let 
 
 
 
  be two Banach spaces. A linear operator

 
  is closed if for every sequence  in 
 
 
converging to 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that  as 
 
 
 
  one has 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Equivalently, 
 
 
 
  is closed if its graph is closed in the direct sum

 
 .
Given a linear operator 
 
 
 
 , not necessarily closed, if the closure of its graph in 
 
 
 
  happens to be the graph of some operator, that operator is called the closure of 
 
 
 
 , and we say that 
 
 
 
  is closable. Denote the closure of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . It follows easily that 
 
 
 
  is the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
A core of a closable operator is a subset

 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that the closure of the restriction of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Basic Properties
Any closed linear operator defined on the whole space 
 
 
 
  is bounded. This is the closed graph theorem. Additionally, the following properties are easily checked:

If 
 
 
 
  is closed then 
 
 
 
  is closed where 
 
 
 
  is a scalar and 
 
 
 
  is the identity function;
If 
 
 
 
  is closed, then its kernel (or nullspace) is a closed subspace of 
 
 
 
 ;
If 
 
 
 
  is closed and injective, then its inverse  is also closed;
An operator 
 
 
 
  admits a closure if and only if for every pair of sequences  and  in 
 
 
 
  both converging to 
 
 
 
 , such that both  and  converge, one has  limn Ayn}}.

Example
Consider the derivative operator 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Banach space of all continuous functions on an interval

 
 . If one takes its domain 
 
 
 
  to be , then 
 
 
 
  is a closed operator, which is not bounded. On the other hand if  [[smooth function|C∞([a, b])]]}}, then 
 
 
 
  will no longer be closed, but it will be closable, with the closure being its extension defined on .
Symmetric operators and self-adjoint operators
An operator T on a Hilbert space is symmetric if and only if for each x and y in the domain of 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
 . A densely defined operator 
 
 
 
  is symmetric if and only if it agrees with its adjoint T∗ restricted to the domain of T, in other words when T∗ is an extension of 
 
 
 
 .31
In general, if T is densely defined and symmetric, the domain of the adjoint T∗ need not equal the domain of T. If T is symmetric and the domain of T and the domain of the adjoint coincide, then we say that T is self-adjoint.32 Note that, when T is self-adjoint, the existence of the adjoint implies that T is densely defined and since T∗ is necessarily closed, T is closed.
A densely defined operator T is symmetric, if the subspace 
 
 
 
  (defined in a previous section) is orthogonal to its image 
 
 
 
  under J (where J(x,y):=(y,-x)).33
Equivalently, an operator T is self-adjoint if it is densely defined, closed, symmetric, and satisfies the fourth condition: both operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are surjective, that is, map the domain of T onto the whole space H. In other words: for every x in H there exist y and z in the domain of T such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .34
An operator T is self-adjoint, if the two subspaces 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are orthogonal and their sum is the whole space 
 
 
35
This approach does not cover non-densely defined closed operators. Non-densely defined symmetric operators can be defined directly or via graphs, but not via adjoint operators.
A symmetric operator is often studied via its Cayley transform.
An operator T on a complex Hilbert space is symmetric if and only if its quadratic form is real, that is, the number 
 
 
 
  is real for all x in the domain of T.36
A densely defined closed symmetric operator T is self-adjoint if and only if T∗ is symmetric.37 It may happen that it is not.3839
A densely defined operator T is called positive40 (or nonnegative41) if its quadratic form is nonnegative, that is, 
 
 
 
  for all x in the domain of T. Such operator is necessarily symmetric.
The operator T∗T is self-adjoint42 and positive43 for every densely defined, closed T.
The spectral theorem applies to self-adjoint operators 44 and moreover, to normal operators,4546 but not to densely defined, closed operators in general, since in this case the spectrum can be empty.4748
A symmetric operator defined everywhere is closed, therefore bounded,49 which is the Hellinger–Toeplitz theorem.50
Extension-related
By definition, an operator T is an extension of an operator S if 
 
 
 
 .51 An equivalent direct definition: for every x in the domain of S, x belongs to the domain of T and 
 
 
 
 .5253
Note that an everywhere defined extension exists for every operator, which is a purely algebraic fact explained at Discontinuous linear map#General existence theorem and based on the axiom of choice. If the given operator is not bounded then the extension is a discontinuous linear map. It is of little use since it cannot preserve important properties of the given operator (see below), and usually is highly non-unique.
An operator T is called closable if it satisfies the following equivalent conditions:545556

T has a closed extension;
the closure of the graph of T is the graph of some operator;
for every sequence (xn) of points from the domain of T such that xn → 0 and also Txn → y it holds that 
 
 
 
 .

Not all operators are closable.57
A closable operator T has the least closed extension 
 
 
 
  called the closure of T. The closure of the graph of T is equal to the graph of 
 
 
5859
Other, non-minimal closed extensions may exist.6061
A densely defined operator T is closable if and only if T∗ is densely defined. In this case 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
6263
If S is densely defined and T is an extension of S then S∗ is an extension of T∗.64
Every symmetric operator is closable.65
A symmetric operator is called maximal symmetric if it has no symmetric extensions, except for itself.66
Every self-adjoint operator is maximal symmetric.67 The converse is wrong.68
An operator is called essentially self-adjoint if its closure is self-adjoint.69
An operator is essentially self-adjoint if and only if it has one and only one self-adjoint extension.70
An operator may have more than one self-adjoint extension, and even a continuum of them.71
A densely defined, symmetric operator T is essentially self-adjoint if and only if both operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  have dense range.72
Let T be a densely defined operator. Denoting the relation "T is an extension of S" by S ⊂ T (a conventional abbreviation for Γ(S) ⊆ Γ(T)) one has the following.73

If T is symmetric then T ⊂ T∗∗ ⊂ T∗.
If T is closed and symmetric then T = T∗∗ ⊂ T∗.
If T is self-adjoint then T = T∗∗ = T∗.
If T is essentially self-adjoint then T ⊂ T∗∗ = T∗.

Importance of self-adjoint operators
The class of self-adjoint operators is especially important in mathematical physics. Every self-adjoint operator is densely defined, closed and symmetric. The converse holds for bounded operators but fails in general. Self-adjointness is substantially more restricting than these three properties. The famous spectral theorem holds for self-adjoint operators. In combination with Stone's theorem on one-parameter unitary groups it shows that self-adjoint operators are precisely the infinitesimal generators of strongly continuous one-parameter unitary groups, see Self-adjoint operator#Self-adjoint extensions in quantum mechanics. Such unitary groups are especially important for describing time evolution in classical and quantum mechanics.
See also

Hilbert space#Unbounded operators
Stone–von Neumann theorem
Bounded operator

Notes
References


(see Chapter 12 "General theory of unbounded operators in Hilbert spaces").





(see Chapter 5 "Unbounded operators").

(see Chapter 8 "Unbounded operators").



de:Linearer Operator#Unbeschränkte lineare Operatoren"
Category:Linear operators Category:Operator theory



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩

↩

Suppose fj is a sequence in the domain of 
 
 
 
  that converges to 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is uniformly continuous on its domain, Tfj is Cauchy in 
 
 
 
 . Thus,  is Cauchy and so converges to some 
 
 
 
  since the graph of 
 
 
 
  is closed. Hence, 
 
 
 
 , and the domain of 
 
 
 
  is closed.↩


Verifying that  is linear trivial.↩
↩
↩
↩
Proof: being closed, the everywhere defined  is bounded, which implies boundedness of , the latter being the closure of 
 
 
 
 . See also  for the case of everywhere defined 
 
 
 
 .↩

Proof: We have:  T}}. So, if  is bounded, then its adjoint 
 
 
 
  is bounded.↩
↩
↩

Proof: If 
 
 
 
  is closed densely defined, then  exists and is densely defined. Thus,  exists. The graph of 
 
 
 
  is dense in the graph of ; hence,  T ∗∗}}. Conversely, since the existence of  implies that that of , which in turn implies 
 
 
 
  is densely defined. Since  is closed, 
 
 
 
  is densely defined and closed.↩
Brezis, pp. 28.↩
Yoshida, pp. 200.↩
Yoshida, pp. 195.↩
↩
Yoshida, pp. 193.↩
Yoshida, pp. 196.↩
↩
↩
Follows from  and the definition via adjoint operators.↩
↩


↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩




↩
↩





↩
↩
↩


↩



↩
↩




