


Følner sequence




Følner sequence

In mathematics, a Følner sequence for a group is a sequence of sets satisfying a particular condition. If a group has a Følner sequence with respect to its action on itself, the group is amenable. A more general notion of Følner nets can be defined analogously, and is suited for the study of uncountable groups. Følner sequences are named for Erling Følner.
Definition
Given a group 
 
 
 
  that acts on a countable set 
 
 
 
 , a Følner sequence for the action is a sequence of finite subsets

 
  of 
 
 
 
  which exhaust 
 
 
 
  and which "don't move too much" when acted on by any group element. Precisely,

For every 
 
 
 
 , there exists some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , and
 


 
  for all group elements 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
 

Explanation of the notation used above:



 
  is the result of the set 
 
 
 
  being acted on the left by 
 
 
 
 . It consists of elements of the form 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the symmetric difference operator, i.e., 
 
 
 
  is the set of elements in exactly one of the sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the cardinality of a set 
 
 
 
 .

Thus, what this definition says is that for any group element 
 
 
 
 , the proportion of elements of 
 
 
 
  that are moved away by 
 
 
 
  goes to 0 as 
 
 
 
  gets large.
In the setting of a locally compact group acting on a measure space 
 
 
 
  there is a more general definition. Instead of being finite, the sets are required to have finite, non-zero measure, and so the Følner requirement will be that



 
 ,

analogously to the discrete case. The standard case is that of the group acting on itself by left translation, in which case the measure in question is normally assumed to be the Haar measure.
Examples

Any finite group 
 
 
 
  trivially has a Følner sequence 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 .


Consider the group of integers, acting on itself by addition. Let 
 
 
 
  consist of the integers between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  consists of integers between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For large 
 
 
 
 , the symmetric difference has size 
 
 
 
 , while 
 
 
 
  has size 
 
 
 
 . The resulting ratio is 
 
 
 
 , which goes to 0 as 
 
 
 
  gets large.


With the original definition of Følner sequence, a countable group has a Følner sequence if and only if it is amenable. An amenable group has a Følner sequence if and only if it is countable. A group which has a Følner sequence is countable if and only if it is amenable.


A locally compact group has a Følner sequence (with the generalized definition) if and only if it is amenable and second countable.

Proof of amenability 
We have a group 
 
 
 
  and a Følner sequence 
 
 
 
 , and we need to define a measure 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , which philosophically speaking says how much of 
 
 
 
  any subset 
 
 
 
  takes up. The natural definition that uses our Følner sequence would be


 
  Of course, this limit doesn't necessarily exist. To overcome this technicality, we take an ultrafilter

 
  on the natural numbers that contains intervals 
 
 
 
 . Then we use an ultralimit instead of the regular limit:


 
  It turns out ultralimits have all the properties we need. Namely,



 
  is a probability measure. That is, 
 
 
 
 , since the ultralimit coincides with the regular limit when it exists.


 
  is finitely additive. This is since ultralimits commute with addition just as regular limits do.


 
  is left invariant. This is since
 
 












by the Følner sequence definition.
 

References



"
Category:Geometric group theory


