


Choice function




Choice function

A choice function (selector, selection) is a mathematical function f that is defined on some collection X of nonempty sets and assigns to each set S in that collection some element f(S) of S. In other words, f is a choice function for X if and only if it belongs to the direct product of X.
An example
Let X = { {1,4,7}, {9}, {2,7} }. Then the function that assigns 7 to the set {1,4,7}, 9 to {9}, and 2 to {2,7} is a choice function on X.
History and importance
Ernst Zermelo (1904) introduced choice functions as well as the axiom of choice (AC) and proved the well-ordering theorem,1 which states that every set can be well-ordered. AC states that every set of nonempty sets has a choice function. A weaker form of AC, the axiom of countable choice (ACω) states that every countable set of nonempty sets has a choice function. However, in the absence of either AC or ACω, some sets can still be shown to have a choice function.

If 
 
 
 
  is a finite set of nonempty sets, then one can construct a choice function for 
 
 
 
  by picking one element from each member of 
 
 
 
  This requires only finitely many choices, so neither AC or ACω is needed.


If every member of 
 
 
 
  is a nonempty set, and the union

 
  is well-ordered, then one may choose the least element of each member of 
 
 
 
 . In this case, it was possible to simultaneously well-order every member of 
 
 
 
  by making just one choice of a well-order of the union, so neither AC nor ACω was needed. (This example shows that the well-ordering theorem implies AC. The converse is also true, but less trivial.)

Refinement of the notion of choice function
A function 
 
 
 
  is said to be a selection of a multivalued map φ:A → B (that is, a function 
 
 
 
  from A to the power set

 
 ), if



The existence of more regular choice functions, namely continuous or measurable selections is important in the theory of differential inclusions, optimal control, and mathematical economics.2
Bourbaki tau function
Nicolas Bourbaki used epsilon calculus for their foundations that had a 
 
 
 
  symbol that could be interpreted as choosing an object (if one existed) that satisfies a given proposition. So if 
 
 
 
  is a predicate, then 
 
 
 
  is the object that satisfies 
 
 
 
  (if one exists, otherwise it returns an arbitrary object). Hence we may obtain quantifiers from the choice function, for example 
 
 
 
  was equivalent to 
 
 
 
 .3
However, Bourbaki's choice operator is stronger than usual: it's a global choice operator. That is, it implies the axiom of global choice.4 Hilbert realized this when introducing epsilon calculus.5
See also

Axiom of countable choice
Hausdorff paradox
Hemicontinuity

Notes
References
"
Category:Basic concepts in set theory Category:Axiom of choice






John Harrison, "The Bourbaki View" eprint.
"Here, moreover, we come upon a very remarkable circumstance, namely, that all of these transfinite axioms are derivable from a single axiom, one that also contains the core of one of the most attacked axioms in the literature of mathematics, namely, the axiom of choice
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the transfinite logical choice function." Hilbert (1925), “On the Infinite”, excerpted in Jean van Heijenoort, From Frege to Gödel, p. 382. From nCatLab.




