


Elementary symmetric polynomial




Elementary symmetric polynomial

In mathematics, specifically in commutative algebra, the elementary symmetric polynomials are one type of basic building block for symmetric polynomials, in the sense that any symmetric polynomial can be expressed as a polynomial in elementary symmetric polynomials. That is, any symmetric polynomial P is given by an expression involving only additions and multiplication of constants and elementary symmetric polynomials. There is one elementary symmetric polynomial of degree d in n variables for each nonnegative integer d ≤ n, and it is formed by adding together all distinct products of d distinct variables.
Definition
The elementary symmetric polynomials in 
 
 
 
  variables X1, …, Xn, written ek(X1, …, Xn) for k = 0, 1, ..., n, are defined by


 
 
  and so forth, ending with


 
 . In general, for k ≥ 0 we define


 
  so that  0}} if 
 
 
 
 .
Thus, for each positive integer 
 
 
 
  less than or equal to 
 
 
 
  there exists exactly one elementary symmetric polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  variables. To form the one that has degree 
 
 
 
 , we take the sum of all products of 
 
 
 
 -subsets of the 
 
 
 
  variables. (By contrast, if one performs the same operation using multisets of variables, that is, taking variables with repetition, one arrives at the complete homogeneous symmetric polynomials.)
Given an integer partition (that is, a finite decreasing sequence of positive integers) λ = (λ1, …, λm), one defines the symmetric polynomial 
 
 
 
 , also called an elementary symmetric polynomial, by


 
 .
Sometimes the notation σk is used instead of ek.
Examples
The following lists the n elementary symmetric polynomials for the first four positive values of n. (In every case, e0 = 1 is also one of the polynomials.)
For n = 1:



For n = 2:



For n = 3:



For n = 4:



Properties
The elementary symmetric polynomials appear when we expand a linear factorization of a monic polynomial: we have the identity


 
  That is, when we substitute numerical values for the variables 
 
 
 
 , we obtain the monic univariate polynomial (with variable λ) whose roots are the values substituted for 
 
 
 
  and whose coefficients are up to their sign the elementary symmetric polynomials. These relations between the roots and the coefficients of a polynomial are called Vieta's formulas.
The characteristic polynomial of a square matrix is an example of this. The roots are the eigenvalues of the matrix. When we substitute these eigenvalues into the elementary symmetric polynomials, we obtain, up to their sign, the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial, which are invariants of the matrix. In particular, the value of  is the trace of the matrix, and the value of  is its determinant.
The set of elementary symmetric polynomials in 
 
 
 
  variables generates the ring of symmetric polynomials in 
 
 
 
 
  variables. More specifically, the ring of symmetric polynomials with integer coefficients equals the integral polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  (See below for a more general statement and proof.) This fact is one of the foundations of invariant theory. For other systems of symmetric polynomials with a similar property see power sum symmetric polynomials and complete homogeneous symmetric polynomials.
The fundamental theorem of symmetric polynomials
For any commutative ring A denote the ring of symmetric polynomials in the variables 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in A by 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is a polynomial ring in the n elementary symmetric polynomials 
 
 
 
 
  for k = 1, ..., n. (Note that 
 
 
 
  is not among these polynomials; since 
 
 
 
 , it cannot be member of any set of algebraically independent elements.)
This means that every symmetric polynomial 
 
 
 
  has a unique representation


 
  for some polynomial 
 
 
 
 . Another way of saying the same thing is that 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the polynomial ring 
 
 
 
  through an isomorphism that sends 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
Proof sketch
The theorem may be proved for symmetric homogeneous polynomials by a double mathematical induction with respect to the number of variables n and, for fixed n, with respect to the degree of the homogeneous polynomial. The general case then follows by splitting an arbitrary symmetric polynomial into its homogeneous components (which are again symmetric).
In the case n = 1 the result is obvious because every polynomial in one variable is automatically symmetric.
Assume now that the theorem has been proved for all polynomials for 
 
 
 
  variables and all symmetric polynomials in n variables with degree  A[X_1,\ldots,X_n]^{S_n}  can be decomposed as a sum of homogeneous symmetric polynomials


 
  Here the "lacunary part" 
 
 
 
  is defined as the sum of all monomials in P which contain only a proper subset of the n variables X1, ..., Xn, i.e., where at least one variable Xj is missing.
Because P is symmetric, the lacunary part is determined by its terms containing only the variables X1, ..., Xn−1, i.e., which do not contain Xn. More precisely: If A and B are two homogeneous symmetric polynomials in X1, ..., Xn having the same degree, and if the coefficient of A before each monomial which contains only the variables X1, ..., Xn−1 equals the corresponding coefficient of B, then A and B have equal lacunary parts. (This is because every monomial which can appear in a lacunary part must lack at least one variable, and thus can be transformed by a permutation of the variables into a monomial which contains only the variables X1, ..., Xn−1.)
But the terms of P which contain only the variables X1, ..., Xn−1 are precisely the terms that survive the operation of setting Xn to 0, so their sum equals 
 
 
 
 , which is a symmetric polynomial in the variables X1, ..., Xn−1 that we shall denote by 
 
 
 
 . By the inductive assumption, this polynomial can be written as


 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . Here the doubly indexed 
 
 
 
  denote the elementary symmetric polynomials in n−1 variables.
Consider now the polynomial


 
  Then 
 
 
 
  is a symmetric polynomial in X1, ..., Xn, of the same degree as 
 
 
 
 , which satisfies


 
  (the first equality holds because setting Xn to 0 in 
 
 
 
  gives 
 
 
 
 , for all 
 
 
 
  of all variables, which equals the elementary symmetric polynomial 
 
 
 
 . Then writing 
 
 
 
 , the quotient Q is a homogeneous symmetric polynomial of degree less than d (in fact degree at most d − n) which by the inductive assumption can be expressed as a polynomial in the elementary symmetric functions. Combining the representations for P−R and R one finds a polynomial representation for P.
The uniqueness of the representation can be proved inductively in a similar way. (It is equivalent to the fact that the n polynomials 
 
 
 
  are algebraically independent over the ring A.) The fact that the polynomial representation is unique implies that 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 .
An alternative proof
The following proof is also inductive, but does not involve other polynomials than those symmetric in X1,...,Xn, and also leads to a fairly direct procedure to effectively write a symmetric polynomial as a polynomial in the elementary symmetric ones. Assume the symmetric polynomial to be homogeneous of degree 
 
 
 
 ; different homogeneous components can be decomposed separately. Order the monomials in the variables  lexicographically, where the individual variables are ordered , in other words the dominant term of a polynomial is one with the highest occurring power of , and among those the one with the highest power of , etc. Furthermore parametrize all products of elementary symmetric polynomials that have degree 
 
 
 
  (they are in fact homogeneous) as follows by partitions of 
 
 
 
 . Order the individual elementary symmetric polynomials  in the product so that those with larger indices 
 
 
 
  come first, then build for each such factor a column of 
 
 
 
  boxes, and arrange those columns from left to right to form a Young diagram containing 
 
 
 
  boxes in all. The shape of this diagram is a partition of 
 
 
 
 , and each partition 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  arises for exactly one product of elementary symmetric polynomials, which we shall denote by ,…,) (the "t" is present only because traditionally this product is associated to the transpose partition of 
 
 
 
 ). The essential ingredient of the proof is the following simple property, which uses multi-index notation for monomials in the variables .
Lemma. The leading term of  is .

Proof. The leading term of the product is the product of the leading terms of each factor (this is true whenever one uses a monomial order, like the lexicographic order used here), and the leading term of the factor  is clearly . To count the occurrences of the individual variables in the resulting monomial, fill the column of the Young diagram corresponding to the factor concerned with the numbers 1…,
 
 
 
  of the variables, then all boxes in the first row contain 1, those in the second row 2, and so forth, which means the leading term is .
 

Now one proves by induction on the leading monomial in lexicographic order, that any nonzero homogeneous symmetric polynomial 
 
 
 
  of degree 
 
 
 
  can be written as polynomial in the elementary symmetric polynomials. Since 
 
 
 
  is symmetric, its leading monomial has weakly decreasing exponents, so it is some  with 
 
 
 
  a partition of 
 
 
 
 . Let the coefficient of this term be 
 
 
 
 , then  is either zero or a symmetric polynomial with a strictly smaller leading monomial. Writing this difference inductively as a polynomial in the elementary symmetric polynomials, and adding back  to it, one obtains the sought for polynomial expression for $P$.
The fact that this expression is unique, or equivalently that all the products (monomials)  of elementary symmetric polynomials are linearly independent, is also easily proved. The lemma shows that all these products have different leading monomials, and this suffices: if a nontrivial linear combination of the  were zero, one focuses on the contribution in the linear combination with nonzero coefficient and with (as polynomial in the variables ) the largest leading monomial; the leading term of this contribution cannot be cancelled by any other contribution of the linear combination, which gives a contradiction.
See also

Symmetric polynomial
Complete homogeneous symmetric polynomial
Schur polynomial
Newton's identities
MacMahon Master theorem
Symmetric function
Representation theory

References

Macdonald, I.G. (1995), Symmetric Functions and Hall Polynomials, second ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-850450-0 (paperback, 1998).
Richard P. Stanley (1999), Enumerative Combinatorics, Vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-56069-1

"
Category:Homogeneous polynomials Category:Symmetric functions Category:Articles containing proofs


