


Iterated function




Iterated function

In mathematics, an iterated function is a function 
 
 
 
  (that is, a function from some set 
 
 
 
  to itself) which is obtained by composing another function 
 
 
 
  with itself a certain number of times. The process of repeatedly applying the same function is called iteration. In this process, starting from some initial number, the result of applying a given function is fed again in the function as input, and this process is repeated.
Iterated functions are objects of study in computer science, fractals, dynamical systems, mathematics and renormalization group physics.
Definition
The formal definition of an iterated function on a set X follows.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a set and 
 
 
 
  be a function.
Define  as the n-th iterate of 
 
 
 
 , where n is a non-negative integer, by:








and








where  is the identity function on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denotes function composition. That is,




 
 ,
 



always associative.
Because the notation  may refer to both iteration (composition) of the function 
 
 
 
  or exponentiation of the function 
 
 
 
  (the latter is used in trigonometry), some mathematicians choose to write  for the n-th iterate of the function 
 
 
 
 .
Abelian property and Iteration sequences
In general, the following identity holds for all non-negative integers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,



This is structurally identical to the property of exponentiation that  am+n}}, i.e. the special case 
 
 
 
 .
In general, for arbitrary general (negative, non-integer, etc.) indices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , this relation is called the translation functional equation, cf. Schröder's equation and Abel equation. On a logarithmic scale, this reduces to the nesting property of Chebyshev polynomials, Tm n(x)}}, since  cos(n arcos(x ))}}.
The relation  (fn )m(x) {{=}} fmn(x)}} also holds, analogous to the property of exponentiation that (an )m {{=}} amn}}.
The sequence of functions  is called a Picard sequence,12 named after Charles Émile Picard.
For a given 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the sequence of values  is called the orbit of 
 
 
 
 .
If  f n+m (x)}} for some integer 
 
 
 
 , the orbit is called a periodic orbit. The smallest such value of 
 
 
 
  for a given 
 
 
 
  is called the period of the orbit. The point 
 
 
 
  itself is called a periodic point. The cycle detection problem in computer science is the algorithmic problem of finding the first periodic point in an orbit, and the period of the orbit.
Fixed points
If f(x) = x for some x in X, then x is called a fixed point of the iterated sequence. The set of fixed points is often denoted as Fix(f ). There exist a number of fixed-point theorems that guarantee the existence of fixed points in various situations, including the Banach fixed point theorem and the Brouwer fixed point theorem.
There are several techniques for convergence acceleration of the sequences produced by fixed point iteration.3 For example, the Aitken method applied to an iterated fixed point is known as Steffensen's method, and produces quadratic convergence.
Limiting behaviour
Upon iteration, one may find that there are sets that shrink and converge towards a single point. In such a case, the point that is converged to is known as an attractive fixed point. Conversely, iteration may give the appearance of points diverging away from a single point; this would be the case for an unstable fixed point.4 When the points of the orbit converge to one or more limits, the set of accumulation points of the orbit is known as the limit set or the ω-limit set.
The ideas of attraction and repulsion generalize similarly; one may categorize iterates into stable sets and unstable sets, according to the behaviour of small neighborhoods under iteration. (Also see Infinite compositions of analytic functions.)
Other limiting behaviours are possible; for example, wandering points are points that move away, and never come back even close to where they started.
Fractional iterates and flows, and negative iterates
In some instances,5 fractional iteration of a function can be defined: for instance, a half iterate of a function 
 
 
 
  is a function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . This function 
 
 
 
  can be written using the index notation as  . Similarly,  is the function defined such that  f(x)}}, while  may be defined equal to , and so forth, all based on the principle, mentioned earlier, that  fm + n}}. This idea can be generalized so that the iteration count 
 
 
 
  becomes a continuous parameter, a sort of continuous "time" of a continuous orbit.
In such cases, one refers to the system as a flow, specified by Schröder's equation. (cf. Section on conjugacy below.)
Negative iterates correspond to function inverses and their compositions. For example,  is the normal inverse of 
 
 
 
 , while  is the inverse composed with itself, i.e.  f−1(f−1(x))}}. Fractional negative iterates are defined analogously to fractional positive ones; for example,  is defined such that  f−1(x)}}, or, equivalently, such that  f0(x) {{=}} x}}.
Some formulas for fractional iteration
One of several methods of finding a series formula for fractional iteration, making use of a fixed point, is as follows.
(1) First determine a fixed point for the function such that 
 
 
 
  .
(2) Define a}} for all n belonging to the reals. This, in some ways, is the most natural extra condition to place upon the fractional iterates.
(3) Expand  around the fixed point a as a Taylor series,



(4) Expand out



(5) Substitute in for  a}}, for any k,



(6) Make use of the geometric progression to simplify terms,



(6b) There is a special case when 
 
 
 
 ,



(7) When n is not an integer, make use of the power formula  exp(n ln(y))}}.
This can be carried on indefinitely, although inefficiently, as the latter terms become increasingly complicated.
A more systematic procedure is outlined in the following section on Conjugacy.
Example 1
For example, setting 
 
 
 
  gives the fixed point 
 
 
 
 , so the above formula terminates to just


 
  which is trivial to check.
Example 2
Find the value of 
 
 
 
  where this is done n times (and possibly the interpolated values when n is not an integer). We have x}}. A fixed point is 
 
 
 
 .
So set x=1 and  expanded around the fixed point value of 2 is then an infinite series,


 
  which, taking just the first three terms, is correct to the first decimal place when n is positive—cf. Tetration:  n }}. (Using the other fixed point 
 
 
 
  causes the series to diverge.)
For 
 
 
 
 , the series computes the inverse function, 
 
 
 
 .
Example 3
With the function  xb}}, expand around the fixed point 1 to get the series


 
  which is simply the Taylor series of x(bn ) expanded around 1.
Conjugacy
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two iterated functions, and there exists a homeomorphism

 
  such that  h−1 ○ f ○ h }}, then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are said to be topologically conjugate.
Clearly, topological conjugacy is preserved under iteration, as h−1 ○ f n ○ h}}. Thus, if one can solve for one iterated function system, one also has solutions for all topologically conjugate systems. For example, the tent map is topologically conjugate to the logistic map. As a special case, taking 
 
 
 
 , one has the iteration of  h−1(h(x)+1)}} as

 h−1(h(x) + n)}},   for any function 
 
 
 
 .
 

Making the substitution  h−1(y) {{=}} ϕ(y)}} yields



 
 ,   a form known as the Abel equation.
 

Even in the absence of a strict homeomorphism, near a fixed point, here taken to be at 
 
 
 
  = 0, 
 
 
 
 (0) = 0, one may often solve6 Schröder's equation for a function 
 
 
 
 , which makes 
 
 
 
  locally conjugate to a mere dilation, 
 
 
 
 , that is

 Ψ−1(f '(0) Ψ(x))}}.
 

Thus, its iteration orbit, or flow, under suitable provisions (e.g., 
 
 
 
 ), amounts to the conjugate of the orbit of the monomial,

,
 

where 
 
 
 
  in this expression serves as a plain exponent: functional iteration has been reduced to multiplication! Here, however, the exponent 
 
 
 
  no longer needs be integer or positive, and is a continuous "time" of evolution for the full orbit:7 the monoid of the Picard sequence (cf. transformation semigroup) has generalized to a full continuous group.8
This method (perturbative determination of the principal eigenfunction

 
 , cf. Carleman matrix) is equivalent to the algorithm of the preceding section, albeit, in practice, more powerful and systematic.
Markov chains
If the function is linear and can be described by a stochastic matrix, that is, a matrix whose rows or columns sum to one, then the iterated system is known as a Markov chain.
Examples
There are many chaotic maps. Well-known iterated functions include the Mandelbrot set and iterated function systems.
Ernst Schröder,9 in 1870, worked out special cases of the logistic map, such as the chaotic case 
 
 
 
 , so that  arcsin2(√x)}}, hence  sin2(2n arcsin(√x))}}.
A nonchaotic case Schröder also illustrated with his method, 
 
 
 
 , yielded 
 
 
 
 , and hence  −½((1−2x)2n−1)}}.
If 
 
 
 
  is the action of a group element on a set, then the iterated function corresponds to a free group.
Most functions do not have explicit general closed-form expressions for the n-th iterate. The table below lists some10 that do. Note that all these expressions are valid even for non-integer and negative n, as well as positive integer n.
















































 
  (see note)





 where:








 
  (see note)





 where:








 
    (rational difference equation)11




 where:































 
    (generic Abel equation)

















Note: these two special cases of  are the only cases that have a closed-form solution. Choosing b = 2 = –a and b = 4 = –a, respectively, further reduces them to the nonchaotic and chaotic logistic cases discussed prior to the table.
Some of these examples are related among themselves by simple conjugacies. A few further examples, essentially amounting to simple conjugacies of Schröder's examples can be found in ref.12
Means of study
Iterated functions can be studied with the Artin–Mazur zeta function and with transfer operators.
In computer science
In computer science, iterated functions occur as a special case of recursive functions, which in turn anchor the study of such broad topics as lambda calculus, or narrower ones, such as the denotational semantics of computer programs.
Definitions in terms of iterated functions
Two important functionals can be defined in terms of iterated functions. These are summation:



and the equivalent product:



Lie's data transport equation
Iterated functions crop up in the series expansion of the combined functions, such as 
 
 
 
 .
Given the iteration velocity, or beta function (physics), 
 
 
 
  for the 
 
 
th iterate of the function 
 
 
 
 , we have13


 
  For example, for rigid advection, if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . Consequently 
 
 
 
 , a plain shift operator.
One may further find 
 
 
 
  given 
 
 
 
 , through the Abel equation discussed above,


 
  where


 
  This is evident by noting that



See also

Irrational rotation
Iterated function system
Iterative method
Rotation number
Sarkovskii's theorem
Fractional calculus


Recurrence relation
Schröder's equation
Functional square root
Abel function
Infinite compositions of analytic functions
Flow (mathematics)

References
"
Category:Dynamical systems Category:Fractals Category:Sequences and series Category:Fixed points (mathematics) Category:Functions and mappings Category:Functional equations






Istratescu, Vasile (1981). Fixed Point Theory, An Introduction, D. Reidel, Holland. ISBN 90-277-1224-7.
The notion  must be used with care when the equation  f(x)}} has multiple solutions, which is normally the case, as in Babbage's equation of the functional roots of the identity map. For example, for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are solutions; so the expression  doesn't denote a unique function, just as algebraic roots of numbers are multiple. The issue is quite similar to division by zero. The roots chosen are normally the ones belonging to the orbit under study.
Kimura, Tosihusa (1971). "On the Iteration of Analytic Functions", Funkcialaj Ekvacioj 14, 197-238.

For explicit instance, example 2 above amounts to just  Ψ−1((ln2)n Ψ(x))}}, for any n, not necessarily integer, where 
 
 
 
  is the solution of the relevant Schröder's equation,  ln2 Ψ(x)}}. This solution is also the infinite m limit of .


Brand, Louis, "A sequence defined by a difference equation," American Mathematical Monthly 62, September 1955, 489–492. online

 




