


Adjoint representation of a Lie algebra




Adjoint representation of a Lie algebra

In mathematics, the adjoint endomorphism or adjoint action is a homomorphism of Lie algebras that plays a fundamental role in the development of the theory of Lie algebras.
Given an element 
 
 
 
  of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 , one defines the adjoint action of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  as the map


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
The concept generates the adjoint representation of a Lie group Ad. In fact, ad is the differential of Ad at the identity element of the group.
Adjoint representation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie algebra over a field 
 
 
 
 . Then the linear mapping


 
  given by  is a representation of a Lie algebra and is called the adjoint representation of the algebra. (Its image actually lies in Der
 
 
 
 . See below.)
Within End
 
 
 
 , the Lie bracket is, by definition, given by the commutator of the two operators:


 
  where ○ denotes composition of linear maps.
If 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional, then End
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 , the Lie algebra of the general linear group over the vector space 
 
 
 
  and if a basis for it is chosen, the composition corresponds to matrix multiplication.
Using the above definition of the Lie bracket, the Jacobi identity


 
  takes the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are arbitrary elements of 
 
 
 
 .
This last identity says that ad really is a Lie algebra homomorphism; i.e., a linear mapping that takes brackets to brackets.
In a more module-theoretic language, the construction simply says that 
 
 
 
  is a module over itself.
The kernel of ad is, by definition, the center of 
 
 
 
 . Next, we consider the image of ad. Recall that a derivation on a Lie algebra is a linear map

 
  that obeys the Leibniz' law, that is,


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the algebra.
That adx is a derivation is a consequence of the Jacobi identity. This implies that the image of 
 
 
 
  under ad is a subalgebra of Der
 
 
 
 , the space of all derivations of 
 
 
 
 .
Structure constants
The explicit matrix elements of the adjoint representation are given by the structure constants of the algebra. That is, let {ei} be a set of basis vectors for the algebra, with


 
  Then the matrix elements for adei are given by



Thus, for example, the adjoint representation of su(2) is the defining rep of so(3).
Relation to Ad
Ad and ad are related through the exponential map: crudely, Ad = exp ad, where Ad is the adjoint representation for a Lie group.
To be more precise, let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie group, and let 
 
 
 
  be the mapping , with  given by the inner automorphism


 
  It is an example of a Lie group map. Define  to be the derivative of  at the origin:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the differential and  is the tangent space at the origin 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  being the identity element of the group 
 
 
 
 ).
The Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  = . Since Adg ∈ Aut
 
 
 
 ,    is a map from 
 
 
 
  to  which will have a derivative from  to  (the Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
  being 
 
 
 
 ).
Then we have



The use of upper-case/lower-case notation is used extensively in the literature. Thus, for example, a vector 
 
 
 
  in the algebra 
 
 
 
  generates a vector field

 
  in the group 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, the adjoint map  [x,y]}} of vectors in 
 
 
 
  is homomorphic to the Lie derivative  [X,Y]}} of vector fields on the group 
 
 
 
  considered as a manifold.
Further see the derivative of the exponential map.
References



"
Category:Representation theory of Lie algebras Category:Lie groups


