


Hankel transform




Hankel transform

In mathematics, the Hankel transform expresses any given function f(r) as the weighted sum of an infinite number of Bessel functions of the first kind . The Bessel functions in the sum are all of the same order ν, but differ in a scaling factor k along the r-axis. The necessary coefficient  of each Bessel function in the sum, as a function of the scaling factor k constitutes the transformed function. The Hankel transform is an integral transform and was first developed by the mathematician Hermann Hankel. It is also known as the Fourier–Bessel transform. Just as the Fourier transform for an infinite interval is related to the Fourier series over a finite interval, so the Hankel transform over an infinite interval is related to the Fourier–Bessel series over a finite interval.
Definition
The Hankel transform of order ν of a function f(r) is given by:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Bessel function of the first kind of order 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  The inverse Hankel transform of  is defined as:



which can be readily verified using the orthogonality relationship described below.
Domain of definition
Inverting a Hankel transform of a function f(r) is valid at every point at which f(r) is continuous provided that the function is defined in (0, ∞), is piecewise continuous and of bounded variation in every finite subinterval in (0, ∞), and



However, like the Fourier Transform, the domain can be extended by a density argument to include some functions whose above integral is not finite, for example 
 
 
 
 .
Alternative definition
An alternative definition says that the Hankel transform of g(r) is:1



The two definitions are related:


 
  This means that, as with the previous definition, the Hankel transform defined this way is also its own inverse:


 
  The obvious domain now has the condition


 
  but this can be extended. According to the reference given above, we can take the integral as the limit as the upper limit goes to infinity (an improper integral rather than a Lebesgue integral) and in this way the Hankel transform and its inverse work for all functions in L2(0, ∞).
Orthogonality
The Bessel functions form an orthogonal basis with respect to the weighting factor r:



The Plancherel theorem and Parseval's theorem
If f(r) and g(r) are such that their Hankel transforms  and  are well defined, then the Plancherel theorem states



Parseval's theorem, which states:



is a special case of the Plancherel theorem. These theorems can be proven using the orthogonality property.
Relation to other function transforms
Relation to the Fourier transform (circularly symmetric case)
The Hankel transform of order zero is essentially the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Fourier transform of a circularly symmetric function.
Consider a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional function 
 
 
 
  of the radius vector 
 
 
 
 . Its Fourier transform is:



With no loss of generality, we can pick a polar coordinate system 
 
 
 
  such that the 
 
 
 
  vector lies on the 
 
 
 
  axis. The Fourier transform is now written in these polar coordinates as:



where 
 
 
 
  is the angle between the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  vectors. If the function 
 
 
 
  happens to be circularly symmetric, it will have no dependence on the angular variable 
 
 
 
  and may be written 
 
 
 
 . The integration over 
 
 
 
  may be carried out, and the Fourier transform is now written:



which is just 
 
 
 
  times the zero-order Hankel transform of 
 
 
 
 . For the reverse transform,



so 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  times the zero-order Hankel transform of 
 
 
 
 .
Relation to the Fourier transform (radially symmetric case in 
 
 
 
 -dimensions)
For an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Fourier transform,



if the function 
 
 
 
  is radially symmetric, then:2



Relation to the Fourier transform (general case)
To generalize: If 
 
 
 
  is expanded in a multipole series,



and if  is the angle between the direction of 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  axis,


 
 
  where  is the 
 
 
 
 
 -th order Hankel transform of .
Functions inside a limited radius
Additionally, if  is sufficiently smooth near the origin and zero outside a radius 
 
 
 
 , it may be expanded into a Chebyshev series,


 
  so that


 
 
  The numerically important aspect is that the expansion coefficients  are accessible with Discrete Fourier transform techniques. Insertion into the previous formula yields
This is one flavor of fast Hankel transform techniques.
Relation to the Fourier and Abel transforms
The Hankel transform is one member of the FHA cycle of integral operators. In two dimensions, if we define 
 
 
 
 
  as the Abel transform operator, 
 
 
 
  as the Fourier transform operator and 
 
 
 
  as the zeroth order Hankel transform operator, then the special case of the projection-slice theorem for circularly symmetric functions states that:



In other words, applying the Abel transform to a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional function and then applying the Fourier transform to that result is the same as applying the Hankel transform to that function. This concept can be extended to higher dimensions.
Some Hankel transform pairs
3
























































































































































































Expressable in terms of elliptic integrals.4













 is a modified Bessel function of the second kind. 
 
 
 
  is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind.
The expression


 
  coincides with the expression for the Laplace operator in polar coordinates

 
  applied to a spherically symmetric function .
The Hankel transform of Zernike polynomials are essentially Bessel Functions (Noll 1976):



for even 
 
 
 
 
 .
Generalized Hankel transform for fan-beam geometry
The image reconstruction in polar coordinates with parallel beam CT projections can be done with Hankel transform. This theory has been generalized to fan-beam geometry. Generalized Bessel function is utilized. 5
See also

Fourier transform
Integral transform
Abel transform
Fourier–Bessel series
Neumann polynomial

References
insert 
























"
Category:Integral transforms



↩
↩
↩
↩
Zhao S.R., H. Halling, Image Reconstruction for Fan Beam Tomography Using a New Integral Transform Pair, published on: International Symposium on Computerized Tomography in Novosibirsk, Russia, August 10-14, 1993. Abstracts ed. M.M. Lavrentev, P125↩




