   Slashed zero      Slashed zero   The slashed zero is a representation of the number ' 0 ' (zero), with a slash through it. The slashed zero glyph is often used to distinguish the digit "zero" ("0") from the Latin script letter "O" anywhere that the distinction needs emphasis, particularly in encoding systems, scientific and engineering applications, computer programming (such as software development ), and telecommunications. It thus helps to differentiate characters that would otherwise be homoglyphs . It was commonly used during the punched card era, when programs were typically written out by hand, to avoid ambiguity when the character was later typed on a card punch .  Unlike in the Scandinavian  vowel ' Ø ' and the " empty set " symbol ' ∅ ', the slash of a slashed zero usually does not extend past the ellipse in most typographic designs. However, the slashed zero is sometimes approximated by overlaying zero and slash characters, producing the character " 0̸" .  In character encoding terms, it has no explicit codepoint, but it is an alternate glyph (in addition to the open zero glyph) for the zero character .  Origins  The slashed zero long predates computers, and is known to have been used in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 1 It is used in many Baudot  teleprinter applications, specifically the keytop and typepallet that combines "P" and slashed zero. 2 Additionally, the slashed zero is used in many ASCII graphic sets descended from the default typewheel on the Teletype Model 33 . 3  Usage  The slashed zero is used in a number of fields in order to avoid confusion with the letter 'O'. It is used by computer programmers , in recording amateur radio call signs and in military radio.  The slashed zero, sometimes called communications zero, was used on teleprinter circuits for weather applications. 4  The slashed zero can be used in stoichiometry to avoid confusion with the symbol for oxygen (capital O).  The slashed zero is also common in logs of contacts to distinguish a zero (i.e. Ø) from a capital 'O', since amateur radio call signs contain both letters and numerals.  Along with the Westminster , MICR , and OCR-A fonts , the slashed zero became one of the things associated with hacker culture in the 1980s. Some cartoons depicted computer users talking in binary code with 1s and 0s using a slashed zero for the 0.  To generate a slashed zero on typewriters, typists would type a normal "O" or zero, backspace, and then hit the slash key to mark the zero.  The use of the slashed zero by many computer systems of the 1970s and 1980s inspired the 1980s space rock band Underground Zerø to use a heavy metal umlaut  Scandinavian  vowel  ø in the band's name and as the band logo on all their album covers (see link below).  Slashed zeroes have been used in the Flash-based artwork of Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries , notably in their 2003 work, Operation Nukorea. The reason for their use is unknown, but has been conjectured to be related to themes of 'negation, erasure, and absence'. 5  Slashed zeroes can also be used on cheques in order to prevent fraud, for example: changing a 0 to an 8.  Representation in Unicode and HTML  The treatment of slashed zero as a glyph is supported by any font whose designer chose the option. Successful display on any local system depends on having the font available there, either via the system's font files or via font embedding .  Unicode supports explicit slashed zero, but only via a pair of combining characters , not as a distinct single character (or codepoint , in Unicode parlance). It is treated literally as "a zero that is slashed", and it is coded as two characters: the commonplace zero and then the "combining long solidus overlay" (U+0338) . These combining characters overlay the preceding character, creating a composite glyph.  When used in HTML , use of such combining characters is valid but not yet supported by all current web browsers; for instance, Microsoft Internet Explorer fails to render them. They may be coded as 0̸ giving 0̸ .  Similar symbols  The slashed zero has the disadvantage that it can be confused with several other symbols:   The slashed zero causes problems in all languages because it can be mistaken for 8, especially when lighting is dim, imaging or eyes are out of focus, or printing is small compared to the dot size.  It causes problems for some Scandinavian languages — Ø is used as a letter in the Danish , Faroese , and Norwegian alphabets , where it represents  or .  It also resembles the Greek letters  Theta and Phi in some fonts (although usually, the slash is horizontal or vertical, respectively).  The symbols Ø and "∅" (U+2205) are used in mathematics to refer to the empty set .  "" (U+2300) is Unicode's codepoint for the diameter symbol.  In German-speaking countries, Ø is also used as a symbol for average value: average in German is Durchschnitt , directly translated as cut-through .   However, the unslashed zero has the disadvantage that it is easily confused with the letter 'O'.  In paper writing one may not distinguish the 0 and O at all, or may add a slash across it in order to show the difference, although this sometimes causes ambiguity in regard to the symbol for the empty set .  Variations  Dotted zero  The zero with a dot in the center seems to have originated as an option on IBM 3270 display controllers. The dotted zero may appear similar to the Greek letter  theta (particularly capital theta, Θ), but the two have different glyphs . In raster fonts, the theta usually has a horizontal line connecting, or nearly touching, the sides of an O; while the dotted zero simply has a dot in the middle. However, on a low-definition display, such a form can be confused with a numeral 8.  Alternatively, the dot can become a vertical trace, for example by adding a "combining short vertical line overlay" (U+20D3) . It may be coded as 0⃓ giving 0⃓ .  Slashed 'O'  IBM (and a few other early mainframe makers) used a convention in which the letter O has a slash and the digit 0 does not. 6 This is even more problematic for Danes , Faroese , and Norwegians because it means two of their letters—the O and slashed O ( Ø )—are visually similar.  Short slash  Use of the "combining short solidus overlay" (U+0337) produces a result where the slash is contained within the zero. This may be coded as 0̷ to yield 0̷.  Reversed slash  Some Burroughs / Unisys equipment displays a zero with a reversed slash, as " ⃠ ".  Other  Yet another convention common on early line printers left zero unornamented but added a tail or hook to the letter-O so that it resembled an inverted Q or cursive capital letter-O.  In the Fixedsys typeface, the numeral 0 has two internal barbs along the lines of the slash, which can alternately be considered a narrow "S" within the zero.  In the FE-Schrift typeface, used on German car license plates because it is harder to alter, the zero is rectangular and has an "insinuated" slash: a diagonal crack just beneath the top right curve.  Typefaces  Typefaces commonly found on personal computers that use the slashed zero include:   Terminal in Microsoft 's Windows line.  Consolas in Microsoft's  Windows Vista , Windows 7 , Microsoft Office 2007 and Microsoft Visual Studio 2010  Menlo in OS X  Monaco in OS X  The Fedora Linux distribution ships with a tweaked variant of the Liberation typeface which adds a slash to the zero; this is not present on most other Linux distributions.  The DejaVu family of typefaces has a "DejaVu Sans Mono" variant with a dotted zero. 7  Andale Mono has a dotted zero.  ProFont has a slashed zero.   See also   0 (number)  Symbols for zero  Names for the number 0 in English   Notes    References     .    External links    .  Underground Zerø Album Cover Underground Zerø Band Logo   "  Category:Typographical symbols  Category:Numeral systems  Category:0 (number)     . ↩  "Teletype Printing Telegraph Systems, Keytops, and Typepallets", Bulletin 1164B, April 1958: 1-6, Teletype part number 99564(keytop) ↩  Teletype Parts Bulletin 1184B pages 27 - 29 figure 29 - 31 ↩  "Reference Data For Radio Engineers, Fifth Edition, Howard W. Sams & Co., Inc., 1970: 30-38 Table 23 ↩  http://www.metafilter.com/25220/That-gentle-piano-is-the-peace-of-the-grave#476182 ↩  "BASIC" 1964 document with many examples of this in the code. ↩  ↩     