


Braided monoidal category




Braided monoidal category

In mathematics, a commutativity constraint

 
  on a monoidal category 

 is a choice of isomorphism 
 
 
 
  for each pair of objects A and B which form a "natural family." In particular, to have a commutativity constraint, one must have 
 
 
 
  for all pairs of objects 
 
 
 
 .
A braided monoidal category is a monoidal category 
 
 
 
  equipped with a braiding - that is, a commutativity constraint 
 
 
 
  that satisfies the hexagon identities (see below). The term braided comes from the fact that the braid group plays an important role in the theory of braided monoidal categories. Partly for this reason, braided monoidal categories and various related notions are important in the theory of knot invariants.
Alternatively, a braided monoidal category can be seen as a tricategory with one 0-cell and one 1-cell.
The hexagon identities
For 
 
 
 
  along with the commutativity constraint 
 
 
 
  to be called a braided monoidal category, the following hexagonal diagrams must commute for all objects 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  is the associativity isomorphism coming from the monoidal structure on 
 
 
 
 :




,






(Figure)
braid category inverse hexagon.svg




Properties
Coherence
It can be shown that the natural isomorphism 
 
 
 
  along with the maps 
 
 
 
  coming from the monoidal structure on the category 
 
 
 
 , satisfy various coherence conditions which state that various compositions of structure maps are equal. In particular:

The braiding commutes with the units. That is, the following diagram commutes:

(Figure)
braid category triangle.svg


The action of 
 
 
 
  on an 
 
 
 
 -fold tensor product factors through the braid group. In particular,




as maps 
 
 
 
 . Here we have left out the associator maps.
Variations
There are several variants of braided monoidal categories that are used in various contexts. See, for example, the expository paper of Savage (2009) for an explanation of symmetric and coboundary monoidal categories, and the book by Chari and Pressley (1995) for ribbon categories.
Symmetric monoidal categories
A braided monoidal category is called symmetric if 
 
 
 
  also satisfies 
 
 
 
  for all pairs of objects 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In this case the action of 
 
 
 
  on an 
 
 
 
 -fold tensor product factors through the symmetric group
Ribbon categories
A braided monoidal category is a ribbon category if it is rigid, and it has a good notion of quantum trace and co-quantum trace. Ribbon categories are particularly useful in constructing knot invariants.
Coboundary monoidal categories
Sometimes categories are assumed to have n-ary monoidal products for all finite n (in particular n>2), diminishing the role of associator morphisms. In such categories, the following variant is used, where the hexagon axiom is replaced by the two conditions:



 
  for all pairs of objects 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .






Examples

The category of representations of a group (or a lie algebra) is a symmetric monoidal category where 
 
 
 
 .


The category of representations of a quantized universal enveloping algebra

 
  is a braided monoidal category, where 
 
 
 
  is constructed using the Universal R-matrix. In fact, this example is a ribbon category as well.

Applications

knot invariants.
Symmetric closed monoidal categories are used in denotational models of linear logic and linear types.

References

Chari, Vyjayanthi; Pressley, Andrew. "A guide to quantum groups". Cambridge University Press. 1995.


Joyal, André; Street, Ross (1993). "Braided Tensor Categories". Advances in Mathematics 102, 20–78.


Savage, Alistair. Braided and coboundary monoidal categories. Algebras, representations and applications, 229–251, Contemp. Math., 483, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2009. Available on the arXiv

External links

John Baez (1999), An introduction to braided monoidal categories, This week's finds in mathematical physics 137.

"
Category:Braids Category:Monoidal categories


