


Linear complementarity problem




Linear complementarity problem

In mathematical optimization theory, the linear complementarity problem (LCP) arises frequently in computational mechanics and encompasses the well-known quadratic programming as a special case. It was proposed by Cottle and Dantzig 
Formulation
Given a real matrix M and vector q, the linear complementarity problem seeks vectors z and w which satisfy the following constraints:






 
  (that is, each component of these two vectors is non-negative)


 
  for all i. (The complementarity condition)

A sufficient condition for existence and uniqueness of a solution to this problem is that M be symmetric positive-definite.
The vector 
 
 
 
  is a slack variable,1 and so is generally discarded after 
 
 
 
  is found. As such, the problem can also be formulated as:









 
  (the complementarity condition)

Convex quadratic-minimization: Minimum conditions
Finding a solution to the linear complementarity problem is associated with minimizing the quadratic function



subject to the constraints






These constraints ensure that f is always non-negative. The minimum of f is 0 at z if and only if z solves the linear complementarity problem.
If M is positive definite, any algorithm for solving (strictly) convex QPs can solve the LCP. Specially designed basis-exchange pivoting algorithms, such as Lemke's algorithm and a variant of the simplex algorithm of Dantzig have been used for decades. Besides having polynomial time complexity, interior-point methods are also effective in practice.
Also, a quadratic-programming problem stated as minimize 
 
 
 
  subject to 
 
 
 
  as well as 
 
 
 
  with Q symmetric
is the same as solving the LCP with








This is because the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions of the QP problem can be written as:




















...being 
 
 
 
  the Lagrange multipliers on the non-negativity constraints,
 
 
 
  the multipliers on the inequality constraints, and 
 
 
 
  the slack variables for the inequality constraints. The fourth condition derives from the complementarity of each group of variables (
 
 
 
 ) with its set of KKT vectors (optimal Lagrange multipliers) being (
 
 
 
 ).
In that case,






If the non-negativity constraint on the 
 
 
 
  is relaxed, the dimensionality of the LCP problem can be reduced to the number of the inequalities, as long as 
 
 
 
  is non-singular (which is guaranteed if it is positive definite). The multipliers 
 
 
 
  are no longer present, and the first KKT conditions can be rewritten as:





or:



pre-multiplying the two sides by 
 
 
 
  and subtracting 
 
 
 
  we obtain:



The left side, due to the second KKT condition, is 
 
 
 
 . Substituting and reordering:



Calling now 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have an LCP, due to the relation of complementarity between the slack variables 
 
 
 
  and their Lagrange multipliers 
 
 
 
 . Once we solve it, we may obtain the value of 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  through the first KKT condition.
Finally, it is also possible to handle additional equality constraints:



This introduces a vector of Lagrange multipliers 
 
 
 
 , with the same dimension as 
 
 
 
 .
It is easy to verify that the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for the LCP system 
 
 
 
  are now expressed as:






From 
 
 
 
  we can now recover the values of both 
 
 
 
  and the Lagrange multiplier of equalities 
 
 
 
 :



In fact, most QP solvers work on the LCP formulation, including the interior point method, principal / complementarity pivoting, and active set methods.23 LCP problems can be solved also by the criss-cross algorithm,4567 conversely, for linear complementarity problems, the criss-cross algorithm terminates finitely only if the matrix is a sufficient matrix.89 A sufficient matrix is a generalization both of a positive-definite matrix and of a P-matrix, whose principal minors are each positive.101112 Such LCPs can be solved when they are formulated abstractly using oriented-matroid theory.131415
See also

Complementarity theory
Physics engine Impulse/constraint type physics engines for games use this approach.
Contact dynamics Contact dynamics with the nonsmooth approach

Notes
References










Further reading

R. W. Cottle and G. B. Dantzig. Complementary pivot theory of mathematical programming. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 1:103-125, 1968.


External links

LCPSolve — A simple procedure in GAUSS to solve a linear complementarity problem
LCPSolve.py — A Python/NumPy implementation of LCPSolve is part of OpenOpt since its release 0.32
Siconos/Numerics open-source GPL implementation in C of Lemke's algorithm and other methods to solve LCPs and MLCPs

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Mathematical optimization



.












: 





