


Root test




Root test

In mathematics, the root test is a criterion for the convergence (a convergence test) of an infinite series. It depends on the quantity


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the terms of the series, and states that the series converges absolutely if this quantity is less than one but diverges if it is greater than one. It is particularly useful in connection with power series.
Test
The root test was developed first by Augustin-Louis Cauchy and so is sometimes known as the Cauchy root test or Cauchy's radical test. For a series



the root test uses the number



where "lim sup" denotes the limit superior, possibly ∞. Note that if



converges then it equals C and may be used in the root test instead.
The root test states that:

if C < 1 then the series converges absolutely,
if C > 1 then the series diverges,
if C = 1 and the limit approaches strictly from above then the series diverges,
otherwise the test is inconclusive (the series may diverge, converge absolutely or converge conditionally).

There are some series for which C = 1 and the series converges, e.g. 
 
 
 
 , and there are others for which C = 1 and the series diverges, e.g. 
 
 
 
 .
Application to power series
This test can be used with a power series



where the coefficients cn, and the center p are complex numbers and the argument z is a complex variable.
The terms of this series would then be given by an = cn(z − p)n. One then applies the root test to the an as above. Note that sometimes a series like this is called a power series "around p", because the radius of convergence is the radius R of the largest interval or disc centred at p such that the series will converge for all points z strictly in the interior (convergence on the boundary of the interval or disc generally has to be checked separately). A corollary of the root test applied to such a power series is that the radius of convergence is exactly 
 
 
 
  taking care that we really mean ∞ if the denominator is 0.
Proof
The proof of the convergence of a series Σan is an application of the comparison test. If for all n ≥ N (N some fixed natural number) we have 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  Since the geometric series

 
  converges so does 
 
 
 
  by the comparison test. Absolute convergence in the case of nonpositive an can be proven in exactly the same way using 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  for infinitely many n, then an fails to converge to 0, hence the series is divergent.
Proof of corollary: For a power series Σan = Σcn(z − p)n, we see by the above that the series converges if there exists an N such that for all n ≥ N we have



equivalent to



for all n ≥ N, which implies that in order for the series to converge we must have 
 
 
 
  for all sufficiently large n. This is equivalent to saying



so 
 
 
 
  Now the only other place where convergence is possible is when



(since points > 1 will diverge) and this will not change the radius of convergence since these are just the points lying on the boundary of the interval or disc, so



See also

Ratio test
Convergent series

References




pl:Kryteria zbieżności szeregów#Kryterium Cauchy'ego"
Category:Convergence tests Category:Articles containing proofs


