


Jacobi triple product




Jacobi triple product

In mathematics, the Jacobi triple product is the mathematical identity:


 
  for complex numbers x and y, with |x| 1, and is the Weyl denominator formula for the corresponding affine Kac–Moody algebra.
Properties
The basis of Jacobi's proof relies on Euler's pentagonal number theorem, which is itself a specific case of the Jacobi Triple Product Identity.
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then we have



The Jacobi Triple Product also allows the Jacobi theta function to be written as an infinite product as follows:
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Then the Jacobi theta function



can be written in the form



Using the Jacobi Triple Product Identity we can then write the theta function as the product



There are many different notations used to express the Jacobi triple product. It takes on a concise form when expressed in terms of q-Pochhammer symbols:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the infinite q-Pochhammer symbol.
It enjoys a particularly elegant form when expressed in terms of the Ramanujan theta function. For 
 
 
 
  it can be written as



Proof
This proof uses a simplified model of the Dirac sea and follows the proof in Cameron (13.3) which is attributed to Richard Borcherds. It treats the case where the power series are formal. For the analytic case, see Apostol. The Jacobi triple product identity can be expressed as



A level is a half-integer. The vacuum state is the set of all negative levels. A state is a set of levels whose symmetric difference with the vacuum state is finite. The energy of the state 
 
 
 
  is



and the particle number of 
 
 
 
  is



An unordered choice of the presence of finitely many positive levels and the absence of finitely many negative levels (relative to the vacuum) corresponds to a state, so the generating function 
 
 
 
  for the number 
 
 
 
  of states of energy 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  particles can be expressed as



On the other hand, any state with 
 
 
 
  particles can be obtained from the lowest energy 
 
 
 
 particle state, 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and move the top particle up by 
 
 
 
  levels, the next highest particle up by 
 
 
 
  levels, etc.... The resulting state has energy 
 
 
 
 , so the generating function can also be written as



where $p(n)$ is the partition function. The uses of random partitions by Andrei Okounkov contains a picture of a partition exciting the vacuum.
Notes


References

See chapter 14, theorem 14.6 of 
Peter J. Cameron, Combinatorics: Topics, Techniques, Algorithms, (1994) Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-45761-0


"
Category:Elliptic functions Category:Theta functions Category:Mathematical identities Category:Theorems in number theory


