


Sturm's theorem




Sturm's theorem

In mathematics, the Sturm's sequence of a univariate polynomial

 
  is a sequence of polynomials associated with 
 
 
 
  and its derivative by a variant of Euclid's algorithm for polynomials. Sturm's theorem expresses the number of distinct real roots of 
 
 
 
  located in an interval in terms of the number of changes of signs of the values of the Sturm's sequence at the bounds of the interval. Applied to the interval of all the real numbers, it gives the total number of real roots of 
 
 
 
 .
Whereas the fundamental theorem of algebra readily yields the overall number of complex roots, counted with multiplicity, it does not provide a procedure for calculating them. Sturm's theorem counts the number of distinct real roots and locates them in intervals. By subdividing the intervals containing some roots, it can isolate the roots into arbitrary small intervals, each containing exactly one root. This yields an arbitrary-precision numeric root finding algorithm for univariate polynomials.
Sturm's sequence and Sturm's theorems are named after Jacques Charles François Sturm.
Sturm chains
A Sturm chain or Sturm sequence is a finite sequence of polynomials


 
  of decreasing degree with these following properties:

 p}} is square free (no square factors, i.e., no repeated roots);
if 
 
 
 
 , then  sign(p′(ξ))}};
if  0}} for 
 
 

 does not change its sign.

Sturm's sequence is a modification of Fourier's sequence.
To obtain a Sturm chain, Sturm himself proposed to choose the intermediary results when applying Euclid's algorithm to 
 
 
 
 
  and its derivative:



where  and  are the remainder and the quotient of the polynomial long division of  by , and where 
 
 
 
  is the minimal number of polynomial divisions (never greater than 
 
 
 
 ) needed to obtain a zero remainder. That is, successively take the remainders with polynomial division and change their signs. Since  for 
 
 




If 
 
 
 
  is not square-free, this sequence does not formally satisfy the definition of a Sturm chain above; nevertheless it still satisfies the conclusion of Sturm's theorem (below).
Statement
Let  p0, ..., pm}} be a Sturm chain, where 
 
 
 
  is a square-free polynomial, and let 
 
 
 
  denote the number of sign changes (ignoring zeroes) in the sequence



Sturm's theorem then states that for two real numbers 
 
 

The non-square-free case
Let  p0, ..., pm}} be the canonical Sturm sequence of a polynomial 
 
 
 
 , not necessarily square-free. Then 
 
 
 
  is the number of distinct roots of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 

Example
Suppose we wish to find the number of roots in some range for the polynomial 
 
 
 
 . So



Using polynomial long division to divide  by  gives the remainder 
 
 
 
 , and upon multiplying this remainder by 
 
 
 
 
  we obtain 
 
 
 
 . Next dividing  by  and multiplying the remainder by 
 
 
 
 , we obtain 
 
 
 
 . And dividing  by  and multiplying the remainder by 
 
 
 
 , we obtain 
 
 
 
 .
Thus the complete chain of Sturm polynomials is:















To find the number of roots between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , first evaluate  and  at 
 
 
 
  and note the sequence of signs of the results: 
 
 
 
 , which contains three sign changes (
 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
 ). The same procedure for 
 
 
 
  gives the sign sequence 
 
 
 
 , which contains just one sign change. Hence the number of roots of the original polynomial between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 
  That this is correct can be seen by noting that  x4 + x3 − x − 1}} can be factored as , where it is readily verifiable that  has the two roots 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  while  has no real roots. In more complicated examples in which there is no advance knowledge of the roots because factoring is either impossible or impractical, one can experiment with various finite bounds for the range to be considered, thus narrowing down the locations of the roots.
Proof
Polynomials are continuous functions, and any sign change must occur at a root, so consider the behavior of a Sturm chain around the roots of its constituent polynomials.
First, note that two adjacent polynomials can share a common root only when it is a multiple root of 
 
 
 
  (in which case it is a root of every ). Indeed, if  pi−1 (ξ) {{=}} 0}}, then  0}}, since  −sign(pi+1(ξ))}}. The zero then propagates recursively up and down the chain, so that 
 
 
 
  is a root of all the polynomials .
Next, consider roots of polynomials in the interior (i.e., 
 
 

Consider a root 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
 
 , and assume first that it is a simple root. Then the derivative of 
 
 
 
 , which is , must be non-zero at 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  must be either increasing or decreasing at 
 
 
 
 . If it's increasing, then its sign is changing from negative to positive when moving from left to right while its derivative (again, ) is positive, so the total number of sign changes decreases by one. Conversely, if it's decreasing, then its sign changes from positive to negative while its derivative is negative, so again the total number of sign changes decreases by one.
Finally, let 
 
 
 
 
  be a multiple root of 
 
 
 
 , and let  be the canonical Sturm chain. Let d = gcd(p,p′), q = p/d, and let  be the canonical Sturm chain of 
 
 
 
 . Then m = m′ and  qid}} for every 
 
 
 
 . In particular, 
 
 
 
  is the same for both chains whenever 
 
 
 
 
  is not a root of 
 
 
 
 . Then the number of sign changes (in either chain) around 
 
 
 
  decreases by one, since 
 
 
 
  is a simple root of 
 
 
 
 .
In summary, only sign changes at roots of the original polynomial affect the total number of sign changes across the chain, and the total number of sign changes always decreases by one as roots are passed. The theorem follows directly.
History section and other related methods
For counting and isolating the real roots, other methods are usually preferred, because they are computationally more efficient; these methods all use Descartes' rule of signs (just like Fourier1 did back in 1820) and Vincent's theorem. The very first one of those methods was initially called "modified Uspensky's algorithm" by its inventors,2 but it was later shown that there is no Uspensky's method;3 afterwards, people started calling it either "Collins-Akritas method"4 or "Descartes' method" only to be shown that there is no Descartes' method5 either. Finally, François Boulier, of the University of Lille,6 p. 24, gave it the name "Vincent-Collins-Akritas" (VCA for short) to also give credit to Vincent. VCA is a bisection method; there exists also a continued fractions method based on Vincent's theorem namely, the Vincent-Akritas-Strzeboński (VAS) method.7
VAS is based on Budan's theorem whereas Sturm's method was inspired by Fourier's theorem. In fact Sturm himself,8 p. 108, acknowledges the great influence Fourier's theorem had on him: « C'est en m'appuyant sur les principes qu'il a posés, et en imitant ses démonstrations, que j'ai trouvé les nouveaux théorèmes que je vais énoncer. » which translates to "It is by relying upon the principles he has laid out and by imitating his proofs that I have found the new theorems which I am about to announce."
Applications
Number of real roots
Sturm's theorem can be used to compute the total number of real roots of a polynomial.
This may be done by choosing 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is larger than the absolute value of every root. For example, a bound due to Cauchy says that all real roots of a polynomial with coefficients  are in the interval 
 
 
 
 , where



Although theoretically the above approach is the simplest, in practice bounds on the positive (only) roots of polynomials are used and the positive roots are isolated and evaluated first; the negative roots are treated by first substituting 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 
 , then compute a new (positive root) bound to isolate and evaluate the negative roots. Sturm's method and VCA need to compute only one bound to isolate the positive roots. In contrast, to isolate the positive roots VAS needs to compute various positive bounds, for the various polynomials that appear in the process.910
Another method is computationally simpler. One can use the fact that for large 
 
 
 
 , the sign of



is , whereas 
 
 
 
  is . In this way, simply counting the sign changes in the leading coefficients in the Sturm chain readily gives the number of distinct real roots of a polynomial.
Sturm's theorem allows also to determine the multiplicity of a given root, say 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, suppose that 
 
 

Quotient
The remainder is needed to compute the chain using Euclid's algorithm. For two polynomials



this is accomplished by



where the quotient is built solely of the first two leading coefficients.
Generalized Sturm chains
Let $ξ$ be in the compact interval $a a , b$. A generalized Sturm chain over $a a , b$ is a finite sequence of real polynomials  such that:

$X ( a ) X ( b ) ≠ 0$
 is constant on $a a , b$
If  0}} for $1 ≤ i ≤ r − 1$, then .

One can check that each Sturm chain is indeed a generalized Sturm chain.
See also

Routh–Hurwitz theorem
Hurwitz's theorem (complex analysis)
Descartes' rule of signs
Rouché's theorem
Properties of polynomial roots
Gauss–Lucas theorem
Turán's inequalities
D.G. Hook and P.R. McAree, "Using Sturm Sequences To Bracket Real Roots of Polynomial Equations" in Graphic Gems I (A. Glassner ed.), Academic Press, p. 416–422, 1990.

References










Baumol, William. Economic Dynamics, section "Sturm's Theorem"

External links

C code from Graphic Gems by D.G. Hook and P.R. McAree.

"
Category:Theorems in real analysis Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Polynomials Category:Computer algebra



↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




