


Real coordinate space




Real coordinate space

(Figure)
The Cartesian product structure of  on Cartesian plane of ordered pairs

 
 . Blue lines denote coordinate axes, horizontal green lines are integer

 
 , vertical cyan lines are integer 
 
 
 
 , brown-orange lines show half-integer

 
  or 
 
 
 
 , magenta and its tint show multiples of one tenth (best seen under magnification)

In mathematics, real coordinate space of 
 
 
dimensions, written R

 ( ) (R with superscript n, also written  with blackboard bold R) or R^n with keyboard is a coordinate space that allows several (

) real variables to be treated as a single variable. With various numbers of dimensions (sometimes unspecified),  is used in many areas of pure and applied mathematics, as well as in physics. It is the prototypical real vector space and a frequently used representation of Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -space. Due to the latter fact, geometric metaphors are widely used for , namely a plane for  and three-dimensional space for .
Definition and uses
For any natural number

 
 , the set  consists of all 
 
 
 
 -tuples of real numbers (
 
 
 
 ). It is called (the) "
 
 
 
 -dimensional real space". Depending on its construction from 
 
 
 
  instances of the set 
 
 
 
 , it inherits some of the latter's structure, notably:

When defined as the direct sum of vector spaces, addition and scalar multiplication are defined on : see below
 is a topological space: see below

An element of  is written


 
  where each  is a real number.
For each 
 
 
 
  there exists only one , the real 
 
 
 
 -space.1
Purely mathematical uses of  can be roughly classified as follows, although these uses overlap. First, linear algebra studies its own properties under vector addition and linear transformations and uses it as a model of any 
 
 
 
 -dimensional real vector space. Second, it is used in mathematical analysis to represent the domain of a function of 
 
 
 
  real variables in a uniform way, as well as a space to which the graph of a real-valued function of 
 
 
 
  real variables is a subset. The third use parametrizes geometric points with elements of ; it is common in analytic, differential and algebraic geometries.
, together with supplemental structures on it, is also extensively used in mathematical physics, dynamical systems theory, mathematical statistics and probability theory.
In applied mathematics, numerical analysis, and so on, arrays, sequences, and other collections of numbers in applications can be seen as the use of  too.
The domain of a function of several variables
Any function  of 
 
 
 
  real variables can be considered as a function on  (that is, with  as its domain). The use of the real 
 
 
 
 -space, instead of several variables considered separately, can simplify notation and suggest reasonable definitions. Consider, for 
 
 
 
 , a function composition of the following form:


 
  where functions  and  are continuous. If

 is continuous (by )
 
 is continuous (by )
 

then 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily continuous. Continuity is a stronger condition: the continuity of 
 
 
 
  in the natural  topology (discussed below), also called multivariable continuity, which is sufficient for continuity of the composition 
 
 
 
 . 
Vector space
The coordinate space  forms an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space over the field of real numbers with the addition of the structure of linearity, and is often still denoted . The operations on  as a vector space are typically defined by





 
  The zero vector is given by


 
  and the additive inverse of the vector 
 
 
 
  is given by



This structure is important because any 
 
 
 
 -dimensional real vector space is isomorphic to the vector space .
Matrix notation
In standard matrix notation, each element of  is typically written as a column vector


 
  and sometimes as a row vector:



The coordinate space  may then be interpreted as the space of all 
 
 
column vectors, or all 
 
 
row vectors with the ordinary matrix operations of addition and scalar multiplication.
Linear transformations from  to  may then be written as 
 
 
 
  matrices which act on the elements of  via left multiplication (when the elements of  are column vectors) and on elements of  via right multiplication (when they are row vectors). The formula for left multiplication, a special case of matrix multiplication, is:


 
  Any linear transformation is a continuous function (see below). Also, a matrix define an open map from  to  if and only if the rank of the matrix equals to 
 
 
 
 .
Standard basis
The coordinate space  comes with a standard basis:



To see that this is a basis, note that an arbitrary vector in  can be written uniquely in the form



Geometric properties and uses
Orientation
The fact that real numbers, unlike many other fields, constitute an ordered field yields an orientation structure on . Any full-rank linear map of  to itself either preserves or reverses orientation of the space depending on the sign of the determinant of its matrix. If one permutes coordinates (or, in other words, elements of the basis), the resulting orientation will depend on the parity of the permutation.
Diffeomorphisms of  or domains in it, by their virtue to avoid zero Jacobian, are also classified to orientation-preserving and orientation-reversing. It has important consequences for the theory of differential forms, whose applications include electrodynamics.
Another manifestation of this structure is that the point reflection in  has different properties depending on evenness of 
 
 
. For even 
 
 
 
  it preserves orientation, while for odd 
 
 
 
  it is reversed (see also improper rotation).
Affine space
 understood as an affine space is the same space, where  as a vector space acts by translations. Conversely, a vector has to be understood as a "difference between two points", usually illustrated by a directed line segment connecting two points. The distinction says that there is no canonical choice of where the origin should go in an affine 
 
 
 
 -space, because it can be translated anywhere.
Convexity
  In a real vector space, such as , one can define a convex cone, which contains all non-negative linear combinations of its vectors. Corresponding concept in an affine space is a convex set, which allows only convex combinations (non-negative linear combinations that sum to 1).
In the language of universal algebra, a vector space is an algebra over the universal vector space  of finite sequences of coefficients, corresponding to finite sums of vectors, while an affine space is an algebra over the universal affine hyperplane in this space (of finite sequences summing to 1), a cone is an algebra over the universal orthant (of finite sequences of nonnegative numbers), and a convex set is an algebra over the universal simplex (of finite sequences of nonnegative numbers summing to 1). This geometrizes the axioms in terms of "sums with (possible) restrictions on the coordinates".
Another concept from convex analysis is a convex function from  to real numbers, which is defined through an inequality between its value on a convex combination of points and sum of values in those points with the same coefficients.
Euclidean space
The dot product


 
  defines the norm


 
  on the vector space . If every vector has its Euclidean norm, then for any pair of points the distance


 
  is defined, providing a metric space structure on  in addition to its affine structure.
As for vector space structure, the dot product and Euclidean distance usually are assumed to exist in  without special explanations. However, the real 
 
 
 
 -space and a Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -space are distinct objects, strictly speaking. Any Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -space has a coordinate system where the dot product and Euclidean distance have the form shown above, called Cartesian. But there are many Cartesian coordinate systems on a Euclidean space.
Conversely, the above formula for the Euclidean metric defines the standard Euclidean structure on , but it is not the only possible one. Actually, any positive-definite quadratic form

 
  defines its own "distance" 
 
 
 
 , but it is not very different from the Euclidean one in the sense that


 
  Such a change of the metric preserves some of its properties, for example the property of being a complete metric space. This also implies that any full-rank linear transformation of , or its affine transformation, does not magnify distances more than by some fixed , and does not make distances smaller than  times, a fixed finite number times smaller.
The aforementioned equivalence of metric functions remains valid if 
 
 
 
  is replaced with 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is any convex positive homogeneous function of degree 1, i.e. a vector norm (see Minkowski distance for useful examples). Because of this fact that any "natural" metric on  is not especially different from the Euclidean metric, is not always distinguished from a Euclidean 
 
 
 
 -space even in professional mathematical works.
In algebraic and differential geometry
Although the definition of a manifold does not require that its model space should be , this choice is the most common, and almost exclusive one in differential geometry.
On the other hand, Whitney embedding theorems state that any real differentiable 
 
 
 
 -dimensional manifold can be embedded into . 
Other appearances
Other structures considered on  include the one of a pseudo-Euclidean space, symplectic structure (even 
 
 
 
 ), and contact structure (odd 
 
 
 
 ). All these structures, although can be defined in a coordinate-free manner, admit standard (and reasonably simple) forms in coordinates.
 is also a real vector subspace of  which is invariant to complex conjugation; see also complexification.
Polytopes in Rn
There are three families of polytopes which have simple representations in  spaces, for any 
 
 
 
 , and can be used to visualize any affine coordinate system in a real 
 
 
 
 -space. Vertices of a hypercube have coordinates  where each  takes on one of only two values, typically 0 or 1. However, any two numbers can be chosen instead of 0 and 1, for example  and 1. An 
 
 
 
 -hypercube can be thought of as the Cartesian product of 
 
 
 
  identical intervals (such as the unit interval

 
 ) on the real line. As an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subset it can be described with a system of 
 
 
 
  inequalities:






 
 
  (for 
 
 
 
 )    



x_1| \le 1 \\ \vdots \\

x_n| \le 1 \end{matrix}  (for 
 
 
 
 )



Each vertex of the cross-polytope has, for some 
 
 
 
 , the  coordinate equal to ±1 and all other coordinates equal to 0 (such that it is the 
 
 
 
 th standard basis vector up to sign). This is a dual polytope of hypercube. As an 
 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subset it can be described with a single inequality which uses the absolute value operation:


 
  but this can be expressed with a system of  linear inequalities as well.
The third polytope with simply enumerable coordinates is the standard simplex, whose vertices are 
 
 
 
  standard basis vectors and the origin

 
 . As an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subset it is described with a system of 
 
 
 
 
  linear inequalities:


 
  Replacement of all "≤" with " (called standard topology, Euclidean topology, or usual topology) can be obtained not only from Cartesian product. It is also identical to the natural topology induced by Euclidean metric discussed above: a set is open in the Euclidean topology if and only if it contains an open ball around each of its points. Also,  is a linear topological space (see continuity of linear maps above), and there is only one possible (non-trivial) topology compatible with its linear structure. As there are many open linear maps from  to itself which are not isometries, there can be many Euclidean structures on  which correspond to the same topology. Actually, it does not depend much even on the linear structure: there are many non-linear diffeomorphisms (and other homeomorphisms) of  onto itself, or its parts such as a Euclidean open ball or the interior of a hypercube).
 has the topological dimension

 
 .
An important result on the topology of , that is far from superficial, is Brouwer's invariance of domain. Any subset of  (with its subspace topology) that is homeomorphic to another open subset of  is itself open. An immediate consequence of this is that  is not homeomorphic to  if 
 
 
 
  – an intuitively "obvious" result which is nonetheless difficult to prove.
Despite the difference in topological dimension, and contrary to a naïve perception, it is possible to map a lesser-dimensional real space continuously and surjectively onto . A continuous (although not smooth) space-filling curve (an image of ) is possible.
Examples



(Figure)
Real 0-space.svg




Empty column vector,
 the only element of 






(Figure)
Real 1-space, orthoplex.svg








n ≤ 1
Cases of 
 
 
 
 
  do not offer anything new:  is the real line, whereas  (the space of empty vectors) is a singleton, understood as a zero vector space. However, it is useful to include these as trivial cases of theories which are appropriate for different 
 
 
 
 .
=== n = 2 ===  
=== n = 3 ===  
=== n = 4 ===   can be imagined using the fact that  points , where each  is either 0 or 1, are vertices of a tesseract (pictured), the 4-hypercube (see above).
The first major use of  is a spacetime model: three spacial coordinates plus one temporal. This is usually associated with theory of relativity, although four dimensions were continuously used for such models since Galilei. The choice of theory leads to different structure, though: in Galilean relativity the 
 
 
 
  coordinate is privileged, but in Einsteinian relativity it is not. Special relativity is set in Minkowski space. General relativity uses curved spaces, which may be thought of as  with a curved metric for most practical purposes, though. Any of these structures does not provide a (positive) metric on .
Euclidean  also attracts the attention of mathematicians, for example due to its relation to quaternions, a 4-dimensional real algebra themselves. See rotations in 4-dimensional Euclidean space for some information.
In differential geometry, 
 
 
 
  is the only case where  admits a non-standard differential structure: see exotic R4.
Generalizations
See also

Exponential object, for theoretical explanation of the superscript notation
Real projective space

Footnotes
References




"
ⁿ Category:Topological vector spaces Category:Analytic geometry Category:Multivariable calculus Category:Mathematical analysis



Unlike many situations in mathematics where a certain object is unique up to isomorphism,  is unique in the strong sense: any of its elements is described explicitly with its 
 
 
 
  real coordinates.↩




