


Mellin inversion theorem




Mellin inversion theorem

In mathematics, the Mellin inversion formula (named after Hjalmar Mellin) tells us conditions under which the inverse Mellin transform, or equivalently the inverse two-sided Laplace transform, are defined and recover the transformed function.
Method
If 
 
 
 
  is analytic in the strip 
 
 
 
 , and if it tends to zero uniformly as 
 
 
 
  for any real value c between a and b, with its integral along such a line converging absolutely, then if



we have that



Conversely, suppose f(x) is piecewise continuous on the positive real numbers, taking a value halfway between the limit values at any jump discontinuities, and suppose the integral



is absolutely convergent when 
 
 
 
 . Then f is recoverable via the inverse Mellin transform from its Mellin transform 
 
 
 
 .
Boundedness condition
We may strengthen the boundedness condition on 
 
 
 
  if f(x) is continuous. If 
 
 
 
  is analytic in the strip 
 
 
 
 , and if 
 
 
 
 , where K is a positive constant, then f(x) as defined by the inversion integral exists and is continuous; moreover the Mellin transform of f is 
 
 
 
  for at least 
 
 
 
 .
On the other hand, if we are willing to accept an original f which is a generalized function, we may relax the boundedness condition on 
 
 
 
  to simply make it of polynomial growth in any closed strip contained in the open strip 
 
 
 
 .
We may also define a Banach space version of this theorem. If we call by 
 
 
 
  the weighted Lp space of complex valued functions f on the positive reals such that



where ν and p are fixed real numbers with p>1, then if f(x) is in 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and



Here functions, identical everywhere except on a set of measure zero, are identified.
Since the two-sided Laplace transform can be defined as



these theorems can be immediately applied to it also.
See also

Mellin transform
Nachbin's theorem

References

P. Flajolet, X. Gourdon, P. Dumas, Mellin transforms and asymptotics: Harmonic sums, Theoretical Computer Science, 144(1-2):3-58, June 1995
McLachlan, N. W., Complex Variable Theory and Transform Calculus, Cambridge University Press, 1953.
Polyanin, A. D. and Manzhirov, A. V., Handbook of Integral Equations, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1998.
Titchmarsh, E. C., Introduction to the Theory of Fourier Integrals, Oxford University Press, second edition, 1948.
Yakubovich, S. B., Index Transforms, World Scientific, 1996.
Zemanian, A. H., Generalized Integral Transforms, John Wiley & Sons, 1968.

External links

Tables of Integral Transforms at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.


Philippe Flajolet, Xavier Gourdon, Philippe Dumas, Mellin Transforms and Asymptotics: Harmonic sums.

"
Category:Integral transforms Category:Theorems in complex analysis


