


Magnetostatics




Magnetostatics

Magnetostatics is the study of magnetic fields in systems where the currents are steady (not changing with time). It is the magnetic analogue of electrostatics, where the charges are stationary. The magnetization need not be static; the equations of magnetostatics can be used to predict fast magnetic switching events that occur on time scales of nanoseconds or less.1 Magnetostatics is even a good approximation when the currents are not static — as long as the currents do not alternate rapidly. Magnetostatics is widely used in applications of micromagnetics such as models of magnetic recording devices.
Applications
Magnetostatics as a special case of Maxwell's equations
Starting from Maxwell's equations and assuming that charges are either fixed or move as a steady current 
 
 
 
 , the equations separate into two equations for the electric field (see electrostatics) and two for the magnetic field.2 The fields are independent of time and each other. The magnetostatic equations, in both differential and integral forms, are shown in the table below.




Name

Partial differential form

Integral form





Gauss's law for magnetism:











Ampère's law:











Where ∇ denotes divergence, and B is the magnetic flux density, the first integral is over a surface 
 
 
 
  with oriented surface element 
 
 
 
 . Where J is the current density and 
 
 
 
  is the magnetic field intensity, the second integral is a line integral around a closed loop 
 
 
 
  with line element 
 
 
 
 . The current going through the loop is 
 
 
 
 .
The quality of this approximation may be guessed by comparing the above equations with the full version of Maxwell's equations and considering the importance of the terms that have been removed. Of particular significance is the comparison of the 
 
 
 
  term against the 
 
 
 
  term. If the 
 
 
 
  term is substantially larger, then the smaller term may be ignored without significant loss of accuracy.
Re-introducing Faraday's law
A common technique is to solve a series of magnetostatic problems at incremental time steps and then use these solutions to approximate the term 
 
 
 
 . Plugging this result into Faraday's Law finds a value for 
 
 
 
  (which had previously been ignored). This method is not a true solution of Maxwell's equations but can provide a good approximation for slowly changing fields.
Solving for the magnetic field
Current sources
If all currents in a system are known (i.e., if a complete description of 
 
 
 
  is available) then the magnetic field can be determined from the currents by the Biot–Savart equation:



This technique works well for problems where the medium is a vacuum or air or some similar material with a relative permeability of 1. This includes Air core inductors and Air core transformers. One advantage of this technique is that a complex coil geometry can be integrated in sections, or for a very difficult geometry numerical integration may be used. Since this equation is primarily used to solve linear problems, the complete answer will be a sum of the integral of each component section.
For problems where the dominant magnetic material is a highly permeable magnetic core with relatively small air gaps, a magnetic circuit approach is useful. When the air gaps are large in comparison to the magnetic circuit length, fringing becomes significant and usually requires a finite element calculation. The finite element calculation uses a modified form of the magnetostatic equations above in order to calculate magnetic potential. The value of 
 
 
 
  can be found from the magnetic potential.
The magnetic field can be derived from the vector potential. Since the divergence of the magnetic flux density is always zero,








and the relation of the vector potential to current is:








where 
 
 
 
  is the current density.
Magnetization
Strongly magnetic materials (i.e., Ferromagnetic, Ferrimagnetic or Paramagnetic) have a magnetization that is primarily due to electron spin. In such materials the magnetization must be explicitly included using the relation



Except in metals, electric currents can be ignored. Then Ampère's law is simply



This has the general solution



where 
 
 
 
  is a scalar potential. Substituting this in Gauss's law gives



Thus, the divergence of the magnetization, 
 
 
 
  has a role analogous to the electric charge in electrostatics 3 and is often referred to as an effective charge density 
 
 
 
 .
The vector potential method can also be employed with an effective current density








See also

Darwin Lagrangian

Notes
References





"
Category:Electric and magnetic fields in matter Category:Magnetostatics Category:Potentials



↩
↩
↩




