


Wald's equation




Wald's equation

In probability theory, Wald's equation, Wald's identity1 or Wald's lemma2 is an important identity that simplifies the calculation of the expected value of the sum of a random number of random quantities. In its simplest form, it relates the expectation of a sum of randomly many finite-mean, independent and identically distributed random variables to the expected number of terms in the sum and the random variables' common expectation under the condition that the number of terms in the sum is independent of the summands.
The equation is named after the mathematician Abraham Wald. An identity for the second moment is given by the Blackwell–Girshick equation.
Basic version
Let  be a sequence of real-valued, independent and identically distributed random variables and let 
 
 
 
  be a nonnegative integer-value random variable that is independent of the sequence . Suppose that 
 
 
 
  and the  have finite expectations. Then



Example
Roll a six-sided die. Take the number on the die (call it 
 
 
 
 ) and roll that number of six-sided dice to get the numbers , and add up their values. By Wald's equation, the resulting value on average is



General version
Let  be an infinite sequence of real-valued random variables and let 
 
 
 
  be a nonnegative integer-valued random variable. Assume that

1.  are all integrable (finite-mean) random variables,
 
2.  for every natural number

 
 , and
 
3. the infinite series satisfies
 









Then the random sums


 
  are integrable and


 
  If, in addition,

4.  all have the same expectation, and
 
5. 
 
 
 
  has finite expectation,
 

then



Remark: Usually, the name Wald's equation refers to this last equality.
Discussion of assumptions
Clearly, assumption () is needed to formulate assumption () and Wald's equation. Assumption () controls the amount of dependence allowed between the sequence  and the number 
 
 
 
  of terms; see the counterexample below for the necessity. Note that assumption () is satisfied when 
 
 
 
  is a stopping time for the sequence . Assumption () is of more technical nature, implying absolute convergence and therefore allowing arbitrary rearrangement of an infinite series in the proof.
If assumption () is satisfied, then assumption () can be strengthened to the simpler condition

6. there exists a real constant 
 
 
 
  such that  for all natural numbers 
 
 
 
 .
 

Indeed, using assumption (),



and the last series equals the expectation of 
 
 
 
  [Proof], which is finite by assumption (). Therefore, () and () imply assumption ().
Assume in addition to () and () that

7. 
 
 
 
  is independent of the sequence  and
 
8. there exists a constant 
 
 
 
 
  such that  for all natural numbers 
 
 
 
 .
 

Then all the assumptions (), (), () and (), hence also () are satisfied. In particular, the conditions () and () are satisfied if

9. the random variables  all have the same distribution.
 

Note that the random variables of the sequence  don't need to be independent.
The interesting point is to admit some dependence between the random number 
 
 
 
  of terms and the sequence . A standard version is to assume (), (), () and the existence of a filtration  such that

10. 
 
 
 
  is a stopping time with respect to the filtration, and
 
11.  and  are independent for every 
 
 
 
 .
 

Then () implies that the event  is in , hence by () independent of . This implies (), and together with () it implies ().
For convenience (see the proof below using the optional stopping theorem) and to specify the relation of the sequence  and the filtration , the following additional assumption is often imposed:

12. the sequence  is adapted to the filtration , meaning the  is -measurable for every 
 
 
 
 
 .
 

Note that () and () together imply that the random variables  are independent.
Application
An application is in actuarial science when considering the total claim amount follows a compound Poisson process



within a certain time period, say one year, arising from a random number 
 
 
 
  of individual insurance claims, whose sizes are described by the random variables . Under the above assumptions, Wald's equation can be used to calculate the expected total claim amount when information about the average claim number per year and the average claim size is available. Under stronger assumptions and with more information about the underlying distributions, Panjer's recursion can be used to calculate the distribution of .
Examples
Example with dependent terms
Let 
 
 
 
  be an integrable, -valued random variable, which is independent of the integrable, real-valued random variable 
 
 
 
  with  0}}. Define  (–1)n Z}} for all 
 
 
 
 
 . Then assumptions (), (), (), and () with  E[|Z|]}} are satisfied, hence also () and (), and Wald's equation applies. If the distribution of 
 
 
 
  is not symmetric, then () does not hold. Note that, when 
 
 
 
  is not almost surely equal to the zero random variable, then () and () cannot hold simultaneously for any filtration , because 
 
 
 
  cannot be independent of itself as  (E[Z])2 {{=}} 0}} is impossible.
Example where the number of terms depends on the sequence
Let  be a sequence of independent, symmetric, and }-valued random variables. For every 
 
 
 
  let  be the σ-algebra generated by  and define 
 
 
 
 
  when  is the first random variable taking the value 
 
 
 
 . Note that  n) {{=}} 1/2n}}, hence  by the ratio test. The assumptions (), () and (), hence () and () with 
 
 
 
 , (), (), and () hold, hence also (), and () and Wald's equation applies. However, () does not hold, because 
 
 
 
  is defined in terms of the sequence . Intuitively, one might expect to have  in this example, because the summation stops right after a one, thereby apparently creating a positive bias. However, Wald's equation shows that this intuition is misleading.
Counterexamples
A counterexample illustrating the necessity of assumption ()
Consider a sequence  of i.i.d. random variables, taking each of the two values 0 and 1 with probability ½ (actually, only  is needed in the following). Define  1 – X1}}. Then  is identically equal to zero, hence  0}}, but  ½}} and  ½}} and therefore Wald's equation does not hold. Indeed, the assumptions (), (), () and () are satisfied, however, the equation in assumption () holds for all 
 
 
 
  except for 
 
 
 
 
 .
A counterexample illustrating the necessity of assumption ()
Very similar to the second example above, let  be a sequence of independent, symmetric random variables, where  takes each of the values  and  with probability ½. Let 
 
 
 
  be the first 
 
 
 
  such that  2n}}. Then, as above, 
 
 
 
  has finite expectation, hence assumption () holds. Since  0}} for all 
 
 
 
 , assumptions () and () hold. However, since  1}} almost surely, Wald's equation cannot hold.
Since 
 
 
 
 
  is a stopping time with respect to the filtration generated by , assumption () holds, see above. Therefore, only assumption () can fail, and indeed, since



and therefore  1/2n–1}} for every 
 
 
 
 , it follows that



A proof using the optional stopping theorem
Assume (), (), (), (), () and (). Using assumption (), define the sequence of random variables



Assumption () implies that the conditional expectation of  given  equals  almost surely for every 
 
 
 
 , hence  is a martingale with respect to the filtration  by assumption (). Assumptions (), () and () make sure that we can apply the optional stopping theorem, hence  SN – TN}} is integrable and 
Due to assumption (),



and due to assumption () this upper bound is integrable. Hence we can add the expectation of  to both sides of Equation () and obtain by linearity



Remark: Note that this proof does not cover the above example with dependent terms.
General proof
This proof uses only Lebesgue's monotone and dominated convergence theorems. We prove the statement as given above in three steps.
Step 1: Integrability of the random sum 
We first show that the random sum  is integrable. Define the partial sums
Since 
 
 
 
  takes its values in  and since  0}}, it follows that



The Lebesgue monotone convergence theorem implies that



By the triangle inequality,



Using this upper estimate and changing the order of summation (which is permitted because all terms are non-negative), we obtain
]\le\sum_{n=1}^\infty\operatorname{E}[|X_n|\,1_{\{N\ge n\}}],|15}}
where the second inequality follows using the monotone convergence theorem. By assumption (), the infinite sequence on the right-hand side of () converges, hence  is integrable.
Step 2: Integrability of the random sum 
We now show that the random sum  is integrable. Define the partial sums
of real numbers. Since 
 
 
 
  takes its values in  and since  0}}, it follows that



The Lebesgue monotone convergence theorem implies that



By the triangle inequality,



Using this upper estimate and changing the order of summation (which is permitted because all terms are non-negative), we obtain
By assumption (),



Substituting this into () yields



which is finite by assumption (), hence  is integrable.
Step 3: Proof of the identity
To prove Wald's equation, we essentially go through the same steps again without the absolute value, making use of the integrability of the random sums  and  in order to show that they have the same expectation. Using the dominated convergence theorem with dominating random variable SN{{!}}}} and the definition of the partial sum  given in (), it follows that



Due to the absolute convergence proved in () above using assumption (), we may rearrange the summation and obtain that



where we used assumption () and the dominated convergence theorem with dominating random variable Xn{{!}}}} for the second equality. Due to assumption () and the σ-additivity of the probability measure,



Substituting this result into the previous equation, rearranging the summation (which is permitted due to absolute convergence, see () above), using linearity of expectation and the definition of the partial sum  of expectations given in (),



By using dominated convergence again with dominating random variable TN{{!}}}},



If assumptions () and () are satisfied, then by linearity of expectation,



This completes the proof.
Further generalizations

Wald's equation can be transferred to -valued random variables  by applying the one-dimensional version to every component.
If  are Bochner-integrable random variables taking values in a Banach space, then the general proof above can be adjusted accordingly.

See also

Lorden's inequality
Wald's martingale
Spitzer's formula

Notes
References





"
Category:Probability theory Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Actuarial science









