


Schur's theorem




Schur's theorem

In discrete mathematics, Schur's theorem is any of several theorems of the mathematician Issai Schur. In differential geometry, Schur's theorem is a theorem of Axel Schur. In functional analysis, Schur's theorem is often called Schur's property, also due to Issai Schur.
Ramsey theory
In Ramsey theory, Schur's theorem states that for any partition of the positive integers into a finite number of parts, one of the parts contains three integers x, y, z with



Moreover, for every positive integer c, there exists a number S(c), called Schur's number, such that for every partition of the integers



into c parts, one of the parts contains integers x, y, and z with



Folkman's theorem generalizes Schur's theorem by stating that there exist arbitrarily large sets of integers all of whose nonempty sums belong to the same part.
Combinatorics
In combinatorics, Schur's theorem tells the number of ways for expressing a given number as a (non-negative, integer) linear combination of a fixed set of relatively prime numbers. In particular, if 
 
 
 
  is a set of integers such that 
 
 
 
 , the number of different tuples of non-negative integer numbers 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity is:



As a result, for every set of relatively prime numbers 
 
 
 
  there exists a value of 
 
 
 
  such that every larger number is representable as a linear combination of 
 
 
 
  in at least one way. This consequence of the theorem can be recast in a familiar context considering the problem of changing an amount using a set of coins. If the denominations of the coins are relatively prime numbers (such as 2 and 5) then any sufficiently large amount can be changed using only these coins. (See Coin problem.)
Differential geometry
In differential geometry, Schur's theorem compares the distance between the endpoints of a space curve 
 
 
 
  to the distance between the endpoints of a corresponding plane curve 
 
 
 
  of less curvature.
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a plane curve with curvature 
 
 
 
  which makes a convex curve when closed by the chord connecting its endpoints, and 
 
 
 
  is a curve of the same length with curvature 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the distance between the endpoints of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denote the distance between the endpoints of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 .
Schur's theorem is usually stated for 
 
 
 
  curves, but John M. Sullivan has observed that Schur's theorem applies to curves of finite total curvature (the statement is slightly different).
Linear algebra
In linear algebra Schur’s theorem is referred to as either the triangularization of a square matrix with complex entries, or of a square matrix with real entries and real eigenvalues.
Functional analysis
In functional analysis and the study of Banach spaces, Schur's theorem, due to J. Schur, often refers to Schur's property, that for certain spaces, weak convergence implies convergence in the norm.
Number theory
In number theory, Issai Schur showed in 1912 that for every nonconstant polynomial p(x) with integer coefficients, if S is the set of all nonzero values 
 
 
 
 , then the set of primes that divide some member of S is infinite
References

Herbert S. Wilf (1994). generatingfunctionology. Academic Press.
Shiing-Shen Chern (1967). Curves and Surfaces in Euclidean Space. In Studies in Global Geometry and Analysis. Prentice-Hall.
Issai Schur (1912). Über die Existenz unendlich vieler Primzahlen in einigen speziellen arithmetischen Progressionen, Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Math.

Further reading

Daniel Panario (2005). Integer Partition and The Money Changing Problem.
Dany Breslauer and Devdatt P. Dubhashi (1995). Combinatorics for Computer Scientists
John M. Sullivan (2006). Curves of Finite Total Curvature. arXiv.

"
Category:Theorems in discrete mathematics Category:Ramsey theory Category:Additive combinatorics Category:Theorems in combinatorics Category:Theorems in differential geometry Category:Theorems in linear algebra Category:Theorems in functional analysis


