


Rodrigues' rotation formula




Rodrigues' rotation formula


This article is about the Rodrigues' rotation formula, which is distinct from the related Euler–Rodrigues parameters and The Euler–Rodrigues formula for 3D rotation.


In the theory of three-dimensional rotation, Rodrigues' rotation formula, named after Olinde Rodrigues, is an efficient algorithm for rotating a vector in space, given an axis and angle of rotation. By extension, this can be used to transform all three basis vectors to compute a rotation matrix in 

, the group of all rotation matrices, from an axis–angle representation. In other words, the Rodrigues' formula provides an algorithm to compute the exponential map from 
 
 
 
 , the Lie algebra of 
 
 
 
 
 , to 
 
 
 
  without actually computing the full matrix exponential.
Statement
If 
 
 
 
  is a vector in  and 
 
 
 
  is a unit vector describing an axis of rotation about which 
 
 
 
  rotates by an angle 
 
 
 
 
  according to the right hand rule, the Rodrigues formula is 
Derivation
(Figure)
Rodrigues' rotation formula rotates 
 
 
 
  by an angle 
 
 
 
  around vector 
 
 
 
  by decomposing it into its components parallel and perpendicular to 
 
 
 
 , and rotating only the perpendicular component.

Given a rotation axis represented by a unit vector 
 
 
 
 
  and a vector 
 
 
 
  to rotate about 
 
 
 
  by the angle 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  is the component of 
 
 
 
 
  parallel to 
 
 
 
 , also called the vector projection of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  is the component of 
 
 
 
 
  orthogonal to 
 
 
 
 , also called the vector rejection of 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 .
Define



The vectors  and 
 
 
 
 
  have the same length, but 
 
 
 
  is perpendicular to both 
 
 
 
  and . This follows from


 
  since 
 
 
 
  has unit length, is parallel to  and is perpendicular to .
The vector 
 
 
 
 
  can be viewed as a copy of  rotated by 
 
 
 
  about 
 
 
 
 . Through trigonometry, one may now rotate  by 
 
 
 
  around 
 
 
 
  to obtain . Consequently,


 
 
  Moreover,  is also the rejection from 
 
 
 
  of the vector , defined as the desired vector, 
 
 
 
  rotated about 
 
 
 
  by the angle 
 
 
 
 .
Since  is not affected by a rotation about 
 
 
 
 , the projection of  on 
 
 
 
  coincides with . Thus,


 
 
  as stated.
Matrix notation
Representing 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as column matrices, permits defining a matrix 
 
 
 
  as the "cross-product matrix" for the vector 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,



This matrix can be easily checked to have the property that


 
  for any vector 
 
 
 
 . (In fact, 
 
 
 
  is the unique matrix with this property.)
Now, from the last equation in the previous sub-section, one may write



In order to collect cosine terms, we expand 
 
 
 
  cos 
 
 
 
 :


 
 
  To simplify further, use the standard formula for the vector triple product,


 
  with 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , to obtain


 
  or



This amounts to (substituting the above equation in the last one for ),


 
  resulting in the Rodrigues' rotation formula in matrix notation,


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the rotation matrix  Since 
 
 
 
  is defined in terms of the components of the rotation axis 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the rotation angle, 
 
 
 
  is the rotation matrix about 
 
 
 
  by angle 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is an element of the rotation group 
 
 
 
  of , and 
 
 
 
  is an element of the Lie algebra

 
  generating that Lie group (note that 
 
 
 
  is skew-symmetric, which characterizes 
 
 
 
 ): In terms of the matrix exponential,


 
  To see that the last identity holds, one notes that


 
  characteristic of a one-parameter subgroup, i.e. exponential, and that the formulas match for infinitesimal 
 
 
 
 .
For an alternative derivation based on this exponential relationship, see Axis–angle representation#Exponential map from so(3) to SO(3). For the inverse mapping, see Axis–angle representation#Log map from SO(3) to so(3).
See also

Axis angle
Rotation (mathematics)
SO(3) and SO(4)
Euler–Rodrigues formula

References

Leonhard Euler, "Problema algebraicum ob affectiones prorsus singulares memorabile", Commentatio 407 Indicis Enestoemiani, Novi Comm. Acad. Sci. Petropolitanae 15 (1770), 75–106.
Olinde Rodrigues, "Des lois géometriques qui regissent les déplacements d' un systéme solide dans l' espace, et de la variation des coordonnées provenant de ces déplacement considérées indépendent des causes qui peuvent les produire", J. Math. Pures Appl. 5 (1840), 380–440.
Don Koks, (2006) Explorations in Mathematical Physics, Springer Science+Business Media,LLC. ISBN 0-387-30943-8. Ch.4, pps 147 et seq. ''A Roundabout Route to Geometric Algebra'

External links


Johan E. Mebius, Derivation of the Euler-Rodrigues formula for three-dimensional rotations from the general formula for four-dimensional rotations., arXiv General Mathematics 2007.
For another descriptive example see http://chrishecker.com/Rigid_Body_Dynamics#Physics_Articles, Chris Hecker, physics section, part 4. "The Third Dimension" -- on page 3, section ``Axis and Angle'', http://chrishecker.com/images/b/bb/Gdmphys4.pdf

fr:Rotation vectorielle#Cas général"
Category:Rotation in three dimensions Category:Euclidean geometry Category:Orientation (geometry)


