


Kruskal–Katona theorem




Kruskal–Katona theorem

In algebraic combinatorics, the Kruskal–Katona theorem gives a complete characterization of the f-vectors of abstract simplicial complexes. It includes as a special case the Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem and can be restated in terms of uniform hypergraphs. The theorem is named after Joseph Kruskal and Gyula O. H. Katona. It was independently proved by Marcel-Paul Schützenberger, but his contribution escaped notice for several years.
Statement
Given two positive integers N and i, there is a unique way to expand N as a sum of binomial coefficients as follows:



This expansion can be constructed by applying the greedy algorithm: set ni to be the maximal n such that 
 
 
 
  replace N with the difference, i with i − 1, and repeat until the difference becomes zero. Define



Statement for simplicial complexes
An integral vector 
 
 
 
  is the f-vector of some 
 
 
 
 -dimensional simplicial complex if and only if



Statement for uniform hypergraphs
Let A be a set consisting of N distinct i-element subsets of a fixed set U ("the universe") and B be the set of all 
 
 
 
 -element subsets of the sets in A. Expand N as above. Then the cardinality of B is bounded below as follows:



Ingredients of the proof
For every positive i, list all i-element subsets a1 2 i of the set N of natural numbers in the reverse lexicographic order. For example, for i = 3, the list begins



Given a vector 
 
 
 
  with positive integer components, let Δf be the subset of the power set 2N consisting of the empty set together with the first 
 
 
i-element subsets of N in the list for i = 1, …, d. Then the following conditions are equivalent:

Vector f is the f-vector of a simplicial complex Δ.
Δf is a simplicial complex.




The difficult implication is 1 ⇒ 2.
See also

Sperner's theorem

References


.



.



. Contains a proof via a more general theorem in discrete geometry.



.

External links

Kruskal-Katona theorem on the polymath1 wiki

"
Category:Algebraic combinatorics Category:Hypergraphs Category:Set families Category:Theorems in combinatorics


