


Matrix norm




Matrix norm

In mathematics, a matrix norm is a natural extension of the notion of a vector norm to matrices.
Definition
In what follows, 
 
 
 
  will denote the field of real or complex numbers. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the vector space containing all matrices with 
 
 
 
  rows and 
 
 
 
  columns with entries in 
 
 
 
 . Throughout the article 
 
 
 
  denotes the conjugate transpose of matrix 
 
 
 
 .
A matrix norm is a vector norm on 
 
 
 
 . That is, if 
 
 
 
  denotes the norm of the matrix 
 
 
 
 , then,






iff




 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and all matrices 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 



 
  for all matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 


Additionally, in the case of square matrices (thus, m = n), some (but not all) matrix norms satisfy the following condition, which is related to the fact that matrices are more than just vectors:



 
  for all matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 


A matrix norm that satisfies this additional property is called a sub-multiplicative norm (in some books, the terminology matrix norm is used only for those norms which are sub-multiplicative). The set of all n-by-n matrices, together with such a sub-multiplicative norm, is an example of a Banach algebra.
Induced norm
If vector norms on Km and Kn are given (K is the field of real or complex numbers), then one defines the corresponding induced norm or operator norm on the space of m-by-n matrices as the following maxima:



The operator norm corresponding to the p-norm for vectors is:



These are different from the entrywise p-norms and the Schatten p-norms for matrices treated below, which are also usually denoted by 
 
 

In the case of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the norms can be computed as:


 
  which is simply the maximum absolute column sum of the matrix.


 
  which is simply the maximum absolute row sum of the matrix
For example, if the matrix A is defined by


 
  then we have ||A||1 = max(|-3|+2+0, 5+6+2, 7+4+8) = max(5,13,19) = 19. and ||A||∞ = max(|-3|+5+7, 2+6+4,0+2+8) = max(15,12,10) = 15.
In the special case of p = 2 (the Euclidean norm), the induced matrix norm is the spectral norm. The spectral norm of a matrix A is the largest singular value of A i.e. the square root of the largest eigenvalue of the positive-semidefinite matrix A*A:


1 where A* denotes the conjugate transpose of A.
More generally, one can define the subordinate matrix norm on 
 
 
 
  induced by 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  as:



Subordinate norms are consistent with the norms that induce them, giving



For 
 
 
 
 , any induced operator norm is a sub-multiplicative matrix norm since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  .
Any induced norm satisfies the inequality


 
  where ρ(A) is the spectral radius of A. For a symmetric or hermitian matrix 
 
 
 
 , we have equality for the 2-norm, since in this case the 2-norm is the spectral radius of 
 
 
 
 . For an arbitrary matrix, we may not have equality for any norm. Take


 
  the spectral radius of 
 
 
 
  is 0, but 
 
 
 
  is not the zero matrix, and so none of the induced norms are equal to the spectral radius of 
 
 
 
 .
Furthermore, for square matrices we have the spectral radius formula:



"Entrywise" norms
These vector norms treat an 
 
 
 
  matrix as a vector of size 
 
 
 
 , and use one of the familiar vector norms.
For example, using the p-norm for vectors, we get:



This is a different norm from the induced p-norm (see above) and the Schatten p-norm (see below), but the notation is the same.
The special case p = 2 is the Frobenius norm, and p = ∞ yields the maximum norm.
L2,1 norm
Let 
 
 
 
  be the columns of matrix 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
 
  norm2 is the sum of the Euclidean norm of the columns of the matrix:



In this norm, the two indices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  are treated differently; all matrix norms introduced prior to the 
 
 
 
  norm treat the two indicees symmetrically. The 
 
 
 
  norm is used in robust data analysis and sparse coding for feature selection.
The 
 
 
 
  norm can be generalized to the 
 
 
 
  norm, defined by



Frobenius norm
For p = q = 2, this is called the Frobenius norm or the Hilbert–Schmidt norm, though the latter term is often reserved for operators on Hilbert space. This norm can be defined in various ways:



where A* denotes the conjugate transpose of A, σi are the singular values of A, and the trace function is used. The Frobenius norm is similar to the Euclidean norm on Kn and comes from the Frobenius inner product on the space of all matrices.
The Frobenius norm is sub-multiplicative and is very useful for numerical linear algebra. This norm is often easier to compute than induced norms and has the useful property of being invariant under rotations, that is, 
 
 
 
  for any rotation matrix 
 
 
 
 . This property follows from the trace definition restricted to real matrices,



and


 
  where we have used the orthogonal nature of 
 
 
 
 , that is, 
 
 
 
 , and the cyclic nature of the trace, 
 
 
 
 . More generally the norm is invariant under a unitary transformation for complex matrices.
Max norm
The max norm is the elementwise norm with p = ∞:


 
  This norm is not sub-multiplicative.
Schatten norms
The Schatten p-norms arise when applying the p-norm to the vector of singular values of a matrix. If the singular values are denoted by σi, then the Schatten p-norm is defined by


 
  These norms again share the notation with the induced and entrywise p-norms, but they are different.
All Schatten norms are sub-multiplicative. They are also unitarily invariant, which means that ||A|| = ||UAV|| for all matrices A and all unitary matrices U and V.
The most familiar cases are p = 1, 2, ∞. The case p = 2 yields the Frobenius norm, introduced before. The case p = ∞ yields the spectral norm, which is the matrix norm induced by the vector 2-norm (see above). Finally, p = 1 yields the nuclear norm (also known as the trace norm, or the Ky Fan 'n'-norm), defined as



(Here 
 
 
 
  denotes a positive semidefinite matrix 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . More precisely, since 
 
 
 
  is a positive semidefinite matrix, its square root is well-defined.)
Consistent norms
A matrix norm 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is called consistent with a vector norm 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  and a vector norm 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  if:


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . All induced norms are consistent by definition.
Compatible norms
A matrix norm 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is called compatible with a vector norm 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  if:


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Induced norms are compatible by definition.
Equivalence of norms
For any two vector norms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , we have



for some positive numbers r and s, for all matrices A in 
 
 
 
 . In other words, all norms on 
 
 
 
  are equivalent; they induce the same topology on 
 
 
 
 . This is true because the vector space 
 
 
 
  has the finite dimension 
 
 
 
 .
Moreover, for every vector norm 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , there exists a unique positive real number 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a sub-multiplicative matrix norm for every 
 
 
 
 .
A sub-multiplicative matrix norm 
 
 
 
  is said to be minimal if there exists no other sub-multiplicative matrix norm 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 .
Examples of norm equivalence
For matrix 
 
 
 
  of rank

 
 , the following inequalities hold:34

















Here, 
 
 
 
  refers to the matrix norm induced by the vector p-norm.
Another useful inequality between matrix norms is


 
  which is a special case of Hölder's inequality.
Notes
References

James W. Demmel, Applied Numerical Linear Algebra, section 1.7, published by SIAM, 1997.
Carl D. Meyer, Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra, published by SIAM, 2000. 1
John Watrous, Theory of Quantum Information, 2.3 Norms of operators, lecture notes, University of Waterloo, 2011.
Kendall Atkinson, An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc 1989


"
Category:Norms (mathematics) Category:Linear algebra



Carl D. Meyer, Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra,section 5.2,p281, Society for Industrial & Applied Mathematics,June 2000.

Golub, Gene; Charles F. Van Loan (1996). Matrix Computations - Third Edition. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 56-57. ISBN 0-8018-5413-X.
Roger Horn and Charles Johnson. Matrix Analysis, Chapter 5, Cambridge University Press, 1985. ISBN 0-521-38632-2.




