


Inversive congruential generator




Inversive congruential generator

Inversive congruential generators are a type of nonlinear congruential pseudorandom number generator, which use the modular multiplicative inverse (if it exists) to generate the next number in a sequence. The standard formula for an inversive congruential generator, modulo some prime q is:








 
  seed






 
   

| if 
 
 








if 
 
 






Such a generator is denoted symbolically as ICG(q,a,c,seed) and is said to be an ICG with parameters q,a,c and seed seed.
Period
The sequence 
 
 
 
  must have 
 
 
 
  after finitely many steps and since the next element depends only on its direct predecessor also 
 
 
 
  etc. The maximum length that the period T for a function modulo q can have is . If the polynomial

 
 
  (polynomial ring over 
 
 
 
 ) is primitive, then the sequence will have the maximum length. Such polynomials are called inversive maximal period (IMP) polynomials. The sufficient condition for maximum sequence period is a proper choice of parameters a and c according to the algorithm described in.1 Eichenauer-Herrmann, Lehn, Grothe and Niederreiter have shown that inversive congruential generators have good uniformity properties, in particular with regard to lattice structure and serial correlations.
Example
ICG(5,2,3,1) gives the sequence:(1,0,3,2,4,1,.....) (as in 
 
 
 
 , 1 and 4 are their own inverse, 2 is the inverse of 3 and conversely). In this example 
 
 
 
  is irreducible in 
 
 
 
  as neither 0,1,2,3 or 4 are roots, and therefore the period is equal to .In order to show that f is primitive one should show that x is a primitive element of 
 
 
 
 
 .
Compound Inversive Generator
The construction of a Compound Inversive Generator (CIG) relies on combining two or more congruential inversive generators according to the method described below.
Let 
 
 
 
  be distinct prime integers, each 
 
 
 
 . For each index j,1≤ j ≤ r, let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of elements of 
 
 
 
 , that is periodic with period length 
 
 
 
 
 . In other words,
 
 
 
 .
For each index j, 1≤ j ≤ r, we consider 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the period length of the following sequence 
 
 
 
 .
The sequence 
 
 
 
 
  of compound pseudorandom numbers is defined as the sum


 
 . The compound approach allows combining Inversive Congruential Generators, provided they have full period, in parallel generation systems.
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . To simplify, take 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . We compute for every 1≤ j≤ 35, 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  (we have to do the 35 different sums to obtain 0+0 and we begin the same sequence again, the period is 
 
 
 
 ). This method allows obtaining very long period and modular operations may be carried out with relatively small moduli.
Advantages of CIG
The CIG are accepted for practical purposes for a number of reason.
Firstly, binary sequences produced in this way are free of undesirable statistical deviations. Inversive sequences extensively tested with variety of statistical tests remain stable under the variation of parameter.234
Secondly, there exists a steady and simple way of parameter choice, based on the Chou algorithm 5 that guarantees maximum period length.
Thirdly, compound approach has the same properties as single inversive generators 67 but it also provides period length significantly greater than obtained by a single Inversive Congruential Generator. They seem to be designed for application with multiprocessor parallel hardware platforms.
There exists an algorithm 8 which allows designing compound generators with predictable period length, predictable linear complexity level, with excellent statistical properties of produced bit streams.
The procedure of designing this complex structure starts with defining finite field of p elements and ends with choosing the parameters a and c for each Inversive Congruential Generator being the component of the compound generator. It means that each generator is associated to a fixed IMP polynomial. Such a condition is sufficient for maximum period of each Inversive Congruential Generator9 and finally for maximum period of the compound generator. The construction of IMP polynomials is the most efficient approach to find parameters for Inversive Congruential Generator with maximum period length.
Discrepancy and its boundaries
Equidistribution and statistical independence properties of the generated sequences, which are very important for their usability in a stochastic simulation, can be analyzed based on the discrepancy of s-tuples of successive pseudorandom numbers with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  respectively.
The discrepancy computes the distance of a generator from a uniform one, a low discrepancy means that the sequence generated can be used for cryptographic purposes and the first aim of the Inversive congruential generator is to provide pseudorandom numbers.
Definition
For 
 
 
 
  arbitrary points 
 
 
 
  the discrepancy is defined by 
 
 
 
 , where the supremum is extended over all subintervals 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  times the number of points among 
 
 
 
  falling into J and V(J) denotes the s-dimensional volume of J.
Until now, we had sequences of integers from 0 to T-1, in order to have sequences of 
 
 
 
 , one can divide a sequences of integers by its period T.
From this definition, we can say that if the sequence 
 
 
 
 
  is perfectly random then its well distributed on the interval 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  and all points are in J so 
 
 
 
  hence 
 
 
 
  but instead if the sequence is concentrated close to one point then the subinterval J is very small 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  so 
 
 
 
  Then we have from the better and worst case: 
 
 
 
 .
Notations
Some further notation is necessary. For integers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  let 
 
 
 
  be the set of nonzero lattice points 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
Define



and


 
  for 
 
 
 
 . For real 
 
 
 
  the abbreviation 
 
 
 
  is used, and 
 
 
 
  stands for the standard inner product of 
 
 
 
 .
Higher bound
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be integers. Let 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
Then the discrepancy of the points 
 
 
 
  satisfies


 
  ≤ 
 
 
 
  + 
 
 



Lower bound
The discrepancy of 
 
 
 
  arbitrary points 
 
 
 
  satisfies


 
  ≥ 
 
 

for any nonzero lattice point 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the number of nonzero coordinates of 
 
 
 
 .
These two theorems show that the CIG is not perfect because the discrepancy is greater strictly than a positive value but also the CIG is not the worst generator as the discrepancy is lower than a value less than 1.
There exist also theorems which bound the average value of the discrepancy for Compound Inversive Generators and also ones which take values such that the discrepancy is bounded by some value depending on the parameters. For more details see the original paper.10
See also

Pseudorandom number generator
List of random number generators
Linear congruential generator
Generalized inversive congruential pseudorandom numbers
Naor-Reingold Pseudorandom Function

References
External links

Inversive Generators at the University of Salzburg.

"
Category:Pseudorandom number generators

















