


Ambient occlusion




Ambient occlusion

(Figure)
The ambient occlusion map (middle image) for this scene darkens only the innermost angles of corners.

In computer graphics, ambient occlusion is a shading and rendering technique used to calculate how exposed each point in a scene is to ambient lighting. The interior of a tube is typically more occluded (and hence darker) than the exposed outer surfaces, and the deeper you go inside the tube, the more occluded (and darker) the lighting becomes. Ambient occlusion can be seen as an accessibility value that is calculated for each surface point.1 In scenes with open sky this is done by estimating the amount of visible sky for each point, while in indoor environments only objects within a certain radius are taken into account and the walls are assumed to be the origin of the ambient light. The result is a diffuse, non-directional shading effect that casts no clear shadows but that darkens enclosed and sheltered areas and can affect the rendered image's overall tone. It is often used as a post-processing effect.
Unlike local methods such as Phong shading, ambient occlusion is a global method, meaning that the illumination at each point is a function of other geometry in the scene. However, it is a very crude approximation to full global illumination. The appearance achieved by ambient occlusion alone is similar to the way an object might appear on an overcast day.
Implementation
 In real-time applications, such as computer games, Screen space ambient occlusion can be used as a faster approximation of true ambient occlusion, using pixel depth rather than scene geometry to form an ambient occlusion map. However, newer technologies are making true ambient occlusion feasible even in real-time.
Ambient occlusion is related to accessibility shading, which determines appearance based on how easy it is for a surface to be touched by various elements (e.g., dirt, light, etc.). It has been popularized in production animation due to its relative simplicity and efficiency. In the industry, ambient occlusion is often referred to as "sky light".
The ambient occlusion shading model has the nice property of offering a better perception of the 3D shape of the displayed objects. This was shown in a paper where the authors report the results of perceptual experiments showing that depth discrimination under diffuse uniform sky lighting is superior to that predicted by a direct lighting model.2
The occlusion 
 
 
 
  at a point 
 
 
 
  on a surface with normal 
 
 
 
  can be computed by integrating the visibility function over the hemisphere 
 
 
 
 
  with respect to projected solid angle:





where 
 
 
 
  is the visibility function at 
 
 
 
 , defined to be zero if 
 
 
 
  is occluded in the direction 
 
 
 
 
  and one otherwise, and 
 
 
 
  is the infinitesimal solid angle step of the integration variable 
 
 
 
 . A variety of techniques are used to approximate this integral in practice: perhaps the most straightforward way is to use the Monte Carlo method by casting rays from the point 
 
 
 
  and testing for intersection with other scene geometry (i.e., ray casting). Another approach (more suited to hardware acceleration) is to render the view from 
 
 
 
  by rasterizing black geometry against a white background and taking the (cosine-weighted) average of rasterized fragments. This approach is an example of a "gathering" or "inside-out" approach, whereas other algorithms (such as depth-map ambient occlusion) employ "scattering" or "outside-in" techniques.
In addition to the ambient occlusion value, a "bent normal" vector 
 
 
 
 
  is often generated, which points in the average direction of unoccluded samples. The bent normal can be used to look up incident radiance from an environment map to approximate image-based lighting. However, there are some situations in which the direction of the bent normal is a misrepresentation of the dominant direction of illumination, e.g.,
(Figure)
In this example the bent normal Nb has an unfortunate direction, since it is pointing at an occluded surface.

In this example, light may reach the point p only from the left or right sides, but the bent normal points to the average of those two sources, which is, unfortunately, directly toward the obstruction.
Recognition
In 2010, Hayden Landis, Ken McGaugh and Hilmar Koch were awarded a Scientific and Technical Academy Award for their work on ambient occlusion rendering.3
See also

Global illumination
Photon mapping
Radiosity
Ray tracing
Reflection occlusion
Screen space ambient occlusion

References


External links

Depth Map based Ambient Occlusion
NVIDIA's accurate, real-time Ambient Occlusion Volumes
Assorted notes about ambient occlusion
Ambient Occlusion Fields — real-time ambient occlusion using cube maps
PantaRay ambient occlusion used in the movie Avatar
Fast Precomputed Ambient Occlusion for Proximity Shadows real-time ambient occlusion using volume textures
Dynamic Ambient Occlusion and Indirect Lighting a real time self ambient occlusion method from Nvidia's GPU Gems 2 book
GPU Gems 3 : Chapter 12. High-Quality Ambient Occlusion
ShadeVis an open source tool for computing ambient occlusion
xNormal A free normal mapper/ambient occlusion baking application
3dsMax Ambient Occlusion Map Baking Demo video about preparing ambient occlusion in 3dsMax

"
Category:Shading Category:Global illumination algorithms Category:Articles containing video clips





Oscar 2010: Scientific and Technical Awards, Alt Film Guide, Jan 7, 2010




