


Fast wavelet transform




Fast wavelet transform

The Fast Wavelet Transform is a mathematical algorithm designed to turn a waveform or signal in the time domain into a sequence of coefficients based on an orthogonal basis of small finite waves, or wavelets. The transform can be easily extended to multidimensional signals, such as images, where the time domain is replaced with the space domain.
It has as theoretical foundation the device of a finitely generated, orthogonal multiresolution analysis (MRA). In the terms given there, one selects a sampling scale J with sampling rate of 2J per unit interval, and projects the given signal f onto the space 
 
 
 
 ; in theory by computing the scalar products



where 
 
 
 
  is the scaling function of the chosen wavelet transform; in practice by any suitable sampling procedure under the condition that the signal is highly oversampled, so


 
  is the orthogonal projection or at least some good approximation of the original signal in 
 
 
 
 .
The MRA is characterised by its scaling sequence


 
  or, as Z-transform, 
 
 

and its wavelet sequence


 
  or 
 
 

(some coefficients might be zero). Those allow to compute the wavelet coefficients 
 
 
 
 , at least some range k=M,...,J-1, without having to approximate the integrals in the corresponding scalar products. Instead, one can directly, with the help of convolution and decimation operators, compute those coefficients from the first approximation 
 
 
 
 .
Forward DWT
One computes recursively, starting with the coefficient sequence 
 
 
 
  and counting down from k=J-1 to some ''M*
, h=b*]]


 
  or 
 
 
 
 
  and


 
  or 
 
 
 
 ,
for k=J-1,J-2,...,M and all 
 
 
 
 . In the Z-transform notation: 
:* The downsampling operator

 
  reduces an infinite sequence, given by its Z-transform, which is simply a Laurent series, to the sequence of the coefficients with even indices, 
 
 
 
 
 .
:* The starred Laurent-polynomial 
 
 
 
  denotes the adjoint filter, it has time-reversed adjoint coefficients, 
 
 
 
 . (The adjoint of a real number being the number itself, of a complex number its conjugate, of a real matrix the transposed matrix, of a complex matrix its hermitian adjoint).
:* Multiplication is polynomial multiplication, which is equivalent to the convolution of the coefficient sequences.
It follows that



is the orthogonal projection of the original signal f or at least of the first approximation 
 
 
 
  onto the subspace

 
 
 , that is, with sampling rate of 2k per unit interval. The difference to the first approximation is given by


 
 ,
where the difference or detail signals are computed from the detail coefficients as


 
 ,
with 
 
 
 
  denoting the mother wavelet of the wavelet transform.
Inverse DWT
Given the coefficient sequence 
 
 
 
  for some M 


 
  or 
 
 
 
  for k=J-1,J-2,...,M and all 
 
 
 
 . In the Z-transform notation:
:* The upsampling operator

 
  creates zero-filled holes inside a given sequence. That is, every second element of the resulting sequence is an element of the given sequence, every other second element is zero or 
 
 
 
 . This linear operator is, in the Hilbert space

 
 
 , the adjoint to the downsampling operator 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Lifting scheme

References

A.N. Akansu Multiplierless Suboptimal PR-QMF Design Proc. SPIE 1818, Visual Communications and Image Processing, p. 723, November, 1992
A.N. Akansu Multiplierless 2-band Perfect Reconstruction Quadrature Mirror Filter (PR-QMF) Banks US Patent 5,420,891, 1995
A.N. Akansu Multiplierless PR Quadrature Mirror Filters for Subband Image Coding IEEE Trans. Image Processing, p. 1359, September 1996
M.J. Mohlenkamp, M.C. Pereyra Wavelets, Their Friends, and What They Can Do for You (2008 EMS) p. 38
B.B. Hubbard ''The World According to Wavelets: The Story of a Mathematical Technique in the Making (1998 Peters) p. 184
S.G. Mallat A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing (1999 Academic Press) p. 255
A. Teolis Computational Signal Processing with Wavelets (1998 Birkhäuser) p. 116
Y. Nievergelt Wavelets Made Easy (1999 Springer) p. 95

Further reading
G. Beylkin, R. Coifman, V. Rokhlin, "Fast wavelet transforms and numerical algorithms" Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 44 (1991) pp. 141–183
"
Category:Wavelets Category:Discrete transforms


