


Estimation theory




Estimation theory

Estimation theory is a branch of statistics that deals with estimating the values of parameters based on measured/empirical data that has a random component. The parameters describe an underlying physical setting in such a way that their value affects the distribution of the measured data. An estimator attempts to approximate the unknown parameters using the measurements.
For example, it is desired to estimate the proportion of a population of voters who will vote for a particular candidate. That proportion is the parameter sought; the estimate is based on a small random sample of voters.
Or, for example, in radar the goal is to estimate the range of objects (airplanes, boats, etc.) by analyzing the two-way transit timing of received echoes of transmitted pulses. Since the reflected pulses are unavoidably embedded in electrical noise, their measured values are randomly distributed, so that the transit time must be estimated.
In estimation theory, two approaches are generally considered. 1

The probabilistic approach (described in this article) assumes that the measured data is random with probability distribution dependent on the parameters of interest


The set-membership approach assumes that the measured data vector belongs to a set which depends on the parameter vector.

For example, in electrical communication theory, the measurements which contain information regarding the parameters of interest are often associated with a noisy signal. Without randomness, or noise, the problem would be deterministic and estimation would not be needed.
Basics
To build a model, several statistical "ingredients" need to be known. These are needed to ensure the estimator has some mathematical tractability.
The first is a set of statistical samples taken from a random vector (RV) of size N. Put into a vector,



Secondly, there are the corresponding M parameters



which need to be established with their continuous probability density function (pdf) or its discrete counterpart, the probability mass function (pmf)



It is also possible for the parameters themselves to have a probability distribution (e.g., Bayesian statistics). It is then necessary to define the Bayesian probability



After the model is formed, the goal is to estimate the parameters, commonly denoted 
 
 
 
 
 , where the "hat" indicates the estimate.
One common estimator is the minimum mean squared error estimator, which utilizes the error between the estimated parameters and the actual value of the parameters



as the basis for optimality. This error term is then squared and minimized for the MMSE estimator.
Estimators
Commonly used estimators and estimation methods, and topics related to them:

Maximum likelihood estimators
Bayes estimators
Method of moments estimators
Cramér–Rao bound
Minimum mean squared error (MMSE), also known as Bayes least squared error (BLSE)
Maximum a posteriori (MAP)
Minimum variance unbiased estimator (MVUE)
nonlinear system identification
Best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE)
Unbiased estimators — see estimator bias.
Particle filter
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
Kalman filter, and its various derivatives
Wiener filter

Examples
Unknown constant in additive white Gaussian noise
Consider a received discrete signal, 
 
 
 
 , of 
 
 
independent samples that consists of an unknown constant 
 
 
 
  with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) 
 
 
 
 
  with known variance

 
  (i.e., 
 
 
 
 ). Since the variance is known then the only unknown parameter is 
 
 
 
 .
The model for the signal is then



Two possible (of many) estimators are:






 
  which is the sample mean

Both of these estimators have a mean of 
 
 
 
 , which can be shown through taking the expected value of each estimator


 
  and



At this point, these two estimators would appear to perform the same. However, the difference between them becomes apparent when comparing the variances.


 
  and



It would seem that the sample mean is a better estimator since its variance is lower for every N > 1.
Maximum likelihood
Continuing the example using the maximum likelihood estimator, the probability density function (pdf) of the noise for one sample 
 
 
 
  is



and the probability of 
 
 
 
  becomes (
 
 
 
  can be thought of a 
 
 
 
 )



By independence, the probability of 
 
 
 
  becomes



Taking the natural logarithm of the pdf



and the maximum likelihood estimator is



Taking the first derivative of the log-likelihood function



and setting it to zero



This results in the maximum likelihood estimator



which is simply the sample mean. From this example, it was found that the sample mean is the maximum likelihood estimator for 
 
 
 
  samples of a fixed, unknown parameter corrupted by AWGN.
Cramér–Rao lower bound
To find the Cramér–Rao lower bound (CRLB) of the sample mean estimator, it is first necessary to find the Fisher information number



and copying from above



Taking the second derivative



and finding the negative expected value is trivial since it is now a deterministic constant 
 
 

Finally, putting the Fisher information into



results in



Comparing this to the variance of the sample mean (determined previously) shows that the sample mean is equal to the Cramér–Rao lower bound for all values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In other words, the sample mean is the (necessarily unique) efficient estimator, and thus also the minimum variance unbiased estimator (MVUE), in addition to being the maximum likelihood estimator.
Maximum of a uniform distribution
One of the simplest non-trivial examples of estimation is the estimation of the maximum of a uniform distribution. It is used as a hands-on classroom exercise and to illustrate basic principles of estimation theory. Further, in the case of estimation based on a single sample, it demonstrates philosophical issues and possible misunderstandings in the use of maximum likelihood estimators and likelihood functions.
Given a discrete uniform distribution

 
  with unknown maximum, the UMVU estimator for the maximum is given by


 
  where m is the sample maximum and k is the sample size, sampling without replacement.23 This problem is commonly known as the German tank problem, due to application of maximum estimation to estimates of German tank production during World War II.
The formula may be understood intuitively as:

"The sample maximum plus the average gap between observations in the sample",
 

the gap being added to compensate for the negative bias of the sample maximum as an estimator for the population maximum.4
This has a variance of5


 
  so a standard deviation of approximately 
 
 
 
 , the (population) average size of a gap between samples; compare 
 
 
 
  above. This can be seen as a very simple case of maximum spacing estimation.
The sample maximum is the maximum likelihood estimator for the population maximum, but, as discussed above, it is biased.
Applications
Numerous fields require the use of estimation theory. Some of these fields include (but are by no means limited to):

Interpretation of scientific experiments
Signal processing
Clinical trials
Opinion polls
Quality control
Telecommunications
Project management
Software engineering
Control theory (in particular Adaptive control)
Network intrusion detection system
Orbit determination

Measured data are likely to be subject to noise or uncertainty and it is through statistical probability that optimal solutions are sought to extract as much information from the data as possible.
See also

:Category:Estimation theory
:Category:Estimation for specific distributions


Best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE)
Chebyshev center
Completeness (statistics)
Cramér–Rao bound
Detection theory
Efficiency (statistics)
Estimator, Estimator bias
Expectation-maximization algorithm (EM algorithm)
Fermi problem
Grey box model
Information theory
Kalman filter
Least-squares spectral analysis
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
Matched filter
Maximum a posteriori (MAP)
Maximum likelihood
Maximum entropy spectral estimation
Method of moments, generalized method of moments
Minimum mean squared error (MMSE)
Minimum variance unbiased estimator (MVUE)
Nonlinear system identification
Nuisance parameter
Parametric equation
Particle filter
Rao–Blackwell theorem
Spectral density, Spectral density estimation
Statistical signal processing
Sufficiency (statistics)
Wiener filter

Notes
References
References

Theory of Point Estimation by E.L. Lehmann and G. Casella. (ISBN 0387985026)
Systems Cost Engineering by Dale Shermon. (ISBN 978-0-566-08861-2)
Mathematical Statistics and Data Analysis by John Rice. (ISBN 0-534-209343)
Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation Theory by Steven M. Kay (ISBN 0-13-345711-7)
An Introduction to Signal Detection and Estimation by H. Vincent Poor (ISBN 0-387-94173-8)
Detection, Estimation, and Modulation Theory, Part 1 by Harry L. Van Trees (ISBN 0-471-09517-6; website)
Optimal State Estimation: Kalman, H-infinity, and Nonlinear Approaches by Dan Simon website
Ali H. Sayed, Adaptive Filters, Wiley, NJ, 2008, ISBN 978-0-470-25388-5.
Ali H. Sayed, Fundamentals of Adaptive Filtering, Wiley, NJ, 2003, ISBN 0-471-46126-1.
Thomas Kailath, Ali H. Sayed, and Babak Hassibi, Linear Estimation, Prentice-Hall, NJ, 2000, ISBN 978-0-13-022464-4.
Babak Hassibi, Ali H. Sayed, and Thomas Kailath, Indefinite Quadratic Estimation and Control: A Unified Approach to H2 and Hoo Theories, Society for Industrial & Applied Mathematics (SIAM), PA, 1999, ISBN 978-0-89871-411-1.
V.G.Voinov, M.S.Nikulin, "Unbiased estimators and their applications. Vol.1: Univariate case", Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993, ISBN 0-7923-2382-3.
V.G.Voinov, M.S.Nikulin, "Unbiased estimators and their applications. Vol.2: Multivariate case", Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996, ISBN 0-7923-3939-8.

"
  Category:Statistical inference Category:Signal processing






The sample maximum is never more than the population maximum, but can be less, hence it is a biased estimator: it will tend to underestimate the population maximum.





