


Kripke–Platek set theory with urelements




Kripke–Platek set theory with urelements

The Kripke–Platek set theory with urelements (KPU) is an axiom system for set theory with urelements, based on the traditional (urelement-free) Kripke-Platek set theory. It is considerably weaker than the (relatively) familiar system ZFU. The purpose of allowing urelements is to allow large or high-complexity objects (such as the set of all reals) to be included in the theory's transitive models without disrupting the usual well-ordering and recursion-theoretic properties of the constructible universe; KP is so weak that this is hard to do by traditional means.
Preliminaries
The usual way of stating the axioms presumes a two sorted first order language 
 
 
 
  with a single binary relation symbol 
 
 
 
 . Letters of the sort 
 
 
 
  designate urelements, of which there may be none, whereas letters of the sort 
 
 
 
  designate sets. The letters 
 
 
 
  may denote both sets and urelements.
The letters for sets may appear on both sides of 
 
 
 
 , while those for urelements may only appear on the left, i.e. the following are examples of valid expressions
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
The statement of the axioms also requires reference to a certain collection of formulae called 
 
 
 
 -formulae. The collection 
 
 
 
  consists of those formulae that can be built using the constants, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and bounded quantification. That is quantification of the form 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is given set.
Axioms
The axioms of KPU are the universal closures of the following formulae:

Extensionality




Foundation: This is an axiom schema where for every formula 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
 .


Pairing




Union




Δ0-Separation: This is again an axiom schema, where for every 
 
 
 
 -formula 
 
 
 
  we have the following 
 
 
 
 .




 
 -Collection: This is also an axiom schema, for every 
 
 
 
 -formula 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
 .


Set Existence
 
 


Additional assumptions
Technically these are axioms that describe the partition of objects into sets and urelements.










Applications
KPU can be applied to the model theory of infinitary languages. Models of KPU considered as sets inside a maximal universe that are transitive as such are called admissible sets.
See also

Axiomatic set theory
Admissible set
Admissible ordinal
Kripke–Platek set theory

References


.

.

External links

Logic of Abstract Existence

"
Category:Systems of set theory Category:Urelements


