


Hyperbolic partial differential equation




Hyperbolic partial differential equation

In mathematics, a hyperbolic partial differential equation of order n is a partial differential equation (PDE) that, roughly speaking, has a well-posed initial value problem for the first n−1 derivatives. More precisely, the Cauchy problem can be locally solved for arbitrary initial data along any non-characteristic hypersurface. Many of the equations of mechanics are hyperbolic, and so the study of hyperbolic equations is of substantial contemporary interest. The model hyperbolic equation is the wave equation. In one spatial dimension, this is


 
  The equation has the property that, if u and its first time derivative are arbitrarily specified initial data on the initial line t = 0 (with sufficient smoothness properties), then there exists a solution for all time.
The solutions of hyperbolic equations are "wave-like." If a disturbance is made in the initial data of a hyperbolic differential equation, then not every point of space feels the disturbance at once. Relative to a fixed time coordinate, disturbances have a finite propagation speed. They travel along the characteristics of the equation. This feature qualitatively distinguishes hyperbolic equations from elliptic partial differential equations and parabolic partial differential equations. A perturbation of the initial (or boundary) data of an elliptic or parabolic equation is felt at once by essentially all points in the domain.
Although the definition of hyperbolicity is fundamentally a qualitative one, there are precise criteria that depend on the particular kind of differential equation under consideration. There is a well-developed theory for linear differential operators, due to Lars Gårding, in the context of microlocal analysis. Nonlinear differential equations are hyperbolic if their linearizations are hyperbolic in the sense of Gårding. There is a somewhat different theory for first order systems of equations coming from systems of conservation laws.
Definition
A partial differential equation is hyperbolic at a point P provided that the Cauchy problem is uniquely solvable in a neighborhood of P for any initial data given on a non-characteristic hypersurface passing through P.1 Here the prescribed initial data consists of all (transverse) derivatives of the function on the surface up to one less than the order of the differential equation.
Examples
By a linear change of variables, any equation of the form


 
  with


 
  can be transformed to the wave equation, apart from lower order terms which are inessential for the qualitative understanding of the equation.2 This definition is analogous to the definition of a planar hyperbola.
The one-dimensional wave equation:



is an example of a hyperbolic equation. The two-dimensional and three-dimensional wave equations also fall into the category of hyperbolic PDE.
This type of second-order hyperbolic partial differential equation may be transformed to a hyperbolic system of first-order differential equations.3
Hyperbolic system of partial differential equations
Consider the following system of 
 
 
 
  first order partial differential equations for 
 
 
 
  unknown functions

 
 , 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 




 
  are once continuously differentiable functions, nonlinear in general.
Now define for each 
 
 
 
  a matrix





We say that the system 
 
 
 
  is hyperbolic if for all 
 
 
 
  the matrix 
 
 
 
  has only real eigenvalues and is diagonalizable.
If the matrix 
 
 
 
  has n distinct real eigenvalues, it follows that it's diagonalizable. In this case the system 
 
 
 
  is called strictly hyperbolic.
If the matrix 
 
 
 
  is symmetric, it follows that it's diagonalizable and the eigenvalues are real. In this case the system 
 
 
 
  is called symmetric hyperbolic.
Hyperbolic system and conservation laws
There is a connection between a hyperbolic system and a conservation law. Consider a hyperbolic system of one partial differential equation for one unknown function 
 
 
 
 . Then the system 
 
 
 
  has the form



Now we may interpret 
 
 
 
  as a quantity that moves around according to the flux given by 
 
 
 
 . To see that the quantity 
 
 
 
  is conserved, integrate

 
  over a domain 
 
 




If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are sufficiently smooth functions, we can use the divergence theorem and change the order of the integration and 
 
 
 
  to get a conservation law for the quantity 
 
 
 
  in the general form


 
  which means that the time rate of change of 
 
 
 
  in the domain 
 
 
 
  is equal to the net flux of 
 
 
 
  through its boundary 
 
 
 
 . Since this is an equality, it can be concluded that 
 
 
 
  is conserved within 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Elliptic partial differential equation
Hypoelliptic operator
Parabolic partial differential equation
Relativistic heat conduction

Notes
Bibliography


A. D. Polyanin, Handbook of Linear Partial Differential Equations for Engineers and Scientists, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2002. ISBN 1-58488-299-9


External links


Linear Hyperbolic Equations at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.
Nonlinear Hyperbolic Equations at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.

"
 



Rozhdestvenskii
Evans 1998, p.400
Evans 1998, p.402




