


Weierstrass factorization theorem




Weierstrass factorization theorem

In mathematics, and particularly in the field of complex analysis, the Weierstrass factorization theorem asserts that entire functions can be represented by a product involving their zeroes. In addition, every sequence tending to infinity has an associated entire function with zeroes at precisely the points of that sequence. The theorem is named after Karl Weierstrass.
A second form of the theorem extends to meromorphic functions and allows one to consider a given meromorphic function as a product of three factors: terms depending on the function's poles and zeroes, and an associated non-zero holomorphic function.
Motivation
The consequences of the fundamental theorem of algebra are twofold.1 Firstly, any finite sequence 
 
 
 
  in the complex plane has an associated polynomial

 
  that has zeroes precisely at the points of that sequence, 
 
 

Secondly, any polynomial function 
 
 
 
  in the complex plane has a factorization

 
  where a is a non-zero constant and cn are the zeroes of p.
The two forms of the Weierstrass factorization theorem can be thought of as extensions of the above to entire functions. The necessity of extra machinery is demonstrated when one considers the product 
 
 
 
  if the sequence 
 
 
 
  is not finite. It can never define an entire function, because the infinite product does not converge. Thus one cannot, in general, define an entire function from a sequence of prescribed zeroes or represent an entire function by its zeroes using the expressions yielded by the fundamental theorem of algebra.
A necessary condition for convergence of the infinite product in question is that each factor 
 
 
 
  must approach 1 as 
 
 
 
 . So it stands to reason that one should seek a function that could be 0 at a prescribed point, yet remain near 1 when not at that point and furthermore introduce no more zeroes than those prescribed. Weierstrass' elementary factors have these properties and serve the same purpose as the factors 
 
 
 
  above.
The elementary factors
These are also referred to as primary factors.2
For 
 
 
 
 , define the elementary factors:3



Their utility lies in the following lemma:4
Lemma (15.8, Rudin) for |z| ≤ 1, n ∈ No



The two forms of the theorem
Existence of entire function with specified zeroes
Sometimes called the Weierstrass theorem.5
Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of non-zero complex numbers such that 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is any sequence of integers such that for all 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  then the function


 
  is entire with zeros only at points 
 
 
 
 . If number 
 
 
 
  occurs in sequence 
 
 
 
  exactly m times, then function f has a zero at 
 
 
 
  of multiplicity m.

Note that the sequence 
 
 
 
  in the statement of the theorem always exists. For example we could always take 
 
 
 
  and have the convergence. Such a sequence is not unique: changing it at finite number of positions, or taking another sequence p'n ≥ pn, will not break the convergence.
The theorem generalizes to the following: sequences in open subsets (and hence regions) of the Riemann sphere have associated functions that are holomorphic in those subsets and have zeroes at the points of the sequence.6
Note also that the case given by the fundamental theorem of algebra is incorporated here. If the sequence 
 
 
 
  is finite then we can take 
 
 
 
  and obtain
 
 
 
 .

The Weierstrass factorization theorem
Sometimes called the Weierstrass product/factor theorem.7
Let ƒ be an entire function, and let 
 
 
 
  be the non-zero zeros of ƒ repeated according to multiplicity; suppose also that ƒ has a zero at z = 0 of order m ≥ 0 (a zero of order m = 0 at z = 0 means ƒ(0) ≠ 0). Then there exists an entire function g and a sequence of integers 
 
 
 
  such that


8
Examples of factorization








Hadamard factorization theorem
If ƒ is an entire function of finite order ρ then it admits a factorization


 
  where g(z) is a polynomial of degree q, q ≤ ρ and p=[ρ] .9
See also

Mittag-Leffler's theorem

Notes
External links



"
Category:Theorems in complex analysis



.↩
, chapter 2.↩
.↩

↩

↩
↩





