


Gibbs' inequality




Gibbs' inequality

In information theory, Gibbs' inequality is a statement about the mathematical entropy of a discrete probability distribution. Several other bounds on the entropy of probability distributions are derived from Gibbs' inequality, including Fano's inequality. It was first presented by J. Willard Gibbs in the 19th century.
Gibbs' inequality
Suppose that



is a probability distribution. Then for any other probability distribution



the following inequality between positive quantities (since the pi and qi are positive numbers less than one) holds



with equality if and only if



for all i. Put in words, the information entropy of a distribution P is less than or equal to its cross entropy with any other distribution Q.
The difference between the two quantities is the Kullback–Leibler divergence or relative entropy, so the inequality can also be written:



Note that the use of base-2 logarithms is optional, and allows one to refer to the quantity on each side of the inequality as an "average surprisal" measured in bits.
Proof
Since



it is sufficient to prove the statement using the natural logarithm (ln). Note that the natural logarithm satisfies



for all x > 0 with equality if and only if x=1.
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the set of all 
 
 
 
 
  for which pi is non-zero. Then









So



and then trivially



since the right hand side does not grow, but the left hand side may grow or may stay the same.
For equality to hold, we require:



 
  for all 
 
 
 
  so that the approximation 
 
 
 
  is exact.


 
  so that equality continues to hold between the third and fourth lines of the proof.

This can happen if and only if



for i = 1, ..., n.
Alternative proofs
The result can alternatively be proved using Jensen's inequality or log sum inequality.
Corollary
The entropy of 
 
 
 
  is bounded by:



The proof is trivial - simply set 
 
 
 
  for all i.
See also

Information entropy

"
Category:Information theory Category:Coding theory Category:Inequalities Category:Articles containing proofs


