


Lie algebra-valued differential form




Lie algebra-valued differential form

In differential geometry, a Lie algebra-valued form is a differential form with values in a Lie algebra. Such forms have important applications in the theory of connections on a principal bundle as well as in the theory of Cartan connections.
Wedge product
Since every Lie algebra has a bilinear Lie bracket operation, the wedge product of two Lie algebra-valued forms can be composed with the bracket operation to obtain another Lie algebra-valued form. This operation, denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is given by: for 
 
 
 
 -valued p-form 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 -valued q-form 
 
 



 
  where vi's are tangent vectors. The notation is meant to indicate both operations involved. For example, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are Lie algebra-valued one forms, then one has



The operation 
 
 
 
  can also be defined as the bilinear operation on 
 
 
 
  satisfying


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Some authors have used the notation 
 
 
 
  instead of 
 
 
 
 . The notation 
 
 
 
 , which resembles a commutator, is justified by the fact that if the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is a matrix algebra then 
 
 
 
  is nothing but the graded commutator of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , i. e. if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are wedge products formed using the matrix multiplication on 
 
 
 
 .
Operations
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie algebra homomorphism. If φ is a 
 
 
 
 -valued form on a manifold, then f(φ) is an 
 
 
 
 -valued form on the same manifold obtained by applying f to the values of φ
 
 
 
 .
Similarly, if f is a multilinear functional on 
 
 
 
 , then one puts1


 
  where q = q1 + … + qk and φi are 
 
 
 
 -valued qi-forms. Moreover, given a vector space V, the same formula can be used to define the V-valued form 
 
 
 
  when


 
  is a multilinear map, φ is a 
 
 
 
 -valued form and η is a V-valued form. Note that, when

(*) f([x, y], z) = f(x, f(y, z)) - f(y, f(x, z)),
 

giving f amounts to giving an action of 
 
 
 
  on V; i.e., f determines the representation


 
  and, conversely, any representation ρ determines f with the condition (*). For example, if 
 
 
 
  (the bracket of 
 
 
 
 ), then we recover the definition of 
 
 
 
  given above, with ρ = ad, the adjoint representation.
Example: If ω is a 
 
 
 
 -valued one-form (for example, a connection form), f(x, y) = ρ(x)y with ρ a representation of 
 
 
 
  on a vector space V and φ a V-valued form, then 
 
 

Forms with values in an adjoint bundle
Let P be a smooth principal bundle with structure group G and 
 
 
 
 . G acts on 
 
 
 
  via adjoint representation and so one can form the associated bundle:


 
  Any 
 
 
 
 -valued forms on the base space of P are in a natural one-to-one correspondence with any tensorial forms on P of adjoint type.
See also

Maurer–Cartan form
Adjoint bundle

Notes
References



External links

http://mathoverflow.net/questions/123632/wedge-product-of-lie-algebra-valued-one-form
http://ncatlab.org:8080/nlab/show/groupoid+of+Lie-algebra+valued+forms

"
Category:Differential forms Category:Lie algebras








