


Rectifiable set




Rectifiable set

In mathematics, a rectifiable set is a set that is smooth in a certain measure-theoretic sense. It is an extension of the idea of a rectifiable curve to higher dimensions; loosely speaking, a rectifiable set is a rigorous formulation of a piece-wise smooth set. As such, it has many of the desirable properties of smooth manifolds, including tangent spaces that are defined almost everywhere. Rectifiable sets are the underlying object of study in geometric measure theory.
Definition
A subset 
 
 
 
  of Euclidean space

 
  is said to be 

 
 -rectifiable set if there exist a countable collection 
 
 
 
 
  of continuously differentiable maps



such that the 
 
 
 
 -Hausdorff measure

 
  of



is zero. The backslash here denotes the set difference. Equivalently, the 
 
 
 
 
  may be taken to be Lipschitz continuous without altering the definition.1
A set 
 
 
 
  is said to be purely 
 
 
 
 -unrectifiable if for every (continuous, differentiable) 
 
 
 
 , one has



A standard example of a purely-1-unrectifiable set in two dimensions is the cross-product of the Smith-Volterra-Cantor set times itself.
Rectifiable sets in metric spaces
gives the following terminology for m-rectifiable sets E in a general metric space X.

E is 

 
 
  rectifiable when there exists a Lipschitz bijection 
 
 
 
  for some bounded subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
E is countably 
 
 
 
  rectifiable when E equals the union of a countable family of 
 
 
 
 
  rectifiable sets.
E is countably 
 
 
 
  rectifiable when 
 
 
 
  is a measure on X and there is a countably 
 
 
 
  rectifiable set F such that 
 
 
 
 .
E is 

 
 
  rectifiable when E is countably 
 
 
 
  rectifiable and 
 
 

E is purely 
 
 
 
  unrectifiable when 
 
 
 
  is a measure on X and E includes no 
 
 
 
 
  rectifiable set F with 
 
 
 
 .

Definition 3 with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  comes closest to the above definition for subsets of Euclidean spaces.
Notes
References





External links

Rectifiable set at Encyclopedia of Mathematics

"
Category:Measure theory



, calls this definition "countably m-rectifiable".↩




