


Carminati–McLenaghan invariants




Carminati–McLenaghan invariants

In general relativity, the Carminati–McLenaghan invariants or CM scalars are a set of 16 scalar curvature invariants for the Riemann tensor. This set is usually supplemented with at least two additional invariants.
Mathematical definition
The CM invariants consist of 6 real scalars plus 5 complex scalars, making a total of 16 invariants. They are defined in terms of the Weyl tensor

 
  and its left (or right) dual 
 
 
 
 , the Ricci tensor

 
 , and the trace-free Ricci tensor


 
  In the following, it may be helpful to note that if we regard 
 
 
 
  as a matrix, then 
 
 
 
  is the square of this matrix, so the trace of the square is 
 
 
 
 , and so forth.
The real CM scalars are



 
  (the trace of the Ricci tensor)
















The complex CM scalars are

















The CM scalars have the following degrees:



 
  is linear,


 
  are quadratic,


 
  are cubic,


 
  are quartic,


 
  are quintic.

They can all be expressed directly in terms of the Ricci spinors and Weyl spinors, using Newman–Penrose formalism; see the link below.
Complete sets of invariants
In the case of spherically symmetric spacetimes or planar symmetric spacetimes, it is known that





 
  comprise a complete set of invariants for the Riemann tensor. In the case of vacuum solutions, electrovacuum solutions and perfect fluid solutions, the CM scalars comprise a complete set. Additional invariants may be required for more general spacetimes; determining the exact number (and possible syzygies among the various invariants) is an open problem.
See also

curvature invariant, for more about curvature invariants in (semi)-Riemannian geometry in general
curvature invariant (general relativity), for other curvature invariants which are useful in general relativity

References



External links

The GRTensor II website includes a manual with definitions and discussions of the CM scalars.

"
Category:Tensors in general relativity


