


Classification of discontinuities




Classification of discontinuities

Continuous functions are of utmost importance in mathematics, functions and applications. However, not all functions are continuous. If a function is not continuous at a point in its domain, one says that it has a discontinuity there. The set of all points of discontinuity of a function may be a discrete set, a dense set, or even the entire domain of the function. This article describes the classification of discontinuities in the simplest case of functions of a single real variable taking real values.
The oscillation of a function at a point quantifies these discontinuities as follows:

in a removable discontinuity, the distance that the value of the function is off by is the oscillation;
in a jump discontinuity, the size of the jump is the oscillation (assuming that the value at the point lies between these limits from the two sides);
in an essential discontinuity, oscillation measures the failure of a limit to exist.

Classification
For each of the following, consider a real valued function 
 
 
 
  of a real variable 
 
 
 
 , defined in a neighborhood of the point x0 at which 
 
 
 
  is discontinuous.
Removable discontinuity
 1. Consider the function



The point  = 1 is a removable discontinuity. For this kind of discontinuity:
The one-sided limit from the negative direction



and the one-sided limit from the positive direction



at  exist, are finite, and are equal to 
 
 
 
  =  = . In other words, since the two one-sided limits exist and are equal, the limit 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  approaches  exists and is equal to this same value. If the actual value of  is not equal to 
 
 
 
 , then  is called a removable discontinuity. This discontinuity can be 'removed to make 
 
 
 
  continuous at ', or more precisely, the function



is continuous at 
 
 
 
  = .
It is important to realize that the term removable discontinuity is sometimes used by abuse of terminology for cases in which the limits in both directions exist and are equal, while the function is undefined at the point .1 This use is abusive because continuity and discontinuity of a function are concepts defined only for points in the function's domain. Such a point not in the domain is properly named a removable singularity.
Jump discontinuity
 2. Consider the function



Then, the point  = 1 is a jump discontinuity.
In this case, the limit does not exist because the one-sided limits,  and , exist and are finite, but are not equal: since,  ≠ , the limit 
 
 
 
  does not exist. Then,  is called a jump discontinuity or step discontinuity. For this type of discontinuity, the function 
 
 
 
  may have any value at .
Essential discontinuity
 3. Consider the function



Then, the point 
 
 
 
  is an essential discontinuity (sometimes called infinite discontinuity). For it to be an essential discontinuity, it would have sufficed that only one of the two one-sided limits did not exist or were infinite. However, given this example the discontinuity is also an essential discontinuity for the extension of the function into complex variables.
In this case, one or both of the limits 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  does not exist or is infinite. Then, x0 is called an essential discontinuity, or infinite discontinuity. (This is distinct from the term essential singularity which is often used when studying functions of complex variables.)
The set of discontinuities of a function
The set of points at which a function is continuous is always a Gδ set. The set of discontinuities is an Fσ set.
The set of discontinuities of a monotonic function is at most countable. This is Froda's theorem.
Thomae's function is discontinuous at every rational point, but continuous at every irrational point.
The indicator function of the rationals, also known as the Dirichlet function, is discontinuous everywhere.
See also

Removable singularity
Mathematical singularity
Extension by continuity

Notes


References


.

External links


"Discontinuity" by Ed Pegg, Jr., The Wolfram Demonstrations Project, 2007.



"
Category:Mathematical analysis



See, for example, the last sentence in the definition given at Mathwords.1↩




