


Stationary spacetime




Stationary spacetime

In general relativity, specifically in the Einstein field equations, a spacetime is said to be stationary if it admits a Killing vector that is asymptotically timelike.1
In a stationary spacetime, the metric tensor components, 
 
 
 
 , may be chosen so that they are all independent of the time coordinate. The line element of a stationary spacetime has the form 
 
 




where 
 
 
 
  is the time coordinate, 
 
 
 
  are the three spatial coordinates and 
 
 
 
  is the metric tensor of 3-dimensional space. In this coordinate system the Killing vector field 
 
 
 
  has the components 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is a positive scalar representing the norm of the Killing vector, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a 3-vector, called the twist vector, which vanishes when the Killing vector is hypersurface orthogonal. The latter arises as the spatial components of the twist 4-vector 
 
 
 
 (see, for example,2 p. 163) which is orthogonal to the Killing vector 
 
 
 
 , i.e., satisfies 
 
 
 
 . The twist vector measures the extent to which the Killing vector fails to be orthogonal to a family of 3-surfaces. A non-zero twist indicates the presence of rotation in the spacetime geometry.
The coordinate representation described above has an interesting geometrical interpretation.3 The time translation Killing vector generates a one-parameter group of motion 
 
 
 
  in the spacetime 
 
 
 
 . By identifying the spacetime points that lie on a particular trajectory (also called orbit) one gets a 3-dimensional space (the manifold of Killing trajectories) 
 
 
 
 , the quotient space. Each point of 
 
 
 
  represents a trajectory in the spacetime 
 
 
 
 . This identification, called a canonical projection, 
 
 
 
  is a mapping that sends each trajectory in 
 
 
 
  onto a point in 
 
 
 
  and induces a metric 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  via pullback. The quantities 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are all fields on 
 
 
 
  and are consequently independent of time. Thus, the geometry of a stationary spacetime does not change in time. In the special case 
 
 
 
  the spacetime is said to be static. By definition, every static spacetime is stationary, but the converse is not generally true, as the Kerr metric provides a counterexample.
In a stationary spacetime satisfying the vacuum Einstein equations 
 
 
 
  outside the sources, the twist 4-vector 
 
 
 
  is curl-free,



and is therefore locally the gradient of a scalar 
 
 
 
  (called the twist scalar):



Instead of the scalars 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  it is more convenient to use the two Hansen potentials, the mass and angular momentum potentials, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , defined as4






In general relativity the mass potential 
 
 
 
  plays the role of the Newtonian gravitational potential. A nontrivial angular momentum potential 
 
 
 
  arises for rotating sources due to the rotational kinetic energy which, because of mass-energy equivalence, can also act as the source of a gravitational field. The situation is analogous to a static electromagnetic field where one has two sets of potentials, electric and magnetic. In general relativity, rotating sources produce a gravitomagnetic field which has no Newtonian analog.
A stationary vacuum metric is thus expressible in terms of the Hansen potentials 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 ) and the 3-metric 
 
 
 
 . In terms of these quantities the Einstein vacuum field equations can be put in the form5






where 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the Ricci tensor of the spatial metric and 
 
 
 
  the corresponding Ricci scalar. These equations form the starting point for investigating exact stationary vacuum metrics.
See also

Axisymmetric spacetime
Static spacetime

References


"
Category:Lorentzian manifolds



[http://books.google.com/books?id=YA8rxOn9H1sC&pg;;=PA123&lpg;=PA123&dq;=Axisymmetric+space+time+definition&source;=bl&ots;=EZNOQ4S-bR&sig;=FhxfAlI3HBt3U1ZsDErzuc4r_jg&hl;=en&ei;=9Hs8SpyEH9mntget0IAI&sa;=X&oi;=book_result&ct;=result&resnum;=8 Ludvigsen, M., General Relativity: A Geometric Approach, Cambridge University Press, 1999, ISBN 052163976X]
Wald, R.M., (1984). General Relativity, (U. Chicago Press)
Geroch, R., (1971). J. Math. Phys. 12, 918
Hansen, R.O. (1974). J. Math. Phys. 15, 46.





