


Location-scale family




Location-scale family

In probability theory, especially in mathematical statistics, a location-scale family is a family of univariate probability distributions parametrized by a location parameter and a non-negative scale parameter. For any random variable

 
 
  whose probability distribution function belongs to such a family, the distribution function of 
 
 
 
  also belongs to the family (where 
 
 
 
  means "equal in distribution"—that is, "has the same distribution as"). Moreover, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two random variables whose distribution functions are members of the family, and 
 
 
 
 
  has zero mean and unit variance, then 
 
 
 
  can be written as 
 
 
 
  , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the mean and standard deviation of 
 
 
 
 
 .
In other words, a class 
 
 
 
  of probability distributions is a location-scale family if for all cumulative distribution functions

 
  and any real numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the distribution function 
 
 
 
 
  is also a member of 
 
 
 
 .
In decision theory, if all alternative distributions available to a decision-maker are in the same location-scale family, then a two-moment decision model applies, and decision-making can be framed in terms of the means and the variances of the distributions.123
Examples
Often, location-scale families are restricted to those where all members have the same functional form. Well-known families in which the functional form of the distribution is consistent throughout the family include the following:

Normal distribution
Elliptical distribution
Cauchy distribution
Uniform distribution (continuous)
Uniform distribution (discrete)
Logistic distribution
Laplace distribution
Student's t-distribution
Generalized extreme value distribution

Converting a single distribution to a location-scale family
The following shows how to implement a location-scale family in a statistical package or programming environment where only functions for the "standard" version of a distribution are available. It is designed for R but should generalize to any language and library.
The example here is of the Student's t-distribution, which is normally provided in R only in its standard form, with a single degrees of freedom parameter df. The versions below with _ls appended show how to generalize this to encompass an arbitrary location parameter mu and scale parameter sigma.




Probability density function (PDF):

dt_ls(x, df, mu, sigma) =

1/sigma * dt((x - mu)/sigma, df)



Cumulative distribution function (CDF):

pt_ls(x, df, mu, sigma) =

pt((x - mu)/sigma, df)



Quantile function (inverse CDF):

qt_ls(prob, df, mu, sigma) =

qt(prob, df)*sigma + mu



Generate a random variate:

rt_ls(df, mu, sigma) =

rt(df)*sigma + mu



Note that the generalized functions do not have standard deviation sigma since the standard t distribution does not have standard deviation 1.
References
External links

http://www.ds.unifi.it/VL/VL_EN/special/special1.html

"
Category:Parametric statistics Category:Probability distributions Category:Types of probability distributions



↩
↩
↩




