


Empirical distribution function




Empirical distribution function

(Figure)
The blue line shows an empirical distribution function. The black bars represent the samples corresponding to the ecdf and the gray curve is the true cumulative distribution function.

In statistics, the empirical distribution function is the distribution function associated with the empirical measure of the sample. This cdf is a step function that jumps up by 1/n at each of the n data points. The empirical distribution function estimates the underlying cdf of the points in the sample and converges with probability 1 according to the Glivenko–Cantelli theorem. However, it is important to note that the true point probability of a cdf jumps up by 1/(n+1).1
A number of results exist to quantify the rate of convergence of the empirical distribution function to the underlying cdf.
Definition
Let (x1, …, xn) be iid real random variables with the common cdf F(t). Then the empirical distribution function is defined as 23


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator of event A. For a fixed t, the indicator 
 
 
 
  is a Bernoulli random variable with parameter , hence 
 
 
 
  is a binomial random variable with mean nF(t) and variance . This implies that 
 
 
 
  is an unbiased estimator for F(t).
Asymptotic properties
By the strong law of large numbers, the estimator 
 
 
 
  converges to F(t) as  almost surely, for every value of t: 4


 
  thus the estimator 
 
 
 
  is consistent. This expression asserts the pointwise convergence of the empirical distribution function to the true cdf. There is a stronger result, called the Glivenko–Cantelli theorem, which states that the convergence in fact happens uniformly over t: 5


 
  The sup-norm in this expression is called the Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic for testing the goodness-of-fit between the empirical distribution 
 
 
 
  and the assumed true cdf F. Other norm functions may be reasonably used here instead of the sup-norm. For example, the L²-norm gives rise to the Cramér–von Mises statistic.
The asymptotic distribution can be further characterized in several different ways. First, the central limit theorem states that pointwise, 
 
 
 
  has asymptotically normal distribution with the standard 
 
 
 
 
  rate of convergence:6


 
  This result is extended by the Donsker’s theorem, which asserts that the empirical process

 
 , viewed as a function indexed by 
 
 
 
 , converges in distribution in the Skorokhod space

 
  to the mean-zero Gaussian process

 
 
 , where B is the standard Brownian bridge.7 The covariance structure of this Gaussian process is


 
  The uniform rate of convergence in Donsker’s theorem can be quantified by the result known as the Hungarian embedding: 8



Alternatively, the rate of convergence of 
 
 
 
  can also be quantified in terms of the asymptotic behavior of the sup-norm of this expression. Number of results exist in this venue, for example the Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality provides bound on the tail probabilities of 
 
 
 
 :9


 
  In fact, Kolmogorov has shown that if the cdf F is continuous, then the expression 
 
 
 
  converges in distribution to 
 
 
 
 , which has the Kolmogorov distribution that does not depend on the form of F.
Another result, which follows from the law of the iterated logarithm, is that 10


 
  and



See also

Càdlàg functions
Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality
Empirical probability
Empirical process
Frequency (statistics)
Kaplan–Meier estimator for censored processes
Survival function
Distribution fitting

References
Further reading



External links
"
Category:Data analysis Category:Non-parametric statistics Category:Empirical process



↩
↩
PlanetMath↩

↩


↩






