


Fredholm kernel




Fredholm kernel

In mathematics, a Fredholm kernel is a certain type of a kernel on a Banach space, associated with nuclear operators on the Banach space. They are an abstraction of the idea of the Fredholm integral equation and the Fredholm operator, and are one of the objects of study in Fredholm theory. Fredholm kernels are named in honour of Erik Ivar Fredholm. Much of the abstract theory of Fredholm kernels was developed by Alexander Grothendieck and published in 1955.
Definition
Let B be an arbitrary Banach space, and let B* be its dual, that is, the space of bounded linear functionals on B. The tensor product

 
  has a completion under the norm



where the infimum is taken over all finite representations



The completion, under this norm, is often denoted as



and is called the projective topological tensor product. The elements of this space are called Fredholm kernels.
Properties
Every Fredholm kernel has a representation in the form



with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and



Associated with each such kernel is a linear operator



which has the canonical representation



Associated with every Fredholm kernel is a trace, defined as



p-summable kernels
A Fredholm kernel is said to be ''' p-summable''' if



A Fredholm kernel is said to be of order q if q is the infimum of all 
 
 
 
  is said to be a nuclear operator if there exists an 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Such an operator is said to be p-summable and of order q if X is. In general, there may be more than one X associated with such a nuclear operator, and so the trace is not uniquely defined. However, if the order 
 
 
 
 , then there is a unique trace, as given by a theorem of Grothendieck.
Grothendieck's theorem
If 
 
 
 
  is an operator of order 
 
 
 
  then a trace may be defined, with



where 
 
 
 
  are the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, the Fredholm determinant



is an entire function of z. The formula



holds as well. Finally, if 
 
 
 
  is parameterized by some complex-valued parameter w, that is, 
 
 
 
 , and the parameterization is holomorphic on some domain, then



is holomorphic on the same domain.
Examples
An important example is the Banach space of holomorphic functions over a domain $D\subset \mathbb{C}^k$. In this space, every nuclear operator is of order zero, and is thus of trace-class.
Nuclear spaces
The idea of a nuclear operator can be adapted to Fréchet spaces. A nuclear space is a Fréchet space where every bounded map of the space to an arbitrary Banach space is nuclear.
References






"
Category:Fredholm theory Category:Banach spaces Category:Topology of function spaces


