


Milnor map




Milnor map

In mathematics, Milnor maps are named in honor of John Milnor, who introduced them to topology and algebraic geometry in his book Singular Points of Complex Hypersurfaces (Princeton University Press, 1968) and earlier lectures. The most studied Milnor maps are actually fibrations, and the phrase Milnor fibration is more commonly encountered in the mathematical literature. The general definition is as follows.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-constant polynomial function of 
 
 
complex variables

 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , so that the set 
 
 
 
  of all complex 
 
 
 
 -vectors 
 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  is a complex hypersurface of complex dimension

 
  containing the origin of complex 
 
 
 
 -space. (For instance, if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 
  is a complex plane curve containing 
 
 
 
 .) The argument of 
 
 
 
  is the function 
 
 
 
  mapping the complement of 
 
 
 
  in complex 
 
 
 
 
 -space to the unit circle

 
  in C. For any real radius 
 
 
 
 , the restriction of the argument of 
 
 
 
  to the complement of 
 
 
 
  in the real 
 
 
 
 
 -sphere with center at the origin and radius 
 
 
 
  is the Milnor map of 
 
 
 
  at radius 
 
 
.
Milnor's Fibration Theorem states that, for every 
 
 
 
  such that the origin is a singular point of the hypersurface 
 
 
 
 
  (in particular, for every non-constant square-free polynomial

 
  of two variables, the case of plane curves), then for 
 
 
 
  sufficiently small,



is a fibration. Each fiber is a non-compact differentiable manifold of real dimension 
 
 
 
 . Note that the closure of each fiber is a compact manifold with boundary. Here the boundary corresponds to the intersection of 
 
 
 
 
  with the 
 
 
 
 -sphere (of sufficiently small radius) and therefore it is a real manifold of dimension 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, this compact manifold with boundary, which is known as the Milnor fiber (of the isolated singular point of 
 
 
 
  at the origin), is diffeomorphic to the intersection of the closed 
 
 
 
 -ball (bounded by the small 
 
 
 
 
 -sphere) with the (non-singular) hypersurface 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is any sufficiently small non-zero complex number. This small piece of hypersurface is also called a Milnor fiber.
Milnor maps at other radii are not always fibrations, but they still have many interesting properties. For most (but not all) polynomials, the Milnor map at infinity (that is, at any sufficiently large radius) is again a fibration.
The Milnor map of 
 
 
 
  at any radius is a fibration; this construction gives the trefoil knot its structure as a fibered knot.
References



"
Category:Knot theory Category:Singularity theory


