


Shapiro–Wilk test




Shapiro–Wilk test

The Shapiro–Wilk test is a test of normality in frequentist statistics. It was published in 1965 by Samuel Sanford Shapiro and Martin Wilk.1
Theory
The Shapiro–Wilk test utilizes the null hypothesis principle to check whether a sample x1, ..., xn came from a normally distributed population. The test statistic is:



where



 
  (with parentheses enclosing the subscript index i) is the ith order statistic, i.e., the ith-smallest number in the sample;


 
  is the sample mean;
the constants 
 
 
 
 
  are given by2










where
 










and 
 
 
 
  are the expected values of the order statistics of independent and identically distributed random variables sampled from the standard normal distribution, and 
 
 
 
  is the covariance matrix of those order statistics. The user may reject the null hypothesis if 
 
 
 
 
  is below a predetermined threshold.
 

Interpretation
The null-hypothesis of this test is that the population is normally distributed. Thus if the p-value is less than the chosen alpha level, then the null hypothesis is rejected and there is evidence that the data tested are not from a normally distributed population. In other words, the data are not normal. On the contrary, if the p-value is greater than the chosen alpha level, then the null hypothesis that the data came from a normally distributed population cannot be rejected. E.g. for an alpha level of 0.05, a data set with a p-value of 0.02 rejects the null hypothesis that the data are from a normally distributed population.3 However, since the test is biased by sample size,4 the test may be statistically significant from a normal distribution in any large samples. Thus a Q–Q plot is required for verification in addition to the test.
Power analysis
Empirical testing5 has found that Shapiro–Wilk has the best power for a given significance, followed closely by Anderson–Darling when comparing the Shapiro–Wilk, Kolmogorov–Smirnov, Lilliefors, and Anderson–Darling tests.
Approximation
Royston proposed an alternative method of calculating the coefficients vector by providing an algorithm for calculating values, which extended the sample size to 2000.6 This technique is used in several software packages including R,7 Stata,89 SPSS and SAS.10
See also

Anderson–Darling test
Cramér–von Mises criterion
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test
Normal probability plot
Ryan–Joiner test
Watson test
Lilliefors test

References


External links

Samuel Sanford Shapiro
Algorithm AS R94 (Shapiro Wilk) FORTRAN code
Exploratory analysis using the Shapiro–Wilk normality test in R

"
Category:Normality tests




 p. 593↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Shapiro–Wilk and Shapiro–Francia tests for normality↩
↩




