


Anomalous magnetic dipole moment




Anomalous magnetic dipole moment

In quantum electrodynamics, the anomalous magnetic moment of a particle is a contribution of effects of quantum mechanics, expressed by Feynman diagrams with loops, to the magnetic moment of that particle. (The magnetic moment, also called magnetic dipole moment, is a measure of the strength of a magnetic source.)
The "Dirac" magnetic moment, corresponding to tree-level Feynman diagrams (which can be thought of as the classical result), can be calculated from the Dirac equation. It is usually expressed in terms of the g-factor; the Dirac equation predicts g = 2. For particles such as the electron, this classical result differs from the observed value by a small fraction of a percent. The difference is the anomalous magnetic moment, denoted a and defined as



Electron
(Figure)
One-loop correction to the fermion's magnetic dipole moment.

The one-loop contribution to the anomalous magnetic moment—corresponding to the first and largest quantum mechanical correction—of the electron is found by calculating the vertex function shown in the diagram on the right. The calculation is relatively straightforward1 and the one-loop result is:



where α is the fine structure constant. This result was first found by Julian Schwinger in 19482 and is engraved on his tombstone. As of 2009, the coefficients of the QED formula for the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron have been calculated through order α4,3 and are known analytically up to α3.4 The QED prediction agrees with the experimentally measured value to more than 10 significant figures, making the magnetic moment of the electron the most accurately verified prediction in the history of physics. (See precision tests of QED for details.)
The current experimental value and uncertainty is:5


 
  According to this value, a is known to an accuracy of around 1 part in 1 billion (109). This required measuring g to an accuracy of around 1 part in 1 trillion (1012).
Muon
(Figure)
One-loop MSSM corrections to the muon g-2 involving a neutralino and a smuon, and a chargino and a muon sneutrino respectively.

The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon is calculated in a similar way; its measurement provides a precision test of the Standard Model. The prediction for the value of the muon anomalous magnetic moment includes three parts:6


 
  The first two components represent the photon and lepton loops, and the W boson and Z boson loops, respectively, and can be calculated precisely from first principles. The third term represents hadron loops, and cannot be calculated accurately from theory alone. It is estimated from experimental measurements of the ratio of hadronic to muonic cross sections (R) in electron–antielectron (e−e+) collisions. As of November 2006, the measurement disagrees with the Standard Model by 3.4 standard deviations,7 suggesting physics beyond the Standard Model may be having an effect (or that the theoretical/experimental errors are not completely under control). This is one of the long-standing discrepancies between the Standard Model and experiment.
The E821 experiment at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) studied the precession of muon and antimuon in a constant external magnetic field as they circulated in a confining storage ring.8 The E821 Experiment reported the following average value (from the 2013 review by Particle Data Group)


 
  where the first error is statistical and the second one is systematic.9
A new experiment at Fermilab called "Muon g−2" using the E821 magnet will improve the accuracy of this value.10 Data taking will begin in 2016. A measurement with a precision 4 times better is expected after years of running.
Composite particles
Composite particles often have a huge anomalous magnetic moment. This is true for the proton, which is made up of charged quarks, and the neutron, which has a magnetic moment even though it is electrically neutral.
Notes
Bibliography



See also

Anomalous electric dipole moment
G-factor

External links

Overview of the g-2 experiment


"
Category:Quantum field theory Category:Quantum electrodynamics











Hoecker, A., Marciano, W. J. (2013), "The Muon Anomalous Magnetic Moment", in 





