


Watt's curve




Watt's curve

 In mathematics, Watt's curve is a tricircular plane algebraic curve of degree six. It is generated by two circles of radius b with centers distance 2a apart (taken to be at (±a, 0). A line segment of length 2c attaches to a point on each of the circles, and the midpoint of the line segment traces out the Watt curve as the circles rotate. It arose in connection with James Watt's pioneering work on the steam engine.
The equation of the curve can be given in polar coordinates as



Derivation
Polar coordinates
The polar equation for the curve can be derived as follows:1 Working in the complex plane, let the centers of the circles be at a and −a, and the connecting segment have endpoints at −a+bei λ and a+bei ρ. Let the angle of inclination of the segment be ψ with its midpoint at rei θ. Then the endpoints are also given by rei θ ± cei ψ. Setting expressions for the same points equal to each other gives





 
  Add these and divide by two to get


 
  Comparing radii and arguments gives


 
  Similarly, subtracting the first two equations and dividing by 2 gives


 
  Write


 
  Then












Cartesian coordinates
Expanding the polar equation gives














 
  Letting d 2=a2+b2–c2 simplifies this to



Form of the curve
The construction requires a quadrilateral with sides 2a, b, 2c, b. Any side must be less than the sum of the remaining sides, so the curve is empty (at least in the real plane) unless a2+b2 2 then the curve has the form of a figure eight. If d is 0 then the curve is a figure eight with two branches of the curve having a common horizontal tangent at the origin. If 0b then the points ±d are still solutions to the Cartesian equation of the curve, but the curve does not cross these points and they are acnodes. The curve again has a figure eight shape though the shape is distorted if d is close to b.
Given b>a+c, the shape of the curve is determined by the relative sizes of a and c. If ac then the curve does not cross the x-axis at all and consists of two flattened ovals.2
Watt's linkage
  When the curve crosses the origin, the origin is a point of inflection and therefore has contact of order 3 with a tangent. However, if a2=b2+2  then tangent has contact of order 5 with the tangent, in other words the curve is a close approximation of a straight line. This is the basis for Watt's linkage.
References



"Courbe de Watt" at Encyclopédie des Formes Mathématiques Remarquables (in French)



See also

Four-bar linkage
Watt's linkage

"
Category:Sextic curves



See Catalan and Rutter
Encyclopédie des Formes Mathématiques Remarquables page for section.




