


Trochoid




Trochoid

thumb|290px|right|A cycloid (a common trochoid) generated by a rolling circle
A trochoid (from the Greek word for wheel, "trochos") is the curve described by a fixed point on a circle as it rolls along a straight line.1 The cycloid is a notable member of the trochoid family. The word "trochoid" was coined by Gilles de Roberval.
Basic description
As a circle of radius a rolls without slipping along a line L, the center C moves parallel to L, and every other point P in the rotating plane rigidly attached to the circle traces the curve called the trochoid. Let CP = b. Parametric equations of the trochoid for which L is the x-axis are





 
  where θ is the variable angle through which the circle rolls.
Curtate, common, prolate
 If P lies inside the circle (b a), the trochoid is described as being curtate ("contracted"), common, or prolate ("extended"), respectively.2 A curtate trochoid is traced by a pedal when a bicycle is pedaled along a straight line. A prolate trochoid is traced by the tip of a paddle when a boat is driven with constant velocity by paddle wheels; this curve contains loops. A common trochoid, also called a cycloid, has cusps at the points where P touches the L.
General description
A more general approach would define a trochoid as the locus of a point 
 
 
orbiting at a constant rate around an axis located at 
 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  which axis is being translated in the x-y-plane at a constant rate in either a straight line,


 
  or a circular path (another orbit) around 
 
 
 
  (the hypotrochoid/epitrochoid case),



The ratio of the rates of motion and whether the moving axis translates in a straight or circular path determines the shape of the trochoid. In the case of a straight path, one full rotation coincides with one period of a periodic (repeating) locus. In the case of a circular path for the moving axis, the locus is periodic only if the ratio of these angular motions, 
 
 
 
 , is a rational number, say 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  & 
 
 
 
  are coprime, in which case, one period consists of 
 
 
 
  orbits around the moving axis and 
 
 
 
  orbits of the moving axis around the point 
 
 
 
 . The special cases of the epicycloid and hypocycloid, generated by tracing the locus of a point on the perimeter of a circle of radius 
 
 
 
  while it is rolled on the perimeter of a stationary circle of radius 
 
 
 
 , have the following properties:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the radius of the orbit of the moving axis. The number of cusps given above also hold true for any epitrochoid and hypotrochoid, with "cusps" replaced by either "radial maxima" or "radial minima."
See also

List of periodic functions
Epitrochoid
Hypotrochoid
Cycloid
Spirograph
Trochoidal wave

References
External links

Online experiments with the Trochoid using JSXGraph

"
Category:Curves









