


Dielectric complex reluctance




Dielectric complex reluctance

Dielectric complex reluctance is a scalar measurement of a passive dielectric circuit (or element within that circuit) dependent on sinusoidal voltage and sinusoidal electric induction flux, and this is determined by deriving the ratio of their complex effective amplitudes. The units of dielectric complex reluctance are 
 
 
 
  (inverse Farads - see Daraf) [Ref. 1-3].



As seen above, dielectric complex reluctance is a phasor represented as uppercase Z epsilon where:


 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  represent the voltage (complex effective amplitude)


 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent the electric induction flux (complex effective amplitude)


 
 , lowercase z epsilon, is the real part of dielectric reluctance
The "lossless" dielectric reluctance, lowercase z epsilon, is equal to the absolute value (modulus) of the dielectric complex reluctance. The argument distinguishing the "lossy" dielectric complex reluctance from the "lossless" dielectric reluctance is equal to the natural number 
 
 
 
  raised to a power equal to:



Where:



 
  is the imaginary number


 
  is the phase of voltage


 
  is the phase of electric induction flux


 
  is the phase difference

The "lossy" dielectric complex reluctance represents a dielectric circuit element's resistance to not only electric induction flux but also to changes in electric induction flux. When applied to harmonic regimes, this formality is similar to Ohm's Law in ideal AC circuits. In dielectric circuits, a dielectric material has a dielectric complex reluctance equal to:



Where:



 
  is the length of the circuit element


 
  is the cross-section of the circuit element


 
  is the complex dielectric permeability

See also

Dielectric
Dielectric reluctance — Special definition of dielectric reluctance that does not account for energy loss

References

Hippel A. R. Dielectrics and Waves. – N.Y.: JOHN WILEY, 1954.
Popov V. P. The Principles of Theory of Circuits. – M.: Higher School, 1985, 496 p. (In Russian).
Küpfmüller K. Einführung in die theoretische Elektrotechnik, Springer-Verlag, 1959.

"
Category:Electric and magnetic fields in matter


