


Beck's theorem




Beck's theorem

In the context of discrete geometry, Beck's theorem may refer to several different results, two of which are given below. Both appeared, alongside several other important theorems, in a well-known paper by József Beck.1 The two results described below primarily concern lower bounds on the number of lines determined by a set of points in the plane. (Any line containing at least two points of point set is said to be determined by that point set.)
Erdős–Beck theorem
The Erdős–Beck theorem is a variation of a classical result by L.M. Kelly and W.O. J. Moser2 involving configurations of n points of which at most n−k are collinear, for some 0
Elekes and Csaba Toth noted that the Erdős–Beck theorem does not easily extend to higher dimensions.3 Take for example a set of 2n points in R3 all lying on two skew lines. Assume that these two lines are each incident to n points. Such a configuration of points spans only 2n planes. Thus, a trivial extension to the hypothesis for point sets in Rd is not sufficient to obtain the desired result.
This result was first conjectured by Erdős, and proven by Beck. (See Theorem 5.2 in.4)
Statement of the theorem
Let S be a set of n points in the plane. If no more than n − k points lie on any line for some 0 ≤ k Beck's Theorem can be derived by letting k=n(1-1/C) and applying the Erdős–Beck theorem.
Statement of the theorem
The theorem asserts the existence of positive constants C, K such that that given any n points in the plane, at least one of the following statements is true:

There is a line which contains at least n/C of the points.
There exist at least 
 
 
 
  lines, each of which contains at least two of the points.

In Beck's original argument, C is 100 and K is an unspecified constant; it is not known what the optimal values of C and K are.
Proof
A proof of Beck's theorem can be given as follows. Consider a set P of n points in the plane. Let j be a positive integer. Let us say that a pair of points A, B in the set P is j-connected if the line connecting A and B contains between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  points of P (including A and B).
From the Szemerédi–Trotter theorem, the number of such lines is 
 
 
 
 , as follows: Consider the set P of n points, and the set L of all those lines spanned by pairs of points of P that contain at least 
 
 
 
  points of P. Note that 
 
 
 
 , since no two points can lie on two distinct lines. Now using Szemerédi–Trotter theorem, it follows that the number of incidences between P and L is at most 
 
 
 
 . All the lines connecting j-connected points also lie in L, and each contributes at least 
 
 
 
  incidences. Therefore the total number of such lines is 
 
 
 
 .
Since each such line connects together 
 
 
 
  pairs of points, we thus see that at most 
 
 
 
  pairs of points can be j-connected.
Now, let C be a large constant. By summing the geometric series, we see that the number of pairs of points which are j-connected for some j satisfying 
 
 
 
  is at most 
 
 
 
 .
On the other hand, the total number of pairs is 
 
 
 
 . Thus if we choose C to be large enough, we can find at least 
 
 
 
  pairs (for instance) which are not j-connected for any 
 
 
 
 . The lines that connect these pairs either pass through fewer than 2C points, or pass through more than n/C points. If the latter case holds for even one of these pairs, then we have the first conclusion of Beck's theorem. Thus we may assume that all of the 
 
 
 
  pairs are connected by lines which pass through fewer than 2C points. But each such line can connect at most 
 
 
 
  pairs of points. Thus there must be at least 
 
 
 
  lines connecting at least two points, and the claim follows by taking 
 
 
 
 .
References


"
Category:Euclidean plane geometry Category:Theorems in discrete geometry Category:Articles containing proofs




↩
↩
↩




