


Magnetic complex reluctance




Magnetic complex reluctance

Magnetic complex reluctance (SI Unit: H−1) is a measurement of a passive magnetic circuit (or element within that circuit) dependent on sinusoidal magnetomotive force (SI Unit: At·Wb−1) and sinusoidal magnetic flux (SI Unit: T·m2), and this is determined by deriving the ratio of their complex effective amplitudes.[Ref. 1-3]



As seen above, magnetic complex reluctance is a phasor represented as uppercase Z mu where:


 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent the magnetomotive force (complex effective amplitude)


 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent the magnetic flux (complex effective amplitude)


 
 , lowercase z mu, is the real part of magnetic complex reluctance
The "lossless" magnetic reluctance, lowercase z mu, is equal to the absolute value (modulus) of the magnetic complex reluctance. The argument distinguishing the "lossy" magnetic complex reluctance from the "lossless" magnetic reluctance is equal to the natural number 
 
 
 
  raised to a power equal to:



Where:



 
 
  is the imaginary number


 
  is the phase of the magnetomotive force


 
  is the phase of the magnetic flux


 
  is the phase difference

The "lossy" magnetic complex reluctance represents a magnetic circuit element's resistance to not only magnetic flux but also to changes in magnetic flux. When applied to harmonic regimes, this formality is similar to Ohm's Law in ideal AC circuits. In magnetic circuits, magnetic complex reluctance is equal to:



Where:



 
 
  is the length of the circuit element


 
  is the cross-section of the circuit element


 
  is the complex magnetic permeability

References

Bull B. K. The Principles of Theory and Calculation of the Magnetic Circuits. – M.-L.: Energy, 1964, 464 p. (In Russian).
Arkadiew W. Eine Theorie des elektromagnetischen Feldes in den ferromagnetischen Metallen. – Phys. Zs., H. 14, No 19, 1913, S. 928-934.
Küpfmüller K. Einführung in die theoretische Elektrotechnik, Springer-Verlag, 1959.

"
Category:Magnetic circuits Category:Electrical analogies


