


Extension and contraction of ideals




Extension and contraction of ideals

In commutative algebra, the extension and contraction of ideals are operations performed on sets of ideals.
Extension of an ideal
Let A and B be two commutative rings with unity, and let f : A → B be a (unital) ring homomorphism. If 
 
 
 
  is an ideal in A, then 
 
 
 
  need not be an ideal in B (e.g. take f to be the inclusion of the ring of integers Z into the field of rationals Q). The extension

 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  in B is defined to be the ideal in B generated by 
 
 
 
 . Explicitly,



Contraction of an ideal
If 
 
 
 
  is an ideal of B, then 
 
 
 
 
  is always an ideal of A, called the contraction

 
  of 
 
 
 
  to A.
Properties
Assuming f : A → B is a unital ring homomorphism, 
 
 
 
  is an ideal in A, 
 
 
 
  is an ideal in B, then:



 
 
  is prime in B


 
  is prime in A.













It is false, in general, that 
 
 
 
 
  being prime (or maximal) in A implies that 
 
 
 
  is prime (or maximal) in B. Many classic examples of this stem from algebraic number theory. For example, embedding

 
 . In 
 
 
 
 , the element 2 factors as 
 
 
 
  where (one can show) neither of 
 
 
 
 
  are units in B. So 
 
 
 
  is not prime in B (and therefore not maximal, as well). Indeed, 
 
 
 
  shows that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and therefore 
 
 
 
 
 .


On the other hand, if f is surjective and 
 
 
 
  then:



 
  and 
 
 
 
 .


Extension of prime ideals is not prime in general, but if f is surjective 
 
 
 
  is a prime ideal in A


 
  is a prime ideal in B.




 
  is a maximal ideal in A


 
  is a maximal ideal in B.

Extension of prime ideals in number theory
Let K be a field extension of L, and let B and A be the rings of integers of K and L, respectively. Then B is an integral extension of A, and we let f be the inclusion map from A to B. The behaviour of a prime ideal

 
 
  of A under extension is one of the central problems of algebraic number theory.
See also

Splitting of prime ideals in Galois extensions

References

Atiyah, M. F. and Macdonald, I. G., Introduction to Commutative Algebra, Perseus Books, 1969, ISBN 0-201-00361-9

"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Algebraic number theory


