


Rational mapping




Rational mapping

In mathematics, in particular the subfield of algebraic geometry, a rational map is a kind of partial function between algebraic varieties. This article uses the convention that varieties are irreducible.
Definition
Formal definition
Formally, a rational map

 
  between two varieties is an equivalence class of pairs 
 
 
 
  in which 
 
 
 
  is a morphism of varieties from an open set

 
  to 
 
 
 
 , and two such pairs 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are considered equivalent if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  coincide on the intersection 
 
 
 
  (this is, in particular, vacuously true if the intersection is empty, but since 
 
 
 
  is assumed irreducible, this is impossible). The proof that this defines an equivalence relation relies on the following lemma:

If two morphisms of varieties are equal on some non-empty open set, then they are equal.



 
  is said to be birational if there exists a rational map 
 
 
 
  which is its inverse, where the composition is taken in the above sense.
The importance of rational maps to algebraic geometry is in the connection between such maps and maps between the function fields of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Even a cursory examination of the definitions reveals a similarity between that of rational map and that of rational function; in fact, a rational function is just a rational map whose range is the projective line. Composition of functions then allows us to "pull back" rational functions along a rational map, so that a single rational map 
 
 
 
  induces a homomorphism of fields 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the following theorem is central: the functor from the category of projective varieties with dominant rational maps (over a fixed base field, for example 
 
 
 
 ) to the category of finitely generated field extensions of the base field with reverse inclusion of extensions as morphisms, which associates each variety to its function field and each map to the associated map of function fields, is an equivalence of categories.
An example of birational equivalence
Two varieties are said to be birationally equivalent if there exists a birational map between them; this theorem states that birational equivalence of varieties is identical to isomorphism of their function fields as extensions of the base field. This is somewhat more liberal than the notion of isomorphism of varieties (which requires a globally defined morphism to witness the isomorphism, not merely a rational map), in that there exist varieties which are birational but not isomorphic.
The usual example is that 
 
 
 
  is birational to the variety 
 
 
 
  contained in 
 
 
 
  consisting of the set of projective points 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , but not isomorphic. Indeed, any two lines in 
 
 
 
  intersect, but the lines in 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  cannot intersect since their intersection would have all coordinates zero. To compute the function field of 
 
 
 
  we pass to an affine subset (which does not change the field, a manifestation of the fact that a rational map depends only on its behavior in any open subset of its domain) in which 
 
 
 
 ; in projective space this means we may take 
 
 
 
  and therefore identify this subset with the affine 
 
 
 
 -plane. There, the coordinate ring of 
 
 
 
  is


 
  via the map 
 
 
 
 . And the field of fractions of the latter is just 
 
 
 
 , isomorphic to that of 
 
 
 
 . Note that at no time did we actually produce a rational map, though tracing through the proof of the theorem it is possible to do so.
See also

Birational geometry

References


, section I.4.

"
Category:Algebraic geometry


