


Carry-skip adder




Carry-skip adder

A carry-skip adder (also known as a carry-bypass adder) is an adder implementation that improves on the delay of a ripple-carry adder with little effort compared to other adders. The improvement of the worst-case delay is achieved by using several carry-skip adders to form a block-carry-skip adder.
Single carry-skip adder
The worst case for a carry-ripple-adder occurs, when the propagate-condition1 is true for each digit pair 
 
 
 
 . Then the carry-in ripples through the 
 
 
 
 -bit adder and appears as the carry-out after 
 
 
 
 . 
For each operand input bit pair 
 
 
 
 
  the propagate-conditions 
 
 
 
  are determined using an XOR-Gate (see ). When all propagate-conditions are true, then the carry-in bit 
 
 
 
  determines the carry-out bit.
The n-bit-carry-skip adder consists of a n-bit-carry-ripple-chain, a n-input AND-gate and one multiplexer. Each propagate bit 
 
 
 
 , that is provided by the carry-ripple-chain is connected to the n-input AND-gate. The resulting bit is used as the select bit of a multiplexer that switches either the last carry-bit 
 
 
 
  or the carry-in 
 
 
 
 
  to the carry-out signal 
 
 
 
 .





This greatly reduces the latency of the adder through its critical path, since the carry bit for each block can now "skip" over blocks with a group propagate signal set to logic 1 (as opposed to a long ripple-carry chain, which would require the carry to ripple through each bit in the adder). The number of inputs of the AND-gate is equal to the width of the adder. For a large width, this becomes impractical and leads to additional delays, because the AND-gate has to be built as a tree. A good width is achieved, when the sum-logic has the same depth like the n-input AND-gate and the multiplexer.
(Figure)
4 bit carry-skip adder.

Performance
The critical path of a carry-skip-adder begins at the first full-adder, passes through all adders and ends at the sum-bit 
 
 
 
 . Carry-skip-adders are chained (see block-carry-skip-adders) to reduce the overall critical path, since a single 
 
 
 
 -bit carry-skip-adder has no real speed benefit compared to a 
 
 
 
 
 -bit carry-ripple-adder.


 
  The skip-logic consists of a 
 
 
 
 -input AND-gate and one multiplexer.


 
  As the propagate signals are computed in parallel and are early available, the critical path for the skip logic in a carry-skip adder consists only of the delay imposed by the multiplexer (conditional skip).


 
 .
Block-carry-skip adders
upright=4.0|thumb|center|16-bit fixed-block-carry-skip adder with a block size of 4 bit. Block-carry-skip adders are composed of a number of carry-skip adders. There are two types of block-carry-skip adders The two operands 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are split in 
 
 
 
  blocks of 
 
 
 
  bits.

Why are block-carry-skip-adders used?
Should the block-size be constant or variable?
Fixed block width vs. variable block width

Fixed size block-carry-skip adders
Fixed size block-carry-skip adders split the 
 
 
 
  bit of the input bits into blocks of 
 
 
 
 
  bit each, resulting in 
 
 
 
  blocks. The critical path consists of the ripple path and the skip element of the first block, the skip paths that are enclosed between the first and the last block, and finally the ripple-path of the last block.


 
  The optimal block size for a given adder width n is derived by equating to 0








 
  Only positive block sizes are realizable



Variable size block-carry-skip adders
Multilevel carry-skip adders
By using additional skip-blocks in an additional layer, the block-propagate signals 
 
 
 
  are further summarized and used to perform larger skips:



Implementation overview
Breaking this down into more specific terms, in order to build a 4-bit carry-bypass adder, 6 full adders would be needed. The input buses would be a 4-bit A and a 4-bit B, with a carry-in (CIN) signal. The output would be a 4-bit bus X and a carry-out signal (COUT).
The first two full adders would add the first two bits together. The carry-out signal from the second full adder (
 
 
 
 )would drive the select signal for three 2 to 1 multiplexers. The second set of 2 full adders would add the last two bits assuming 
 
 
 
 
  is a logical 0. And the final set of full adders would assume that 
 
 
 
  is a logical 1.
The multiplexers then control which output signal is used for COUT, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
References


External links

Explanation for critical path of the variable-skip adder

;
"
Category:Adders (electronics)








