


Bézout matrix




Bézout matrix

In mathematics, a Bézout matrix (or Bézoutian or Bezoutiant) is a special square matrix associated with two polynomials, introduced by  and  and named after Étienne Bézout. Such matrices are sometimes used to test the stability of a given polynomial.
Definition
Let f(z) and g(z) be two complex polynomials of degree at most n with coefficients (note that any coefficient could be zero):



The Bézout matrix of order n associated with the polynomials f and g is


 
  where the coefficients result from the identity



It is in 
 
 
 
  and the entries of that matrix are such that if we note for each i,j=1,...,n, 
 
 
 
 , then:



To each Bézout matrix, one can associate the following bilinear form, called the Bézoutian:



Examples

For n=3, we have for any polynomials f and g of degree (at most) 3:





Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be two polynomials. Then:



 
  The last row and column are all zero as f and g have degree strictly less than n (equal 4). The other zero entries are because for each i=0,...,n, either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is zero.
Properties



 
  is symmetric (as a matrix);


 
 ;


 
 ;


 
  is bilinear in (f,g);


 
  is in 
 
 
 
  if f and g have real coefficients;


 
  is nonsingular with 
 
 
 
  if and only if f and g have no common roots.


 
  with 
 
 
 
  has determinant which is the resultant of f and g.

Applications
An important application of Bézout matrices can be found in control theory. To see this, let f(z) be a complex polynomial of degree n and denote by q and p the real polynomials such that f(iy)=q(y)+ip(y) (where y is real). We also note r for the rank and σ for the signature of 
 
 
 
 . Then, we have the following statements:

f(z) has n-r roots in common with its conjugate;
the left r roots of f(z) are located in such a way that:
 
(r+σ)/2 of them lie in the open left half-plane, and
(r-σ)/2 lie in the open right half-plane;

f is Hurwitz stable if and only if

 
  is positive definite.

The third statement gives a necessary and sufficient condition concerning stability. Besides, the first statement exhibits some similarities with a result concerning Sylvester matrices while the second one can be related to Routh-Hurwitz theorem.
References







"
Category:Polynomials Category:Matrices


