


Autoepistemic logic




Autoepistemic logic

The autoepistemic logic is a formal logic for the representation and reasoning of knowledge about knowledge. While propositional logic can only express facts, autoepistemic logic can express knowledge and lack of knowledge about facts.
The stable model semantics, which is used to give a semantics to logic programming with negation as failure, can be seen as a simplified form of autoepistemic logic.
Syntax
The syntax of autoepistemic logic extends that of propositional logic by a modal operator 
 
 
 
  indicating knowledge: if 
 
 
 
  is a formula, 
 
 
 
  indicates that 
 
 
 
  is known. As a result, 
 
 
 
  indicates that 
 
 
 
  is known and 
 
 
 
  indicates that 
 
 
 
  is not known.
This syntax is used for allowing reasoning based on knowledge of facts. For example, 
 
 
 
  means that 
 
 
 
  is assumed false if it is not known to be true. This is a form of negation as failure.
Semantics
The semantics of autoepistemic logic is based on the expansions of a theory, which have a role similar to models in propositional logic. While a propositional model specifies which axioms are true or false, an expansion specifies which formulae 
 
 
 
  are true and which ones are false. In particular, the expansions of an autoepistemic formula 
 
 
 
  makes this distinction for every subformula 
 
 
 
  contained in 
 
 
 
 . This distinction allows 
 
 
 
  to be treated as a propositional formula, as all its subformulae containing 
 
 
 
  are either true or false. In particular, checking whether 
 
 
entails

 
  in this condition can be done using the rules of the propositional calculus. In order for an initial assumption to be an expansion, it must be that a subformula 
 
 
 
  is entailed if and only if 
 
 
 
  has been initially assumed true.
For example, in the formula 
 
 
 
 , there is only a single “boxed subformula”, which is 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, there are only two candidate expansions, assuming it true or false, respectively. The check for them being actual expansions is as follows.


 
  is false : with this assumption, 
 
 
 
  becomes tautological, as 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is assumed true; therefore, 
 
 
 
  is not entailed. This result confirms the assumption implicit in 
 
 
 
  being false, that is, that 
 
 
 
  is not currently known. Therefore, the assumption that 
 
 
 
  is false is an expansion.


 
  is true : together with this assumption, 
 
 
 
  entails 
 
 
 
 ; therefore, the initial assumption that is implicit in 
 
 
 
  being true, i.e., that 
 
 
 
  is known to be true, is satisfied. As a result, this is another expansion.
The formula 
 
 
 
  has therefore two expansions, one in which 
 
 
 
  is not known and one in which 
 
 
 
  is known. The second one has been regarded as unintuitive, as the initial assumption that 
 
 
 
  is true is the only reason why 
 
 
 
  is true, which confirms the assumption. In other words, this is a self-supporting assumption. A logic allowing such a self-support of beliefs is called not strongly grounded to differentiate them from strongly grounded logics, in which self-support is not possible. Strongly grounded variants of autoepistemic logic exist.
Generalizations
In uncertain inference, the known/unknown duality of truth values is replaced by a degree of certainty of a fact or deduction; certainty may vary from 0 (completely uncertain/unknown) to 1 (certain/known). In probabilistic logic networks, truth values are also given a probabilistic interpretation (i.e. truth values may be uncertain, and, even if almost certain, they may still be "probably" true (or false).)
See also

Non-monotonic logic
Modal logic

References







"
Category:Logic programming Category:Modal logic Category:Knowledge


