


Trisectrix of Maclaurin




Trisectrix of Maclaurin

 In geometry, the trisectrix of Maclaurin is a cubic plane curve notable for its trisectrix property, meaning it can be used to trisect an angle. It can be defined as locus of the point of intersection of two lines, each rotating at a uniform rate about separate points, so that the ratio of the rates of rotation is 1:3 and the lines initially coincide with the line between the two points. A generalization of this construction is called a sectrix of Maclaurin. The curve is named after Colin Maclaurin who investigated the curve in 1742.
Equations
Let two lines rotate about the points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  so that when the line rotating about 
 
 
 
  has angle 
 
 
 
  with the x axis, the rotating about 
 
 
 
  has angle 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the point of intersection, then the angle formed by the lines at 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . By the law of sines,


 
  so the equation in polar coordinates is (up to translation and rotation)


 
 . The curve is therefore a member of the Conchoid of de Sluze family.
In Cartesian coordinates the equation of this curve is


 
 .
If the origin is moved to (a, 0) then a derivation similar to that given above shows that the equation of the curve in polar coordinates becomes


 
  making it an example of an epispiral.
The trisection property
Given an angle 
 
 
 
 , draw a ray from 
 
 
 
  whose angle with the 
 
 
 
 -axis is 
 
 
 
 . Draw a ray from the origin to the point where the first ray intersects the curve. Then, by the construction of the curve, the angle between the second ray and the 
 
 
 
 -axis is 
 
 

Notable points and features
The curve has an x-intercept at 
 
 
 
  and a double point at the origin. The vertical line 
 
 
 
  is an asymptote. The curve intersects the line x = a, or the point corresponding to the trisection of a right angle, at 
 
 
 
 . As a nodal cubic, it is of genus zero.
Relationship to other curves
The trisectrix of Maclaurin can be defined from conic sections in three ways. Specifically:

It is the inverse with respect to the unit circle of the hyperbola





 
 .
 




It is cissoid of the circle








and the line 
 
 
 
  relative to the origin.
 


It is the pedal with respect to the origin of the parabola





 
 .
 



In addition:

The inverse with respect to the point 
 
 
 
  is the Limaçon trisectrix.


The trisectrix of Maclaurin is related to the Folium of Descartes by affine transformation.

References



"Trisectrix of Maclaurin" at MacTutor's Famous Curves Index
"Trisectrix of MacLaurin" on 2dcurves.com
"Trisectrix of Maclaurin" at Visual Dictionary Of Special Plane Curves
"Trisectrice de Maclaurin" at Encyclopédie des Formes Mathématiques Remarquables

External links

Loy, Jim "Trisection of an Angle", Part VI

"
Category:Curves


