


Schwartz–Zippel lemma




Schwartz–Zippel lemma

In mathematics, the Schwartz–Zippel lemma is a tool commonly used in probabilistic polynomial identity testing, i.e. in the problem of determining whether a given multivariate polynomial is the 0-polynomial (or identically equal to 0). It was discovered independently by Jack Schwartz,1 Richard Zippel,2 and Richard DeMillo and Richard J. Lipton.3 The finite field version of this bound was proved by Øystein Ore in 1922.4
Statement of the lemma
The input to the problem is an n-variable polynomial over a field F. It can occur in the following forms:

Algebraic form:

For example, is



To solve this, we can multiply it out and check that all the coefficients are 0. However, this takes exponential time. In general, a polynomial can be algebraically represented by an arithmetic formula or circuit.

Determinant of a matrix with polynomial entries: Let




be the determinant of the polynomial matrix.
Currently, there is no known sub-exponential time algorithm that can solve this problem deterministically. However, there are randomized polynomial algorithms for testing polynomial identities. Their analysis usually requires a bound on the probability that a non-zero polynomial will have roots at randomly selected test points. The Schwartz–Zippel lemma provides this as follows:
Theorem 1 (Schwartz, Zippel). Let



be a non-zero polynomial of total degree d ≥ 0 over a field, F. Let S be a finite subset of F and let r1, r2, ..., rn be selected at random independently and uniformly from S. Then



In the single variable case, this follows directly from the fact that a polynomial of degree d can have no more than d roots. It seems logical, then, to think that a similar statement would hold for multivariable polynomials. This is, in fact, the case.
Proof. The proof is by mathematical induction on n. For n = 1, as was mentioned before, P can have at most d roots. This gives us the base case. Now, assume that the theorem holds for all polynomials in n − 1 variables. We can then consider P to be a polynomial in x1 by writing it as



Since 
 
 
 
  is not identically 0, there is some 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is not identically 0. Take the largest such 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 , since the degree of 
 
 
 
  is at most d.
Now we randomly pick 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 . By the induction hypothesis, 
 
 
 
  If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is of degree 
 
 
 
  so








If we denote the event 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , the event 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , and the complement of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , we have



































Applications
The importance of the Schwartz–Zippel Theorem and Testing Polynomial Identities follows from algorithms which are obtained to problems that can be reduced to the problem of polynomial identity testing.
Comparison of two polynomials
Given a pair of polynomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , is




 
 ?
 



This problem can be solved by reducing it to the problem of polynomial identity testing. It is equivalent to checking if








Hence if we can determine that








where








then we can determine whether the two polynomials are equivalent.
Comparison of polynomials has applications for branching programs (also called binary decision diagrams). A read-once branching program can be represented by a multilinear polynomial which computes (over any field) on {0,1}-inputs the same Boolean function as the branching program, and two branching programs compute the same function if and only if the corresponding polynomials are equal. Thus, identity of Boolean functions computed by read-once branching programs can be reduced to polynomial identity testing.
Comparison of two polynomials (and therefore testing polynomial identities) also has applications in 2D-compression, where the problem of finding the equality of two 2D-texts A and B is reduced to the problem of comparing equality of two polynomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Primality testing
Given 
 
 
 
 , is 
 
 
 
  a prime number?
A simple randomized algorithm developed by Manindra Agrawal and Somenath Biswas can determine probabilistically whether 
 
 
 
  is prime and uses polynomial identity testing to do so.
They propose that all prime numbers n (and only prime numbers) satisfy the following polynomial identity:








This is a consequence of the Frobenius endomorphism.
Let








Then 
 
 
iff n is prime. The proof can be found in [4]. However, since this polynomial has degree 
 
 
 
 , and since 
 
 
 
  may or may not be a prime, the Schwartz–Zippel method would not work. Agrawal and Biswas use a more sophisticated technique, which divides 
 
 
 
  by a random monic polynomial of small degree.
Prime numbers are used in a number of applications such as hash table sizing, pseudorandom number generators and in key generation for cryptography. Therefore finding very large prime numbers (on the order of (at least) 
 
 
 
 ) becomes very important and efficient primality testing algorithms are required.
Perfect matching
Let 
 
 
 
  be a graph of 
 
 
 
  vertices where 
 
 
 
  is even. Does 
 
 
 
  contain a perfect matching?
Theorem 2 : A Tutte matrix determinant is not a 
 
 
 
 -polynomial if and only if there exists a perfect matching.
A subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is called a matching if each vertex in 
 
 
 
  is incident with at most one edge in 
 
 
 
 . A matching is perfect if each vertex in 
 
 
 
  has exactly one edge that is incident to it in 
 
 
 
 . Create a Tutte matrix

 
  in the following way:








where






0\;\;\;\;\mbox{otherwise}. \end{cases}
The Tutte matrix determinant (in the variables xij, i a="" (as="" )="" 
contains a perfect matching. There exists a deterministic black-box algorithm for graphs with polynomially bounded permanents (Grigoriev & Karpinski 1987).5
In the special case of a balanced bipartite graph on 
 
 
 
  vertices this matrix takes the form of a block matrix








if the first m rows (resp. columns) are indexed with the first subset of the bipartition and the last m rows with the complementary subset. In this case the pfaffian coincides with the usual determinant of the m × m matrix X (up to sign). Here X is the Edmonds matrix.
Notes
References




Moshkovitz, Dana (2010). An Alternative Proof of The Schwartz-Zippel Lemma. 








External links

The Curious History of the Schwartz–Zippel Lemma, by Richard J. Lipton

"
Category:Polynomials Category:Computer algebra Category:Lemmas Category:Mathematical theorems in theoretical computer science






Ö. Ore, Über höhere Kongruenzen. Norsk Mat. Forenings Skrifter Ser. I (1922), no. 7, 15 pages.





