   Inverse (mathematics)      Inverse (mathematics)    In many contexts in mathematics the term inverse indicates the opposite of something. This word and its derivatives are used widely in mathematics , as illustrated below.   Inverse element of an element x with respect to a binary operation * with identity element e is an element y such that x * y = y * x = e . In particular,  the additive inverse of x is −x ;  the multiplicative inverse or reciprocal of x is x −1 .  inverse function — inverse element with respect to function composition: a function that "reverses" the action of a given function: f −1 ( f ( x )) = x .   Inversion in a point — a geometric transform.  Circle inversion — another particular geometric transformation of a plane that maps the outside of a circle to the inside and vice versa.  Inverse limit — a notion in abstract algebra.  Inverse (logic) — ~ p → ~ q is the inverse of p → q .  Inverse matrix — inverse element with respect to matrix multiplication.  Pseudoinverse , a generalization of the inverse matrix.  Inverse proportion , also inversely proportional — a relationship between two variables x and y characterized by the equation     y  =   k  /  x    .      y    k  x     y=k/x.     Inverse problem — the task of identifying model parameters from observed data; see for example  inverse scattering problem  inverse kinematics  inverse dynamics .   Inverse perspective — the further the objects, the larger they are drawn.  Inverse semigroup  Inverse of an element in a semigroup  Inverse-square law — the magnitude of a force is proportional to the inverse square of the distance.  Inverse transform sampling — generate some random numbers according to a given probability distribution.  Inverse chain rule method — related to integration and differentiation.  Inversion of elements , a pair of adjacent out-of-order elements of a permutation (viewed as a list).  Inverse relation  Inversion transformation , an extension of Poincaré transformation .   See also   Inversion (disambiguation)    ca:Invers  fr:Inverse  id:Invers  pl:Inwersja  sv:Invers  "  Category:Mathematical terminology   