


Delta method




Delta method

In statistics, the delta method is a result concerning the approximate probability distribution for a function of an asymptotically normal statistical estimator from knowledge of the limiting variance of that estimator.
Univariate delta method
While the delta method generalizes easily to a multivariate setting, careful motivation of the technique is more easily demonstrated in univariate terms. Roughly, if there is a sequence of random variables  satisfying



where θ and σ2 are finite valued constants and 
 
 
 
  denotes convergence in distribution, then



for any function g satisfying the property that 
 
 
 
  exists, is non-zero valued, and is polynomially bounded with the random variable.1
Proof in the univariate case
Demonstration of this result is fairly straightforward under the assumption that 
 
 
 
  is continuous. To begin, we use the mean value theorem:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  lies between  and θ. Note that since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it must be that 
 
 
 
  and since 
 
 
 
  is continuous, applying the continuous mapping theorem yields


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes convergence in probability.
Rearranging the terms and multiplying by 
 
 
 
  gives


 
  Since


 
  by assumption, it follows immediately from appeal to Slutsky's Theorem that


 
  This concludes the proof.
Proof with an explicit order of approximation
Alternatively, one can add one more step at the end, to obtain the order of approximation:


 
 
  This suggests that the error in the approximation converges to 0 in probability.
Multivariate delta method
By definition, a consistent estimator B converges in probability to its true value β, and often a central limit theorem can be applied to obtain asymptotic normality:



where n is the number of observations and Σ is a (symmetric positive semi-definite) covariance matrix. Suppose we want to estimate the variance of a function h of the estimator B. Keeping only the first two terms of the Taylor series, and using vector notation for the gradient, we can estimate h(B) as



which implies the variance of h(B) is approximately



One can use the mean value theorem (for real-valued functions of many variables) to see that this does not rely on taking first order approximation.
The delta method therefore implies that



or in univariate terms,



Example
Suppose Xn is Binomial with parameters p and n. Since



we can apply the Delta method with 
 
 
 
  to see



Hence, the variance of 
 
 
 
  is approximately



Moreover, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are estimates of different group rates from independent samples of sizes n and m respectively, then the logarithm of the estimated relative risk

 
  is approximately normally distributed with variance that can be estimated by



This is useful to construct a hypothesis test or to make a confidence interval for the relative risk.
Note
The delta method is often used in a form that is essentially identical to that above, but without the assumption that  or B is asymptotically normal. Often the only context is that the variance is "small". The results then just give approximations to the means and covariances of the transformed quantities. For example, the formulae presented in Klein (1953, p. 258) are:



where  is the rth element of h(B) and Biis the ith element of B. The only difference is that Klein stated these as identities, whereas they are actually approximations.
See also

Taylor expansions for the moments of functions of random variables
Variance-stabilizing transformation

References

Casella, G. and Berger, R. L. (2002), Statistical Inference, 2nd ed.
Cramér, H. (1946), Mathematical Methods of Statistics, p. 353.
Davison, A. C. (2003), Statistical Models, pp. 33–35.
Greene, W. H. (2003), Econometric Analysis, 5th ed., pp. 913f.
Klein, L. R. (1953), A Textbook of Econometrics, p. 258.
Oehlert, G. W. (1992), A Note on the Delta Method, The American Statistician, Vol. 46, No. 1, p. 27-29. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2684406
Lecture notes
More lecture notes
Explanation from Stata software corporation

de:Statistischer Test#Asymptotisches Verhalten des Tests"
Category:Econometrics Category:Statistical approximations Category:Articles containing proofs



Oehlert, G. W. (1992). A note on the delta method. The American Statistician, 46(1), 27-29.




