


Circle bundle




Circle bundle

In mathematics, a circle bundle is a fiber bundle where the fiber is the circle

 
 .
Oriented circle bundles are also known as principal U(1)-bundles. In physics, circle bundles are the natural geometric setting for electromagnetism. A circle bundle is a special case of a sphere bundle.
As 3-manifolds
Circle bundles over surfaces are an important example of 3-manifolds. A more general class of 3-manifolds is Seifert fiber spaces, which may be viewed as a kind of "singular" circle bundle, or as a circle bundle over a two-dimensional orbifold.
Relationship to electrodynamics
The Maxwell equations correspond to an electromagnetic field represented by a 2-form F, with 
 
 
 
  being cohomologous to zero. In particular, there always exists a 1-form A such that



Given a circle bundle P over M and its projection



one has the homomorphism



where 
 
 
 
  is the pullback. Each homomorphism corresponds to a Dirac monopole; the integer cohomology groups correspond to the quantization of the electric charge.
Examples

The Hopf fibration is an example of a non-trivial circle bundle.


The unit normal bundle of a surface is another example of a circle bundle.


The unit normal bundle of a non-orientable surface is a circle bundle that is not a principal 
 
 
 
  bundle. Orientable surfaces have principal unit tangent bundles.

Classification
The isomorphism classes of circle bundles over a manifold M are in one-to-one correspondence with the homotopy classes of maps 
 
 
 
 . There is an extension of groups, 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . Circle bundles classified by maps into 
 
 
 
  are known as principal 
 
 
 
 -bundles, and are classified by an element element of the second integral cohomology group

 
  of M, since 
 
 
 
 . This isomorphism is realized by the Euler class. A circle bundle is a principal 
 
 
 
  bundle if and only if the associated map 
 
 
 
  is null-homotopic, which is true if and only if the bundle is fibrewise orientable.
See also: Wang sequence.
References



.

"
Category:Fiber bundles Category:K-theory Category:Circles


