


Quaternionic projective space




Quaternionic projective space

In mathematics, quaternionic projective space is an extension of the ideas of real projective space and complex projective space, to the case where coordinates lie in the ring of quaternions H. Quaternionic projective space of dimension n is usually denoted by



and is a closed manifold of (real) dimension 4n. It is a homogeneous space for a Lie group action, in more than one way.
In coordinates
Its direct construction is as a special case of the projective space over a division algebra. The homogeneous coordinates of a point can be written



where the 
 
 
 
  are quaternions, not all zero. Two sets of coordinates represent the same point if they are 'proportional' by a left multiplication by a non-zero quaternion c; that is, we identify all the


 
 .
In the language of group actions, 
 
 
 
  is the orbit space of 
 
 
 
  by the action of 
 
 
 
 , the multiplicative group of non-zero quaternions. By first projecting onto the unit sphere inside 
 
 
 
  one may also regard 
 
 
 
  as the orbit space of 
 
 
 
  by the action of 
 
 
 
 , the group of unit quaternions.1 The sphere 
 
 
 
  then becomes a principal Sp(1)-bundle over 
 
 
 
 :



There is also a construction of 
 
 
 
  by means of two-dimensional complex subspaces of 
 
 
 
 , meaning that 
 
 
 
  lies inside a complex Grassmannian.
Projective line
The one-dimensional projective space over H is called the "projective line" in generalization of the complex projective line. For example, it was used (implicitly) in 1947 by P. G. Gormley to extend the Möbius group to the quaternion context with "linear fractional transformations". For the linear fractional transformations of an associative ring with 1, see projective line over a ring and the homography group GL(2,A).
From the topological point of view the quaternionic projective line is the 4-sphere, and in fact these are diffeomorphic manifolds. The fibration mentioned previously is from the 7-sphere, and is an example of a Hopf fibration.
Infinite-dimensional quaternionic projective space
The space 
 
 
 
  is the classifying space BS3. The homotopy groups of 
 
 
 
  are given by 
 
 
 
 . These groups are known to be very complex and in particular they are non-zero for infinitely many values of 
 
 
 
 . However, we do have that 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . It follows that rationally, i.e. after localisation of a space, 
 
 
 
  is an Eilenberg–Maclane space

 
 . That is 
 
 
 
 . (cf. the example K(Z,2)). See rational homotopy theory.
Quaternionic projective plane
The 8-dimensional 
 
 
 
  has a circle action, by the group of complex scalars of absolute value 1 acting on the other side (so on the right, as the convention for the action of c above is on the left). Therefore the quotient manifold



may be taken, writing U(1) for the circle group. It has been shown that this quotient is the 7-sphere, a result of Vladimir Arnold from 1996, later rediscovered by Edward Witten and Michael Atiyah.
References
Further reading

V. I. Arnol'd, Relatives of the Quotient of the Complex Projective Plane by the Complex Conjugation, Tr. Mat. Inst. Steklova, 1999, Volume 224, Pages 56–67. Treats the analogue of the result mentioned for quaternionic projective space and the 13-sphere.

"
Category:Projective geometry Category:Homogeneous spaces Category:Quaternions



Gregory L. Naber, Topology, geometry, and gauge fields: foundations (1997), p. 50.




