


Belle experiment




Belle experiment

The Belle experiment is a particle physics experiment conducted by the Belle Collaboration, an international collaboration of more than 400 physicists and engineers investigating CP-violation effects at the High Energy Accelerator Research Organisation (KEK) in Tsukuba, Ibaraki Prefecture, Japan.
The Belle detector, located at the collision point of the  asymmetric-energy collider (KEKB), is a multilayer particle detector. Its large solid angle coverage, vertex location with precision on the order of tens of micrometres (provided by a silicon vertex detector), good pion–kaon separation at the momenta range from  till few GeV/c (provided by a novel Cherenkov detector), and few-percent precision electromagnetic calorimetry (CsI(Tl) scintillating crystals) allow for many other scientific searches apart from CP-violation. Extensive studies of rare decays, searches for exotic particles and precision measurements of B mesons, D mesons, and tau particles have been carried out and have resulted in almost 300 publications in physics journals.
Highlights of the Belle experiment so far include

the first observation of CP-violation outside of the kaon system (2001)
observation of
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

measurement of 
 
 
 
  using the 
 
 
Dalitz plot
measurement of the CKM quark mixing matrix elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

observation of direct CP-violation in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

observation of 
 
 
 
  transitions
evidence for 
 
 

observations of a number of new particles including the X(3872)

The Belle experiment operated at the KEKB accelerator, the world's highest luminosity machine. The instantaneous luminosity exceeded . The integrated luminosity collected at the (4S) resonance mass is ~ (corresponds to 771 million  meson pairs). Most data is recorded on the (4S) resonance, which decays to pairs of B mesons. About 10% of the data is recorded below the (4S) resonance in order to study backgrounds. In addition, Belle has carried out special runs at the (5S) resonance to study  mesons as well as on the (1S), (2S) and (3S) resonances to search for evidence of Dark Matter and the Higgs Boson. The samples of (1S), (2S) and (5S) collected by Belle are the world largest samples available.
The Belle II B-factory, an upgraded facility with two orders of magnitude more luminosity, has been approved in June 2010.1 The design and construction work is ongoing.
See also

B-factory
– oscillation

References


External links

Official Belle Website
Official Belle 2 Website

"
Category:Particle experiments



KEK press release↩




