   Triangular prism      Triangular prism   In geometry , a triangular prism is a three-sided prism ; it is a polyhedron made of a triangular base, a translated copy, and 3 faces joining corresponding sides . A right triangular prism has rectangular sides, otherwise it is oblique . A uniform triagular prism is a right triangular prism with equilateral bases, and square sides.  Equivalently, it is a pentahedron of which two faces are parallel, while the surface normals of the other three are in the same plane (which is not necessarily parallel to the base planes). These three faces are parallelograms . All cross-sections parallel to the base faces are the same triangle.  As a semiregular (or uniform) polyhedron  A right triangular prism is semiregular or, more generally, a uniform polyhedron if the base faces are equilateral triangles , and the other three faces are squares . It can be seen as a truncated  trigonal hosohedron , represented by Schläfli symbol t{2,3}. Alternately it can be seen as the Cartesian product of a triangle and a line segment , and represented by the product {3}x{}. The dual of a triangular prism is a triangular bipyramid .  The symmetry group of a right 3-sided prism with triangular base is D 3h of order 12. The rotation group is D 3 of order 6. The symmetry group does not contain inversion .  Volume  The volume of any prism is the product of the area of the base and the distance between the two bases. In this case the base is a triangle so we simply need to compute the area of the triangle and multiply this by the length of the prism:      V  =    1  2   b  h  l       V      1  2   b  h  l     V=\frac{1}{2}bhl   where b is the triangle base length, h is the triangle height, and l is the length between the triangles.  Truncated triangular prism  A truncated right triangular prism has one triangular face truncated ( planed ) at an oblique angle. 1      Facetings  There are two full D 2h symmetry facetings of a triangular prism , both with 6 isosceles triangle faces, one keeping the original top and bottom triangles, and one the original squares. Two lower C 3v symmetry faceting have one base triangle, 3 lateral crossed square faces, and 3 isosceles triangle lateral faces.      Convex   Facetings       D 3h symmetry   C 3v symmetry    (Figure)  Triangular prism.png   (Figure)  FacetedTriangularPrism2.png      2 {3} 3 {4}   3 {4} 6 ( ) v { }     Related polyhedra and tilings  Symmetry mutations  This polyhedron is topologically related as a part of sequence of uniform truncated polyhedra with vertex configurations (3.2n.2n), and [n,3] Coxeter group symmetry.  This polyhedron is topologically related as a part of sequence of cantellated polyhedra with vertex figure (3.4.n.4), and continues as tilings of the hyperbolic plane . These vertex-transitive figures have (*n32) reflectional symmetry .  This polyhedron is topologically related as a part of sequence of cantellated polyhedra with vertex figure (3.4.n.4), and continues as tilings of the hyperbolic plane . These vertex-transitive figures have (*n32) reflectional symmetry .  Compounds  There are 4 uniform compounds of triangular prisms:   Compound of four triangular prisms , compound of eight triangular prisms , compound of ten triangular prisms , compound of twenty triangular prisms .   Honeycombs  There are 9 uniform honeycombs that include triangular prism cells:   Gyroelongated alternated cubic honeycomb , elongated alternated cubic honeycomb , gyrated triangular prismatic honeycomb , snub square prismatic honeycomb , triangular prismatic honeycomb , triangular-hexagonal prismatic honeycomb , truncated hexagonal prismatic honeycomb , rhombitriangular-hexagonal prismatic honeycomb , snub triangular-hexagonal prismatic honeycomb , elongated triangular prismatic honeycomb    Related polytopes  The triangular prism is first in a dimensional series of semiregular polytopes . Each progressive uniform polytope is constructed vertex figure of the previous polytope. Thorold Gosset identified this series in 1900 as containing all regular polytope facets, containing all simplexes and orthoplexes ( equilateral triangles and squares in the case of the triangular prism). In Coxeter 's notation the triangular prism is given the symbol −1 21 .  Four dimensional space  The triangular prism exists as cells of a number of four-dimensional uniform 4-polytopes , including:      tetrahedral prism    octahedral prism    cuboctahedral prism    icosahedral prism    icosidodecahedral prism    Truncated dodecahedral prism     (Figure)  tetrahedral prism.png   (Figure)  octahedral prism.png   (Figure)  cuboctahedral prism.png   (Figure)  icosahedral prism.png   (Figure)  icosidodecahedral prism.png   (Figure)  Truncated dodecahedral prism.png      Rhombi-cosidodecahedral prism    Rhombi-cuboctahedral prism    Truncated cubic prism    Snub dodecahedral prism    n-gonal antiprismatic prism     (Figure)  Rhombicosidodecahedral prism.png   (Figure)  Rhombicuboctahedral prism.png   (Figure)  Truncated cubic prism.png   (Figure)  Snub dodecahedral prism.png   (Figure)  Square antiprismatic prism.png      Cantellated 5-cell    Cantitruncated 5-cell    Runcinated 5-cell    Runcitruncated 5-cell    Cantellated tesseract    Cantitruncated tesseract     (Figure)  4-simplex t02.svg   (Figure)  4-simplex t012.svg   (Figure)  4-simplex t03.svg   (Figure)  4-simplex t013.svg   (Figure)  4-cube t02.svg   (Figure)  4-cube t012.svg      Cantellated 24-cell    Cantitruncated 24-cell    Runcinated 24-cell    Runcitruncated 24-cell    Cantellated 120-cell    Cantitruncated 120-cell     (Figure)  24-cell t02 F4.svg   (Figure)  24-cell t012 F4.svg   (Figure)  24-cell t03 F4.svg   (Figure)  24-cell t013 F4.svg   (Figure)  120-cell t02 H3.png   (Figure)  120-cell t012 H3.png      See also   Wedge (geometry)   References    Interactive Polyhedron: Triangular Prism  surface area and volume of a triangular prism   "  Category:Prismatoid polyhedra  Category:Space-filling polyhedra     William F. Kern, James R Bland, Solid Mensuration with proofs , 1938, p.81 ↩     