


Alexander's trick




Alexander's trick

Alexander's trick, also known as the Alexander trick, is a basic result in geometric topology, named after J. W. Alexander.
Statement
Two homeomorphisms of the n-dimensional ball

 
  which agree on the boundary sphere

 
  are isotopic.
More generally, two homeomorphisms of Dn that are isotopic on the boundary are isotopic.
Proof
Base case: every homeomorphism which fixes the boundary is isotopic to the identity relative to the boundary.
If 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
 , then an isotopy connecting f to the identity is given by



Visually, the homeomorphism is 'straightened out' from the boundary, 'squeezing' 
 
 
 
  down to the origin. William Thurston calls this "combing all the tangles to one point".
The subtlety is that at 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  "disappears": the germ at the origin "jumps" from an infinitely stretched version of 
 
 
 
  to the identity. Each of the steps in the homotopy could be smoothed (smooth the transition), but the homotopy (the overall map) has a singularity at 
 
 
 
 . This underlines that the Alexander trick is a PL construction, but not smooth.
General case: isotopic on boundary implies isotopic
If 
 
 
 
  are two homeomorphisms that agree on 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is the identity on 
 
 
 
 , so we have an isotopy 
 
 
 
  from the identity to 
 
 
 
 . The map 
 
 
 
  is then an isotopy from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Radial extension
Some authors use the term Alexander trick for the statement that every homeomorphism of 
 
 
 
  can be extended to a homeomorphism of the entire ball 
 
 
 
 .
However, this is much easier to prove than the result discussed above: it is called radial extension (or coning) and is also true piecewise-linearly, but not smoothly.
Concretely, let 
 
 
 
  be a homeomorphism, then


 
  defines a homeomorphism of the ball.
Exotic spheres
The failure of smooth radial extension and the success of PL radial extension yield exotic spheres via twisted spheres.
References



"
Category:Geometric topology Category:Homeomorphisms


