   Oblique reflection      Oblique reflection   In Euclidean geometry , oblique reflections generalize ordinary reflections by not requiring that reflection be done using perpendiculars . If two points are oblique reflections of each other, they will still stay so under affine transformations .  Consider a plane  P in the three-dimensional Euclidean space . The usual reflection of a point A in space in respect to the plane P is another point B in space, such that the midpoint of the segment AB is in the plane, and AB is perpendicular to the plane. For an oblique reflection , one requires instead of perpendicularity that AB be parallel to a given reference line. 1  Formally, let there be a plane P in the three-dimensional space, and a line L in space not parallel to P . To obtain the oblique reflection of a point A in space in respect to the plane P , one draws through A a line parallel to L , and lets the oblique reflection of A be the point B on that line on the other side of the plane such that the midpoint of AB is in P . If the reference line L is perpendicular to the plane, one obtains the usual reflection.  For example, consider the plane P to be the xy plane, that is, the plane given by the equation z =0 in Cartesian coordinates . Let the direction of the reference line L be given by the vector ( a , b , c ), with c ≠0 (that is, L is not parallel to P ). The oblique reflection of a point ( x , y , z ) will then be       (   x  -    2  z  a   c    ,   y  -    2  z  b   c    ,   -  z   )   .       x      2  z  a   c      y      2  z  b   c      z     \left(x-\frac{2za}{c},y-\frac{2zb}{c},-z\right).     The concept of oblique reflection is easily generalizable to oblique reflection in respect to an affine hyperplane in R n with a line again serving as a reference, or even more generally, oblique reflection in respect to a k -dimensional affine subspace, with a n − k -dimensional affine subspace serving as a reference. Back to three dimensions, one can then define oblique reflection in respect to a line, with a plane serving as a reference.  An oblique reflection is an affine transformation , and it is an involution , meaning that the reflection of the reflection of a point is the point itself. 2  References  "  Category:Affine geometry  Category:Functions and mappings     . ↩  . ↩     