


Q value (nuclear science)




Q value (nuclear science)

In nuclear physics and chemistry, the Q value for a reaction is the amount of energy released by that reaction. The value relates to the enthalpy of a chemical reaction or the energy of radioactive decay products. It can be determined from the masses of reactants and products. Q values affect reaction rates.
Definition
Considering the energy conservation of the simple reaction, enables the general definition of Q based on mass-energy equivalence, where K is kinetic energy and m is mass:



A reaction with a positive Q value is exothermic, i.e. has a net release of energy, since the kinetic energy of the final state is greater than the kinetic energy of the initial state. A reaction with a negative Q value is endothermic, i.e. requires a net energy input, since the kinetic energy of the final state is less than the kinetic energy of the initial state.1
Applications
Chemical Q values are measurement in calorimetry. Exothermic chemical reactions tend to be more spontaneous and can emit light or heat, resulting in runaway feedback(i.e. explosions).
Q values are also featured in particle physics. For example, Sargent's rule states that weak reaction rates are proportional to Q5. The Q value is the kinetic energy released in the decay at rest. For neutron decay, some mass disappears as neutrons convert to a proton, electron and antineutrino:2



where mn is the mass of the neutron, mp is the mass of the proton, m

 is the mass of the electron antineutrino and me is the mass of the electron; and the K are the corresponding kinetic energies. The neutron has no initial kinetic energy since it is at rest. In beta decay, a typical Q is around 1 MeV.
The decay energy is divided among the products in a continuous distribution for more than 2 products. Measuring this spectrum allows one to find the mass of a product. Experiments are studying emission spectrums to search for neutrinoless decay and neutrino mass; this is the principle of the upcoming KATRIN experiment.
See also

Fusion energy gain factor
Pandemonium effect

Notes and references
External links

Nuclear Structure and Decay Data – IAEA with query on decays' Q-values

"
Category:Nuclear physics









