


Topological K-theory




Topological K-theory

In mathematics, topological 
 
 
 
 -theory is a branch of algebraic topology. It was founded to study vector bundles on topological spaces, by means of ideas now recognised as (general) K-theory that were introduced by Alexander Grothendieck. The early work on topological 
 
 
 
 -theory is due to Michael Atiyah and Friedrich Hirzebruch.
Definitions
Let 
 
 
 
  be a compact Hausdorff space and 
 
 
 
 . Then  is the Grothendieck group of the commutative monoid of isomorphism classes of finite-dimensional 
 
 
 
 -vector bundles over 
 
 
 
  under Whitney sum. Tensor product of bundles gives 
 
 
 
 -theory a commutative ring structure. Without subscripts, 
 
 
 
  usually denotes complex 
 
 
 
 -theory whereas real 
 
 
 
 -theory is sometimes written as 
 
 
 
 . The remaining discussion is focussed on complex 
 
 
 
 -theory, the real case being similar.
As a first example, note that the 
 
 
 
 -theory of a point are the integers. This is because vector bundles over a point are trivial and thus classified by their rank and the Grothendieck group of the natural numbers are the integers.
There is also a reduced version of 
 
 
 
 -theory, 
 
 
 
 , defined for 
 
 
 
  a compact pointed space (cf. reduced homology). This reduced theory is intuitively 
 
 
 
  modulo trivial bundles. It is defined as the group of stable equivalence classes of bundles. Two bundles 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are said to be stably isomorphic if there are trivial bundles  and , so that . This equivalence relation results in a group since every vector bundle can be completed to a trivial bundle by summing with its orthogonal complement. Alternatively, 
 
 
 
  can be defined as the kernel of the map  induced by the inclusion of the base point  into 
 
 
 
 .


 
 -theory forms a multiplicative (generalized) cohomology theory as follows. The short exact sequence of a pair of pointed spaces 
 
 




extends to a long exact sequence



Let  be the 
 
 
 
 -th reduced suspension of a space and then define



Negative indices are chosen so that the coboundary maps increase dimension. One-point compactification extends this definition to locally compact spaces without base points:



Finally, the Bott periodicity theorem as formulated below extends the theories to positive integers.
Properties

 respectively 
 
 
 
  is a contravariant functor from the homotopy category of (pointed) spaces to the category of commutative rings. Thus, for instance, the 
 
 
 
 -theory over contractible spaces is always 
 
 
 
 .
The spectrum of 
 
 
 
 -theory is 
 
 
 
  (with the discrete topology on 
 
 
 
 ), i.e. , where 
 
 
 
  denotes pointed homotopy classes and 
 
 
 
  is the colimit of the classifying spaces of the unitary groups: . Similarly,








For real 
 
 
 
 -theory use 
 
 
 
 .
 


There is a natural ring homomorphism , the Chern character, such that  is an isomorphism.
The equivalent of the Steenrod operations in 
 
 
 
 -theory are the Adams operations. They can be used to define characteristic classes in topological 
 
 
 
 -theory.
The Splitting principle of topological 
 
 
 
 -theory allows one to reduce statements about arbitrary vector bundles to statements about sums of line bundles.
The Thom isomorphism theorem in topological 
 
 
 
 -theory is








where 
 
 
 
  is the Thom space of the vector bundle 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . This holds whenever 
 
 
 
  is a spin-bundle.
 


The Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence allows computation of 
 
 
 
 -groups from ordinary cohomology groups.
Topological 
 
 
 
 -theory can be generalized vastly to a functor on C*-algebras, see operator K-theory and KK-theory.

Bott periodicity
The phenomenon of periodicity named after Raoul Bott (see Bott periodicity theorem) can be formulated this way:

 K(X) ⊗ K(S2)}}, and  Z[H]/(H − 1)2}} where H is the class of the tautological bundle on  P1(C)}}, i.e. the Riemann sphere.



.

In real 
 
 
 
 -theory there is a similar periodicity, but modulo 8.
Applications
The two most famous applications of topological 
 
 
 
 -theory are both due to J. F. Adams. First he solved the Hopf invariant one problem by doing a computation with his Adams operations. Then he proved an upper bound for the number of linearly independent vector fields on spheres.
See also

KR-theory
Atiyah–Singer index theorem
Snaith's theorem
Algebraic K-theory

References



Max Karoubi (1978), K-theory, an introduction Springer-Verlag
 
Max Karoubi (2006), "K-theory. An elementary introduction", 

Allen Hatcher, Vector Bundles & K-Theory, (2003)
Maxim Stykow, Connections of K-Theory to Geometry and Topology, (2013)

"
Category:K-theory


