


Spin connection




Spin connection

In differential geometry and mathematical physics, a spin connection is a connection on a spinor bundle. It is induced, in a canonical manner, from the affine connection. It can also be regarded as the gauge field generated by local Lorentz transformations. In some canonical formulations of general relativity, a spin connection is defined on spatial slices and can also be regarded as the gauge field generated by local rotations.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be the local Lorentz frame fields or vierbein (also known as a tetrad), which is a set of orthogonal space time vector fields that diagonalize the metric tensor


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the spacetime metric and 
 
 
 
 
  is the Minkowski metric. Here, Latin letters denote the local Lorentz frame indices; Greek indices denote general coordinate indices. This simply expresses that 
 
 
 
 , when written in terms of the basis 
 
 
 
 , is locally flat. The vierbein field indices can be raised or lowered by the metric 
 
 
 
  and/or 
 
 
 
 . For example, 
 
 
 
 
 .
The spin connection is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the affine connection. Or purely in terms of the vierbein field as1


 
  which by definition is anti-symmetric in its internal indices 
 
 
 
 .
The spin connection 
 
 
 
 
  defines a covariant derivative 
 
 
 
  on generalized tensors. For example its action on 
 
 
 
  is



Derivation
By the tetrad postulate
The connection is said to be compatible to the vierbein if it satisfies


 
  This equation is also known as the tetrad postulate, from which the solution of the spin connection 
 
 
 
 
  is then given by


 
  where we have introduced the dual-vierbein 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . We expect that 
 
 
 
 
  will also annihilate the Minkowski metric 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  This implies that the connection is anti-symmetric in its internal indices, 
 
 
 
 .
By substituting the formula for the affine connection 
 
 
 
  written in terms of the 
 
 
 
 
 , the spin connection can be written entirely in terms of the 
 
 
 
 ,



By the metric compatibility
This formula can be derived another way. To directly solve the compatibility condition for the spin connection 
 
 
 
 , one can use the same trick that was used to solve 
 
 
 
  for the affine connection 
 
 
 
 
 . First contract the compatibility condition to give


 
 .
Then, do a cyclic permutation of the free indices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and add and subtract the three resulting equations:



where we have used the definition 
 
 
 
 
 . The solution for the spin connection is


 
 .
From this we obtain the same formula as before.
Applications
The spin connection arises in the Dirac equation when expressed in the language of curved spacetime. Specifically there are problems coupling gravity to spinor fields: there are no finite-dimensional spinor representations of the general covariance group. However, there are of course spinorial representations of the Lorentz group. This fact is utilized by employing tetrad fields describing a flat tangent space at every point of spacetime. The Dirac matrices

 
  are contracted onto vierbiens,


 
 .
We wish to construct a generally covariant Dirac equation. Under a flat tangent space Lorentz transformation the spinor transforms as



We have introduced local Lorentz transformatins on flat tangent space, so 
 
 
 
 
  is a function of space-time. This means that the partial derivative of a spinor is no longer a genuine tensor. As usual, one introduces a connection field 
 
 
 
  that allows us to gauge the Lorentz group. The covariant derivative defined with the spin connection is,


 
 ,
and is a genuine tensor and Dirac's equation is rewritten as


 
 .
The generally covariant fermion action couples fermions to gravity when added to the first order tetradic Palatini action,



where 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the curvature of the spin connection.
The tetradic Palatini formulation of general relativity which is a first order formulation of the Einstein–Hilbert action where the tetrad and the spin connection are the basic independent variables. In the 3+1 version of Palatini formulation, the information about the spatial metric, 
 
 
 
 , is encoded in the triad 
 
 
 
  (three-dimensional, spatial version of the tetrad). Here we extend the metric compatibility condition 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
 , that is, 
 
 
 
  and we obtain a formula similar to the one given above but for the spatial spin connection 
 
 
 
 .
The spatial spin connection appears in the definition of Ashtekar-Barbero variables which allows 3+1 general relativity to be rewritten as a special type of 
 
 
Yang–Mills gauge theory. One defines 
 
 
 
 . The Ashtekar-Barbero connection variable is then defined as 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the extrinsic curvature and 
 
 
 
  is the Immirzi parameter. With 
 
 
 
  as the configuration variable, the conjugate momentum is the densitized triad 
 
 
 
 
 . With 3+1 general relativity rewritten as a special type of 
 
 
Yang–Mills gauge theory, it allows the importation of non-perturbative techniques used in Quantum chromodynamics to canonical quantum general relativity.
See also

Ashtekar variables
Dirac operator
Cartan connection
Einstein–Cartan theory
Gamma matrices
General relativity
Levi-Civita connection
Particle physics
Quantum field theory
Ricci calculus
Supergravity
Torsion tensor

References

Hehl, F.W.; von der Heyde, P.; Kerlick, G.D.; Nester, J.M. (1976), "General relativity with spin and torsion: Foundations and prospects", Rev. Mod. Phys. 48, 393.
Kibble, T.W.B. (1961), "Lorentz invariance and the gravitational field", J. Math. Phys. 2, 212.
Poplawski, N.J. (2009), "Spacetime and fields", arXiv:0911.0334
Sciama, D.W. (1964), "The physical structure of general relativity", Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 463.

"
Category:Connection (mathematics) Category:Spinors Category:Differential geometry



M.B. Green, J.H. Schwarz, E. Witten, "Superstring theory", Vol. 2.




