


Energy–momentum relation




Energy–momentum relation

In physics, the energy–momentum relation is the relativistic equation relating any object's rest (intrinsic) mass, total energy, and momentum:  holds for a system, such as a particle or macroscopic body, having intrinsic rest mass , total energy 
 
 
 
 , and a momentum of magnitude

 
 , where the constant c is the speed of light, assuming the special relativity case of flat spacetime.123
The energy-momentum relation () is consistent with the familiar mass-energy relation in both its interpretations:  mc2}} relates total energy 
 
 
 
  to the (total) relativistic mass

 
  (alternatively denoted  or  ), while  m0c2}} relates rest energy  to rest (invariant) mass which we denote . Unlike either of those equations, the energy-momentum equation () relates the total energy to the rest mass . All three equations hold true simultaneously.
Special cases of the relation () include:

If the body is a massless particle ( 0}}), then () reduces to 
 
 
 
 . For photons, this is the relation, discovered in 19th century classical electromagnetism, between radiant momentum (causing radiation pressure) and radiant energy.
If the body's speed 
 
 
 
  is much less than 
 
 
 
 , then () reduces to  m0v2/2 + m0c2}}; that is, the body's total energy is simply its classical kinetic energy () plus its rest energy.
If the body is at rest (
 
 
 
 ), i.e. in its center-of-momentum frame (
 
 
 
 ), we have  E0}} and  m0}}; thus the energy-momentum relation and both forms of the mass-energy relation (mentioned above) all become the same.

A more general form of relation () holds for general relativity.
The invariant mass (or rest mass) is an invariant for all frames of reference (hence the name), not just in inertial frames in flat spacetime, but also accelerated frames traveling through curved spacetime (see below). However the total energy of the particle 
 
 
 
  and its relativistic momentum 
 
 
 
  are frame-dependent; relative motion between two frames causes the observers in those frames to measure different values of the particle's energy and momentum; one frame measures 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , while the other frame measures 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , unless there is no relative motion between observers, in which case each observer measures the same energy and momenta. Although we still have, in flat spacetime;



The quantities 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are all related by a Lorentz transformation. The relation allows one to sidestep Lorentz transformations when determining only the magnitudes of the energy and momenta by equating the relations in the different frames. Again in flat spacetime, this translates to;



Since  does not change from frame to frame, the energy–momentum relation is used in relativistic mechanics and particle physics calculations, as energy and momentum are given in a particle's rest frame (that is, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as an observer moving with the particle would conclude to be) and measured in the lab frame (i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as determined by particle physicists in a lab, and not moving with the particles).
In relativistic quantum mechanics, it is the basis for constructing relativistic wave equations, since if the relativistic wave equation describing the particle is consistent with this equation – it is consistent with relativistic mechanics, and is Lorentz invariant. In relativistic quantum field theory, it is applicable to all particles and fields.4
This article will use the conventional notation for the "square of a vector" as the dot product of a vector with itself:  p · p {{=}} {{!}}p{{!}}2}}.
Origins of the equation
The equation can be derived in a number of ways, two of the simplest include:

considering the relativistic dynamics of a massive particle,
evaluating the norm of the four-momentum of the system. This is completely general for all particles, and is easy to extend to multi-particle systems (see below).

Heuristic approach for massive particles
For a massive object moving at three-velocity  (ux, uy, uz)}} with magnitude 
 
 
 
  in the lab frame:5


 
  is the total energy of the moving object in the lab frame,


 
  is the three dimensional relativistic momentum of the object in the lab frame with magnitude 
 
 
 
 . The relativistic energy 
 
 
 
  and momentum 
 
 
 
  include the Lorentz factor defined by:


 
  Some authors use relativistic mass defined by:


 
  although rest mass  has a more fundamental significance, and will be used primarily over relativistic mass 
 
 
 
  in this article.
Squaring the 3-momentum gives:



then solving for  and substituting into the Lorentz factor obtains its alternative form in terms of 3-momentum and mass, rather than 3-velocity:



Inserting this form of the Lorentz factor into the energy equation:



followed by more rearrangement yields (1). The elimination of the Lorentz factor also eliminates implicit velocity dependence of the particle in (1), as well as any inferences to the "relativistic mass" of a massive particle. This approach is not general as massless particles are not considered. Naively setting  0}} would mean that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and no energy-momentum relation could be derived, which is not correct.
Norm of the four-momentum
(Figure)
The energy and momentum of an object measured in two inertial frames in energy-momentum space - the yellow frame measures 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  while the blue frame measures E′ and 
 
 
 
 . The green arrow is the four-momentum 
 
 
 
  of an object with length proportional to its rest mass . The green frame is the centre-of-momentum frame for the object with energy equal to the rest energy. The hyperbolae show the Lorentz transformation from one frame to another is a hyperbolic rotation, and ϕ and  are the rapidities of the blue and green frames, respectively.

Special relativity
In Minkowski space, energy (divided by c) and momentum are two components of a Minkowski four-vector, namely the four-momentum;6



(these are the contravariant components).
The Minkowski inner product

 
  of this vector with itself gives the square of the norm of this vector, it is proportional to the square of the rest mass 
 
 
 
  of the body:



a Lorentz invariant quantity, and therefore independent of the frame of reference. Using the Minkowski metric

 
  with metric signature

 
 , the inner product in tensor index notation and as matrix multiplication can be calculated as:



and so:



which is the energy–momentum relation. If we had the other metric signature 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , the inner product would be



and



so:



which is still the same equation, as it should be because the inner product is an invariant.
General relativity
In general relativity, the 4-momentum is a four-vector defined in a local coordinate frame, although by definition the inner product is similar to that of special relativity,



in which the Minkowski metric 
 
 
 
  is replaced by the metric tensor field g:



solved from the Einstein field equations. Then:7



Performing the summations over indices followed by collecting "timelike", "spacetime-like", and "spacelike" terms gives:



where the factor of 2 arises because the metric is a symmetric tensor, and the convention of Latin indices i, j taking spacelike values 1, 2, 3 is used. As each component of the metric has space and time dependence in general; this is significantly more complicated than the formula quoted at the beginning, see metric tensor (general relativity) for more information.
Units of energy, mass and momentum
In natural units where 
 
 
 
 , the energy–momentum equation reduces to



In particle physics, energy is typically given in units of electron volts (eV), momentum in units of eV·c−1, and mass in units of eV·c−2. In electromagnetism, and because of relativistic invariance, it is useful to have the electric field

 
  and the magnetic field

 
  in the same unit (Gauss), using the cgs (Gaussian) system of units, where energy is given in units of erg, mass in grams (g), and momentum in g·cm·s−1.
Energy may also in theory be expressed in units of grams, though in practice it requires a large amount of energy to be equivalent to masses in this range. For example, the first atomic bomb liberated about 1 gram of heat, and the largest thermonuclear bombs have generated a kilogram or more of heat. Energies of thermonuclear bombs are usually given in tens of kilotons and megatons referring to the energy liberated by exploding that amount of trinitrotoluene (TNT).
Special cases
Centre-of-momentum frame (one particle)
For a body in its rest frame, the momentum is zero, so the equation simplifies to



where  is the rest mass of the body.
Massless particles
If the object is massless, as is the case for a photon, then the equation reduces to



This is a useful simplification. It can be rewritten in other ways using the de Broglie relations:



if the wavelength

 
  or wavenumber

 
  are given.
Correspondence principle
Rewriting the relation for massive particles as:



and expanding into power series by the binomial theorem (or a Taylor series):



in the limit that 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
  so the momentum has the classical form , then to first order in  (i.e. retain the term  for 
 
 
 
  and neglect all terms for 
 
 
 
 ) we have



or



where the second term is the classical kinetic energy, and the first is the rest mass of the particle. This approximation is not valid for massless particles since the expansion required the division of momentum by mass. Incidentally, there are no massless particles in classical mechanics.
Many-particle systems
Addition of four momenta
In the case of many particles with relativistic momenta  and energy , where 
 
 
 
  (up to the total number of particles) simply labels the particles, as measured in a particular frame, the four-momenta in this frame can be added;



and then take the norm; to obtain the relation for a many particle system:



where  is the invariant mass of the whole system, and is not equal to the sum of the rest masses of the particles unless all particles are at rest (see mass in special relativity for more detail). Substituting and rearranging gives the generalization of ();
The energies and momenta in the equation are all frame-dependent, while  is frame-independent.
Center-of-momentum frame
In the center-of-momentum frame (COM frame), by definition we have:



with the implication from () that the invariant mass is also the centre of momentum (COM) mass-energy, aside from the  factor:



and this is true for all frames since  is frame-independent. The energies  are those in the COM frame, not the lab frame.
Rest masses and the invariant mass
Either the energies or momenta of the particles, as measured in some frame, can be eliminated using the energy momentum relation for each particle:



allowing  to be expressed in terms of the energies and rest masses, or momenta and rest masses. In a particular frame, the squares of sums can be rewritten as sums of squares (and products):



similarly the momenta can be eliminated by:



where  is the angle between the momentum vectors  and .
Rearranging:



where 
 
 
 
  is the angular frequency and 
 
 
 
  is the wavevector with magnitude 
 
 
 
 , equal to the wave number, the energy–momentum relation can be expressed in terms of wave quantities:



and tidying up by dividing by  throughout:
This can also be derived from the magnitude of the four-wavevector



in a similar way to the four-momentum above.
Since the reduced Planck constant

 
  and the speed of light

 
  both appear and clutter this equation, this is where natural units are especially helpful. Normalizing them so that $ħ = c = 1$, we have:
$$\omega^2 = k^2  + m_0^2 \,.$$
See also

Mass–energy equivalence
Four-momentum
Mass in special relativity

References






"
Category:Special relativity














