


Klein geometry




Klein geometry

In mathematics, a Klein geometry is a type of geometry motivated by Felix Klein in his influential Erlangen program. More specifically, it is a homogeneous space X together with a transitive action on X by a Lie group G, which acts as the symmetry group of the geometry.
For background and motivation see the article on the Erlangen program.
Formal definition
A Klein geometry is a pair  where G is a Lie group and H is a closed Lie subgroup of G such that the (left) coset space G/H is connected. The group G is called the principal group of the geometry and G/H is called the space of the geometry (or, by an abuse of terminology, simply the Klein geometry). The space  of a Klein geometry is a smooth manifold of dimension

dim X = dim G − dim H.
 

There is a natural smooth left action of G on X given by


 
  Clearly, this action is transitive (take ), so that one may then regard X as a homogeneous space for the action of G. The stabilizer of the identity coset  is precisely the group H.
Given any connected smooth manifold X and a smooth transitive action by a Lie group G on X, we can construct an associated Klein geometry  by fixing a basepoint x0 in X and letting H be the stabilizer subgroup of x0 in G. The group H is necessarily a closed subgroup of G and X is naturally diffeomorphic to G/H.
Two Klein geometries  and  are geometrically isomorphic if there is a Lie group isomorphism  so that . In particular, if φ is conjugation by an element , we see that  and  are isomorphic. The Klein geometry associated to a homogeneous space X is then unique up to isomorphism (i.e. it is independent of the chosen basepoint x0).
Bundle description
Given a Lie group G and closed subgroup H, there is natural right action of H on G given by right multiplication. This action is both free and proper. The orbits are simply the left cosets of H in G. One concludes that G has the structure of a smooth principal H-bundle over the left coset space G/H:



Types of Klein geometries
Effective geometries
The action of G on  need not be effective. The kernel of a Klein geometry is defined to be the kernel of the action of G on X. It is given by


 
  The kernel K may also be described as the core of H in G (i.e. the largest subgroup of H that is normal in G). It is the group generated by all the normal subgroups of G that lie in H.
A Klein geometry is said to be effective if  and locally effective if K is discrete. If  is a Klein geometry with kernel K, then  is an effective Klein geometry canonically associated to .
Geometrically oriented geometries
A Klein geometry  is geometrically oriented if G is connected. (This does not imply that G/H is an oriented manifold). If H is connected it follows that G is also connected (this is because G/H is assumed to be connected, and  is a fibration).
Given any Klein geometry , there is a geometrically oriented geometry canonically associated to  with the same base space G/H. This is the geometry  where G0 is the identity component of G. Note that .
Reductive geometries
A Klein geometry  is said to be reductive and G/H a reductive homogeneous space if the Lie algebra

 
  of H has an H-invariant complement in 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
In the following table, there is a description of the classical geometries, modeled as Klein geometries.





Underlying space

Transformation group G

Subgroup H

Invariants



Projective geometry

Real projective space



Projective group



A subgroup 
 
 
 
  fixing a flag



Projective lines, cross-ratio



Conformal geometry on the sphere

Sphere



Lorentz group of an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space 
 
 


A subgroup 
 
 
 
  fixing a line in the null cone of the Minkowski metric

Generalized circles, angles



Hyperbolic geometry

Hyperbolic space

 
 , modelled e.g. as time-like lines in the Minkowski space



Orthochronous Lorentz group







Lines, circles, distances, angles



Elliptic geometry

Elliptic space, modelled e.g. as the lines through the origin in Euclidean space








Lines, circles, distances, angles



Spherical geometry

Sphere



Orthogonal group 
 
 


Orthogonal group 
 
 


Lines (great circles), circles, distances of points, angles



Affine geometry

Affine space



Affine group



General linear group



Lines, quotient of surface areas of geometric shapes, center of mass of triangles



Euclidean geometry

Euclidean space



Euclidean group



Orthogonal group



Distances of points, angles of vectors, areas





References



"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Lie groups Category:Homogeneous spaces


