


Parametric model




Parametric model

In statistics, a parametric model or parametric family or finite-dimensional model is a family of distributions that can be described using a finite number of parameters. These parameters are usually collected together to form a single k-dimensional parameter vector θ = (θ1, θ2, …, θk).
Parametric models are contrasted with the semi-parametric, semi-nonparametric, and non-parametric models, all of which consist of an infinite set of “parameters” for description. The distinction between these four classes is as follows:

in a “parametric” model all the parameters are in finite-dimensional parameter spaces;
a model is “non-parametric” if all the parameters are in infinite-dimensional parameter spaces;
a “semi-parametric” model contains finite-dimensional parameters of interest and infinite-dimensional nuisance parameters;
a “semi-nonparametric” model has both finite-dimensional and infinite-dimensional unknown parameters of interest.

Some statisticians believe that the concepts “parametric”, “non-parametric”, and “semi-parametric” are ambiguous.1 It can also be noted that the set of all probability measures has cardinality of continuum, and therefore it is possible to parametrize any model at all by a single number in (0,1) interval.2 This difficulty can be avoided by considering only “smooth” parametric models.
Definition
A parametric model is a collection of probability distributions such that each member of this collection, Pθ, is described by a finite-dimensional parameter θ. The set of all allowable values for the parameter is denoted Θ ⊆ Rk, and the model itself is written as


 
  When the model consists of absolutely continuous distributions, it is often specified in terms of corresponding probability density functions:


 
  The parametric model is called identifiable if the mapping θ ↦ Pθ is invertible, that is there are no two different parameter values θ1 and θ2 such that Pθ1 = Pθ2.
Examples

The Poisson family of distributions is parametrized by a single number λ > 0:
 
 

 
  where pλ is the probability mass function. This family is an exponential family.
The normal family is parametrized by θ = (μ,σ), where μ ∈ R is a location parameter, and σ > 0 is a scale parameter. This parametrized family is both an exponential family and a location-scale family:
 
 


The Weibull translation model has three parameters θ = (λ, β, μ):
 
 

 
  This model is not regular (see definition below) unless we restrict β to lie in the interval (2, +∞).

Regular parametric model
Let μ be a fixed σ-finite measure on a probability space (Ω, ℱ), and 
 
 
 
 
  the collection of all probability measures dominated by μ. Then we will call 
 
 
 
  a regular parametric model if the following requirements are met:3

Θ is an open subset of Rk.
The map
 
 

 
  from Θ to L2(μ) is Fréchet differentiable: there exists a vector 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  where ′ denotes matrix transpose.
The map 
 
 
 
 
  (defined above) is continuous on Θ.
The k×k Fisher information matrix


 
  is non-singular.

Properties

Sufficient conditions for regularity of a parametric model in terms of ordinary differentiability of the density function ƒθ are following:4

The density function ƒθ(x) is continuously differentiable in θ for μ-almost all x, with gradient ∇ƒθ.
The score function
 
 

 
  belongs to the space L²(Pθ) of square-integrable functions with respect to the measure Pθ.
The Fisher information matrix I(θ), defined as
 
 

 
  is nonsingular and continuous in θ.


If conditions (i)−(iii) hold then the parametric model is regular.

Local asymptotic normality.

If the regular parametric model is identifiable then there exists a uniformly 
 
 
 
 -consistent and efficient estimator of its parameter θ.5

See also

Statistical model
Parametric family
Parametrization (i.e., coordinate system)
Parsimony (with regards to the trade-off of many or few parameters in data fitting)
Parametricism

Notes
References












"
Category:Statistical theory Category:Statistical models



, ch.7.4↩
↩
↩
, p.13, prop.2.1.1↩
, Theorems 2.5.1, 2.5.2↩




