


Chow test




Chow test

The Chow test is a statistical and econometric test of whether the coefficients in two linear regressions on different data sets are equal. The Chow test was invented by economist Gregory Chow in 1960. In econometrics, the Chow test is most commonly used in time series analysis to test for the presence of a structural break. In program evaluation, the Chow test is often used to determine whether the independent variables have different impacts on different subgroups of the population.




structural break

program evaluation







style="width:450px"
(Figure)
Chow test structural break.png




At 
 
 
 
  there is a structural break, regression on the subintervals 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  delivers a better modelling than the combined regression(dashed) over the whole interval.

Comparison of 2 different programs (red, green) existing in a common data set, separate regressions for both programs deliver a better modelling than a combined regression (black).



Suppose that we model our data as



If we split our data into two groups, then we have



and



The null hypothesis of the Chow test asserts that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , and there is the assumption that the model errors

 
  are independent and identically distributed from a normal distribution with unknown variance.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the sum of squared residuals from the combined data, 
 
 
 
  be the sum of squared residuals from the first group, and 
 
 
 
  be the sum of squared residuals from the second group. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the number of observations in each group and 
 
 
 
  is the total number of parameters (in this case, 3). Then the Chow test statistic is



The test statistic follows the F distribution with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
degrees of freedom.
Remarks
- The global sum of squares (SSE) if often called Restricted Sum of Squares (RSSM) as we basically test a constrained model where we have 2K assumptions (with K the number of regressors).
- Some software like SAS will use a predictive Chow test when the size of a subsamble is less than the number of regressors.
References







External links

Computing the Chow statistic, Chow and Wald tests, Chow tests: Series of FAQ explanations from the Stata Corporation at https://www.stata.com/support/faqs/
1: Series of FAQ explanations from the SAS Corporation

"
Category:Econometrics Category:Time series analysis Category:Statistical tests Category:Regression diagnostics


