


Doubly stochastic matrix




Doubly stochastic matrix

In mathematics, especially in probability and combinatorics, a doubly stochastic matrix (also called bistochastic), is a square matrix

 
  of nonnegative real numbers, each of whose rows and columns sums to 1, i.e.,


 
 ,
Thus, a doubly stochastic matrix is both left stochastic and right stochastic.1
Indeed, any matrix that is both left and right stochastic must be square: if every row sums to one then the sum of all entries in the matrix must be equal to the number of rows, and since the same holds for columns, the number of rows and columns must be equal.
Birkhoff polytope and Birkhoff–von Neumann theorem
The class of 
 
 
 
  doubly stochastic matrices is a convex polytope known as the Birkhoff polytope

 
 
 . Using the matrix entries as Cartesian coordinates, it lies in an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional affine subspace of 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space. defined by 
 
 
 
  independent linear constraints specifying that the row and column sums all equal one. (There are 
 
 
 
  constraints rather than 
 
 
 
 
  because one of these constraints is dependent, as the sum of the row sums must equal the sum of the column sums.) Moreover, the entries are all constrained to be non-negative and less than or equal to one.
The Birkhoff–von Neumann theorem states that this polytope 
 
 
 
  is the convex hull of the set of 
 
 
permutation matrices, and furthermore that the vertices of 
 
 
 
  are precisely the permutation matrices.
Other properties
The inverse of a nonsingular doubly stochastic matrix need not be doubly stochastic.
Sinkhorn's theorem states that any matrix with strictly positive entries can be made doubly stochastic by pre- and post-multiplication by diagonal matrices.
For 
 
 
 
 , all bistochastic matrices are unistochastic and orthostochastic, but for larger 
 
 
 
 
  it is not the case.
Van der Waerden conjectured that the minimum permanent among all  doubly stochastic matrices is 
 
 
 
 , achieved by the matrix for which all entries are equal to 
 
 
 
 .2 Proofs of this conjecture were published in 1980 by B. Gyires3 and in 1981 by G. P. Egorychev4 and D. I. Falikman;5 for this work, Egorychev and Falikman won the Fulkerson Prize in 1982.6
See also

Stochastic matrix

References



External links

PlanetMath page on Birkhoff–von Neumann theorem
PlanetMath page on proof of Birkhoff–von Neumann theorem

"
Category:Matrices



↩
.↩
.↩
. . .↩
.↩
Fulkerson Prize, Mathematical Optimization Society, retrieved 2012-08-19.↩




