   Abouabdillah's theorem      Abouabdillah's theorem   Abouabdillah's theorem refers to two distinct theorems in mathematics , proven by Moroccan mathematician Driss Abouabdillah: one in geometry and one in number theory .  Geometry  In geometry, similarities of a Euclidean space preserve circles and spheres. Conversely, Abouabdillah's theorem states that every injective or surjective transformation of a Euclidean space that preserves circles or spheres is a similarity .  More precisely:  Theorem. Let   E   E   E   be a Euclidean affine space of dimension at least 2. Then:  1. Every surjective mapping    f  :   E  →  E      normal-:  f   normal-→  E  E     f:E\rightarrow E   that transforms any four concyclic points into four concyclic points is a similarity.  2. Every injective mapping    f  :   E  →  E      normal-:  f   normal-→  E  E     f:E\rightarrow E   that transforms any circle into a circle is a similarity.  Number theory  The number-theoretic theorem of Abouabdillah is about antichains in the partially ordered set  E N consisting of the positive integers in the interval [1, N ], partially ordered by divisibility . With this partial order, an antichain is a set of integers within this interval, such that no member of this set is a divisor of any other member. It possible to prove using ideas related to Dilworth's theorem that the maximum number of elements in an antichain of E 2 n is exactly n : there exists an antichain of this size consisting of all the numbers in the subinterval [ n + 1,2 n ], so the maximum size of an antichain is at least n . However, there are only n odd numbers within the interval [1,2 n ], for each odd number c in this interval at most one number of the form 2 k c may belong to any antichain, and every number in the interval has this form for some c , so the maximum size of an antichain is also at most n .  Abouabdillah's theorem characterizes more precisely the numbers that may belong to an antichain of maximum size in E 2 n . Specifically, if x is any integer in the interval [1,2 n ], decompose x as the product of a power of two and an odd number: x = 2 k c , where c is odd. Then, according to Abouabdillah's theorem, there exists an antichain of cardinality n in E 2 n that contains x if and only if 2 n  k + 1 c .  The smallest value in any maximum antichain of E 2 n is at least 2 k , where 3 k + 1 is the first power of three that is greater than 2 n , as had been posed as a problem by  and solved by . Lehmer's solution immediately implies the special case of Abouabdillah's theorem for c = 1. Abouabdillah's theorem generalizes this solution to all values within the given interval.  References    .   .   .   .   External links   Contributions in Geometry  [ http://www.zentralblatt-math.org/zmath/en/advanced/?q=an:1017.51003&format; ;=complete Contributions en géométrie]   "  Category:Theorems in geometry  Category:Euclidean geometry  Category:Theorems in number theory   