


Chevalley–Warning theorem




Chevalley–Warning theorem

In algebra, the Chevalley–Warning theorem implies that certain polynomial equations in sufficiently many variables over a finite field have solutions. It was proved by  and a slightly weaker form of the theorem, known as Chevalley's theorem, was proved by . Chevalley's theorem implied Artin's and Dickson's conjecture that finite fields are quasi-algebraically closed fields .
Statement of the theorems
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite field and 
 
 
 
  be a set of polynomials such that the number of variables satisfies



where 
 
 
 
  is the total degree of 
 
 
 
 . The theorems are statements about the solutions of the following system of polynomial equations




Chevalley–Warning theorem states that the number of common solutions 
 
 
 
  is divisible by the characteristic

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Or in other words, the cardinality of the vanishing set of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  modulo 
 
 
 
 .
Chevalley's theorem states that if the system has the trivial solution 
 
 
 
 , i.e. if the polynomials have no constant terms, then the system also has a non-trivial solution 
 
 
 
 .

Chevalley's theorem is an immediate consequence of the Chevalley–Warning theorem since 
 
 
 
  is at least 2.
Both theorems are best possible in the sense that, given any 
 
 
 
 , the list 
 
 
 
  has total degree 
 
 
 
  and only the trivial solution. Alternatively, using just one polynomial, we can take f1 to be the degree n polynomial given by the norm of x1a1 + ... + xnan where the elements a form a basis of the finite field of order pn.
Proof of Warning's theorem
Remark: If 
 
 
 
  so the sum over 
 
 
 
  of any polynomial in 
 
 
 
  of degree less than 
 
 
 
  also vanishes.
The total number of common solutions modulo 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is equal to


 
  because each term is 1 for a solution and 0 otherwise. If the sum of the degrees of the polynomials 
 
 
 
  is less than n then this vanishes by the remark above.
Artin's conjecture
It is a consequence of Chevalley's theorem that finite fields are quasi-algebraically closed. This had been conjectured by Emil Artin in 1935. The motivation behind Artin's conjecture was his observation that quasi-algebraically closed fields have trivial Brauer group, together with the fact that finite fields have trivial Brauer group by Wedderburn's theorem.
The Ax–Katz theorem
The Ax–Katz theorem, named after James Ax and Nicholas Katz, determines more accurately a power 
 
 
 
  of the cardinality 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  dividing the number of solutions; here, if 
 
 
 
  is the largest of the 
 
 
 
 , then the exponent 
 
 
 
  can be taken as the ceiling function of



The Ax–Katz result has an interpretation in étale cohomology as a divisibility result for the (reciprocals of) the zeroes and poles of the local zeta-function. Namely, the same power of $q$ divides each of these algebraic integers.
See also

Combinatorial Nullstellensatz

References








"
Category:Finite fields Category:Diophantine geometry Category:Theorems in algebra


