


Stagnation pressure




Stagnation pressure

In fluid dynamics, stagnation pressure (or pitot pressure) is the static pressure at a stagnation point in a fluid flow.1 At a stagnation point the fluid velocity is zero and all kinetic energy has been converted into pressure energy (isentropically). Stagnation pressure is equal to the sum of the free-stream dynamic pressure and free-stream static pressure.2
Stagnation pressure is sometimes referred to as pitot pressure because it is measured using a pitot tube.
Magnitude
The magnitude of stagnation pressure can be derived from a simplified form of Bernoulli Equation.34 For incompressible flow,



where:


 
  is the stagnation pressure


 
  is the fluid density


 
  is the velocity of fluid


 
  is the static pressure at any point.
At a stagnation point, the velocity of the fluid is zero. If the gravity head of the fluid at a particular point in a fluid flow is zero, then the stagnation pressure at that particular point is equal to total pressure.5 However, in general total pressure differs from stagnation pressure in that total pressure equals the sum of stagnation pressure and gravity head.



In compressible flow the stagnation pressure is equal to static pressure only if the fluid entering the stagnation point is brought to rest isentropically.6 For many purposes in compressible flow, the stagnation enthalpy or stagnation temperature plays a role similar to the stagnation pressure in incompressible flow.
Compressible flow
Stagnation pressure is the static pressure a fluid retains when brought to rest isentropically from Mach number M.7



or, assuming an isentropic process, the stagnation pressure can be calculated from the ratio of stagnation temperature to static temperature:



where:


 
  is the stagnation pressure


 
  is the static pressure


 
  is the stagnation temperature


 
  is the static temperature


 
  ratio of specific heats
The above derivation holds only for the case when the fluid is assumed to be calorically perfect. For such fluids, specific heats and 
 
 
 
 
  are assumed to be constant and invariant with temperature (a thermally perfect fluid).
See also

Hydraulic ram

Notes
References

Clancy, L.J. (1975), Aerodynamics, Pitman Publishing Limited, London. ISBN 0-273-01120-0
Cengel, Boles, "Thermodynamics, an engineering approach, McGraw Hill, ISBN 0-07-254904-1

External links

Pitot-Statics and the Standard Atmosphere
The Measurement of Air Speed in Airplanes

"
Category:Fluid dynamics



Clancy, L.J., Aerodynamics, Section 3.5
Stagnation Pressure at Eric Weisstein's World of Physics (Wolfram Research)
Equation 4, Bernoulli Equation - The Engineering Toolbox


Clancy, L.J. Aerodynamics, Section 3.12
Equations 35,44, Equations, Tables and Charts for Compressible Flow




