


Momentum transfer




Momentum transfer

In particle physics, wave mechanics and optics, momentum transfer is the amount of momentum that one particle gives to another particle.
In the simplest example of scattering of two colliding particles with initial momenta 
 
 
 
 , resulting in final momenta 
 
 
 
 , the momentum transfer is given by


 
  where the last identity expresses momentum conservation. Momentum transfer is an important quantity because 
 
 
 
  is a better measure for the typical distance resolution of the reaction than the momenta themselves.
Wave mechanics and optics
A wave has a momentum 
 
 
 
  and is a vectorial quantity. The difference of the momentum of the scattered wave to the incident wave is called momentum transfer. The wave number k is the absolute of the wave vector

 
  and is related to the wavelength

 
 . Often, momentum transfer is given in wavenumber units in reciprocal length


Diffraction
The momentum transfer plays an important role in the evaluation of neutron, X-ray and electron diffraction for the investigation of condensed matter. Bragg diffraction occurs on the atomic crystal lattice, conserves the wave energy and thus is called elastic scattering, where the wave numbers final and incident particles, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, are equal and just the direction changes by a reciprocal lattice vector 
 
 
 
  with the relation to the lattice spacing 
 
 
 
 . As momentum is conserved, the transfer of momentum occurs to crystal momentum.
The presentation in 
 
 
 
 -space is generic and does not depend on the type of radiation and wavelength used but only on the sample system, which allows to compare results obtained from many different methods. Some established communities such as powder diffraction employ the diffraction angle 
 
 
 
  as the independent variable, which worked fine in the early years when only a few characteristic wavelengths such as Cu-K
 
 
 
  were available. The relationship to 
 
 
 
 -space is



and basically states that larger 
 
 
 
  corresponds to larger 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Mandelstam variables
Momentum-transfer cross section
impulse (physics)

"
Category:Particle physics Category:Neutron-related techniques Category:Synchrotron-related techniques Category:Diffraction


