


Solvable Lie algebra




Solvable Lie algebra

In mathematics, a Lie algebra

 
  is solvable if its derived series terminates in the zero subalgebra. The derived Lie algebra is the subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 , denoted



that consists of all Lie brackets of pairs of elements of 
 
 
 
 . The derived series is the sequence of subalgebras



If the derived series eventually arrives at the zero subalgebra, then the Lie algebra is solvable.1 The derived series for Lie algebras is analogous to the derived series for commutator subgroups in group theory.
Any nilpotent Lie algebra is solvable, a fortiori, but the converse is not true. The solvable Lie algebras and the semisimple Lie algebras form two large and generally complementary classes, as is shown by the Levi decomposition.
A maximal solvable subalgebra is called a Borel subalgebra. The largest solvable ideal of a Lie algebra is called the radical.
Characterizations
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite-dimensional Lie algebra over a field of characteristic

 
 . The following are equivalent.

(i) 
 
 
 
  is solvable.
(ii) 
 
 
 
 , the adjoint representation of 
 
 
 
 , is solvable.
(iii) There is a finite sequence of ideals  of 
 
 
 
 :
 
 


(iv) 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent.2
(v) For 
 
 

 
 -dimensional, there is a finite sequence of subalgebras  of 
 
 
 
 :
 
 




with each  an ideal in .3 A sequence of this type is called an elementary sequence.
 


(vi) There is a finite sequence of subalgebras  of 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 




such that  is an ideal in  and  is abelian.4



(vii) 
 
 
 
  is solvable if and only if its Killing form

 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .5 This is Cartan's criterion for solvability.

Properties
Lie's Theorem states that if 
 
 
 
  is a finite-dimensional vector space over an algebraically closed field 
 
 
 
  of characteristic zero, and 
 
 
 
  is a solvable linear Lie algebra over a subfield 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , and if 
 
 
 
  is a representation of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 , then there exists a simultaneous eigenvector

 
  of the matrices 
 
 
 
  for all elements 
 
 
 
 . More generally, the result holds if all eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  lie in 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .6

Every Lie subalgebra, quotient and extension of a solvable Lie algebra is solvable.
A solvable nonzero Lie algebra has a nonzero abelian ideal, the last nonzero term in the derived series.7
A homomorphic image of a solvable Lie algebra is solvable.8
If 
 
 
 
  is a solvable ideal in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is solvable, then 
 
 
 
  is solvable.9
If 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional, then there is a unique solvable ideal 
 
 
 
  containing all solvable ideals in 
 
 
 
 . This ideal is the radical of 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 .10
If 
 
 
 
  are solvable ideals, then so is 
 
 
 
 .11
A solvable Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  has a unique largest nilpotent ideal 
 
 
 
 , the set of all 
 
 
 
  such that  is nilpotent. If 
 
 
 
  is any derivation of 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .12

Completely solvable Lie algebras
A Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is called completely solvable or split solvable if it has an elementary sequence of ideals in 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . A finite-dimensional nilpotent Lie algebra is completely solvable, and a completely solvable Lie algebra is solvable. Over an algebraically closed field a solvable Lie algebra is completely solvable, but the  real Lie algebra of the group of Euclidean isometries of the plane is solvable but not completely solvable.

(a) A solvable Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is split solvable if and only if the eigenvalues of  are in 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .13

Examples

A semisimple Lie algebra is not solvable.14
Every abelian Lie algebra is solvable.
Every nilpotent Lie algebra is solvable.
Let  be a subalgebra of  consisting of upper triangular matrices. Then  is solvable.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of matrices on the form





Then 
 
 
 
  is solvable, but not split solvable.15 It is isomorphic with the Lie algebra of the group of translations and rotations in the plane.
 

Solvable Lie groups
The terminology arises from the solvable groups of abstract group theory. There are several possible definitions of solvable Lie group. For a Lie group G, there is

termination of the usual derived series, in other words taking G as an abstract group;
termination of the closures of the derived series;
having a solvable Lie algebra.

To have equivalence one needs to assume G connected. For connected Lie groups, these definitions are the same, and the derived series of Lie algebras are the Lie algebra of the derived series of (closed) subgroups.
See also

Cartan's criterion
Killing form
Lie-Kolchin theorem
Solvmanifold
Dixmier mapping

External links

EoM article Lie algebra, solvable
EoM article Lie group, solvable

Notes
References




.

"
Category:Properties of Lie algebras



↩
 Proposition 1.39.↩
 Proposition 1.23.↩
↩
 Proposition 1.46.↩
 Theorem 1.25.↩

↩



 Proposition 1.40.↩







