


Gauge covariant derivative




Gauge covariant derivative

The gauge covariant derivative is a generalization of the covariant derivative used in general relativity. If a theory has gauge transformations, it means that some physical properties of certain equations are preserved under those transformations. Likewise, the gauge covariant derivative is the ordinary derivative modified in such a way as to make it behave like a true vector operator, so that equations written using the covariant derivative preserve their physical properties under gauge transformations.
Fluid dynamics
In fluid dynamics, the gauge covariant derivative of a fluid may be defined as


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is a velocity vector field of a fluid.
Gauge theory
In gauge theory, which studies a particular class of fields which are of importance in quantum field theory, the minimally-coupled gauge covariant derivative is defined as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the electromagnetic vector potential.
(Note that this is valid for a Minkowski metric signature

 
 , which is used in this article. For 
 
 
 
  the minus becomes a plus.)
Construction of the covariant derivative throught the comparator
Construction of the covariant derivative throught Gauge covariance requirement
Consider a generic (possibly non-Abelian) Gauge transformation given by





 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an element of the Lie algebra associated with the Lie group of transformations, and can be expressed in terms of the generators as 
 
 
 
 .
The partial derivative 
 
 
 
  transforms accordingly as


 
  and a kinetic term of the form 
 
 
 
  is thus not invariant under this transformation.
We can introduce the covariant derivative 
 
 
 
  in this context as a generalization of the partial derivative 
 
 
 
  which transforms covariantly under the Gauge transformation, i.e. an object satisfying


 
  which in operatorial form takes the form


 
  We thus compute (omitting the explicit 
 
 
 
  dependences for brevity)


 
 , where





 
  The requirement for 
 
 
 
  to transform covariantly is now translated in the condition


 
  To obtain an explicit expression we make the Ansatz


 
  from which it follows that


 
  and


 
  which, using 
 
 
 
 , takes the form


 
  We have thus found an object 
 
 
 
  such that



Quantum electrodynamics
If a gauge transformation is given by


 
  and for the gauge potential


 
  then 
 
 
 
  transforms as


 
 , and 
 
 
 
  transforms as


 
  and 
 
 
 
  transforms as


 
  so that


 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the QED Lagrangian is therefore gauge invariant, and the gauge covariant derivative is thus named aptly.
On the other hand, the non-covariant derivative 
 
 
 
  would not preserve the Lagrangian's gauge symmetry, since


 
 .
Quantum chromodynamics
In quantum chromodynamics, the gauge covariant derivative is1


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the coupling constant, 
 
 
 
  is the gluon gauge field, for eight different gluons 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a four-component Dirac spinor, and where 
 
 
 
  is one of the eight Gell-Mann matrices, 
 
 
 
 .
Standard Model
The covariant derivative in the Standard Model can be expressed in the following form:2



See also

Kinetic momentum
Connection (mathematics)
Minimal coupling
Ricci calculus

References



Tsutomu Kambe, Gauge Principle For Ideal Fluids And Variational Principle. (PDF file.)

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Connection (mathematics) Category:Gauge theories



http://www.fuw.edu.pl/~dobaczew/maub-42w/node9.html
See e.g. eq. 3.116 in C. Tully, Elementary Particle Physics in a Nutshell, 2011, Princeton University Press.




