


Harnack's inequality




Harnack's inequality
In ma
 thematics, Harnack's inequality is an inequality relating the values of a positive harmonic function at two points, introduced by .  and  generalized Harnack's inequality to solutions of elliptic or parabolic partial differential equations. Perelman's solution of the Poincaré conjecture uses a version of the Harnack inequality, found by , for the Ricci flow. Harnack's inequality is used to prove Harnack's theorem about the convergence of sequences of harmonic functions. Harnack's inequality can also be used to show the interior regularity of weak solutions of partial differential equations.
The statement
 Harnack's inequality applies to a non-negative function f defined on a closed ball in Rn with radius R and centre x0. It states that, if f is continuous on the closed ball and harmonic on its interior, then for any point x with |x - x0| = r \displaystylef(x_0)\le f(x) \le {1+(r/R)\over [1-(r/R)]^{n-1}} f(x_0).}
In the plane R2 (n = 2) the inequality can be written:



For general domains 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  the inequality can be stated as follows: If 
 
 
 
  is a bounded domain with 
 
 
 
 , then there is a constant 
 
 
 
  such that
for every twice differentiable, harmonic and nonnegative function 
 
 
 
 . The constant 
 
 
 
  is independent of 
 
 
 
 ; it depends only on the domains 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Proof of Harnack's inequality in a ball
By Poisson's formula



where ωn − 1 is the area of the unit sphere in Rn and r = |x - x0|.
Since



the kernel in the integrand satisfies



Harnack's inequality follows by substituting this inequality in the above integral and using the fact that the average of a harmonic function over a sphere equals it value at the center of the sphere:



Elliptic partial differential equations
For elliptic partial differential equations, Harnack's inequality states that the supremum of a positive solution in some connected open region is bounded by some constant times the infimum, possibly with an added term containing a functional norm of the data:


 
  The constant depends on the ellipticity of the equation and the connected open region.
Parabolic partial differential equations
There is a version of Harnack's inequality for linear parabolic PDEs such as heat equation.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth domain in 
 
 
 
  and consider the linear parabolic operator



with smooth and bounded coefficients and a nondegenerate matrix 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a solution of


 
  in 
 
 

such that


 
  in 
 
 

Let 
 
 
 
  be a compact subset of 
 
 
 
  and choose 
 
 
 
 . Then there exists a constant 
 
 
 
  (depending only on 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and the coefficients of 
 
 
 
 ) such that, for each 
 
 
 
 ,



See also

Harnack's theorem
Harmonic function

References












L. C. Evans (1998), Partial differential equations. American Mathematical Society, USA. For elliptic PDEs see Theorem 5, p. 334 and for parabolic PDEs see Theorem 10, p. 370.

"
Category:Harmonic functions Category:Inequalities


