


Verma module




Verma module

Verma modules, named after Daya-Nand Verma, are objects in the representation theory of Lie algebras, a branch of mathematics.
Verma modules can be used to prove that an irreducible highest weight module with highest weight

 
  is finite-dimensional, if and only if the weight 
 
 
 
  is dominant and integral. Their homomorphisms correspond to invariant differential operators over flag manifolds.
Definition of Verma modules
The definition relies on a stack of relatively dense notation. Let 
 
 
 
  be a field and denote the following:



 
 , a semisimple Lie algebra over 
 
 
 
 , with universal enveloping algebra

 
 .


 
 , a Borel subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 , with universal enveloping algebra 
 
 
 
 .


 
 , a Cartan subalgebra of 
 
 
 
 . We do not consider its universal enveloping algebra.


 
 , a fixed weight.

To define the Verma module, we begin by defining some other modules:



 
 , the one-dimensional 
 
 
 
 -vector space (i.e. whose underlying set is 
 
 
 
  itself) together with a 
 
 
 
 -module structure such that 
 
 
 
  acts as multiplication by 
 
 
 
  and the positive root spaces act trivially. As 
 
 
 
  is a left 
 
 
 
 -module, it is consequently a left 
 
 
 
 -module.
Using the Poincaré–Birkhoff–Witt theorem, there is a natural right 
 
 
 
 -module structure on 
 
 
 
  by right multiplication of a subalgebra. 
 
 
 
  is naturally a left 
 
 
 
 -module, and together with this structure, it is a 
 
 
 
 -bimodule.

Now we can define the Verma module (with respect to 
 
 
 
 ) as


 
  which is naturally a left 
 
 
 
 -module (i.e. a representation of 
 
 
 
 ). The Poincaré–Birkhoff–Witt theorem implies that the underlying vector space of 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Lie subalgebra generated by the negative root spaces of 
 
 
 
 .
Basic properties
Verma modules, considered as 
 
 
 
 -modules, are highest weight modules, i.e. they are generated by a highest weight vector. This highest weight vector is 
 
 
 
  (the first 
 
 
 
  is the unit in 
 
 
 
  and the second is the unit in the field 
 
 
 
 , considered as the 
 
 
 
 -module

 
 ) and it has weight 
 
 
 
 .
Verma modules are weight modules, i.e. 
 
 
 
  is a direct sum of all its weight spaces. Each weight space in 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional and the dimension of the 
 
 
 
 -weight space 
 
 
 
  is the number of possibilities how to obtain 
 
 
 
  as a sum of positive roots (this is closely related to the so-called Kostant partition function).
Verma modules have a very important property: If 
 
 
 
  is any representation generated by a highest weight vector of weight 
 
 
 
 , there is a surjective

 
 -homomorphism

 
  That is, all representations with highest weight 
 
 
 
  that are generated by the highest weight vector (so called highest weight modules) are quotients of 
 
 

 
  contains a unique maximal submodule, and its quotient is the unique (up to isomorphism) irreducible representation with highest weight 
 
 

The Verma module 
 
 
 
  itself is irreducible if and only if none of the coordinates of 
 
 
 
  in the basis of fundamental weights is from the set 
 
 
 
 .
The Verma module 
 
 
 
  is called regular, if its highest weight λ is on the affine Weyl orbit of a dominant weight 
 
 
 
 . In other word, there exist an element w of the Weyl group W such that


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the affine action of the Weyl group.
The Verma module 
 
 
 
  is called singular, if there is no dominant weight on the affine orbit of λ. In this case, there exists a weight 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is on the wall of the fundamental Weyl chamber (δ is the sum of all fundamental weights).
Homomorphisms of Verma modules
For any two weights 
 
 
 
  a non-trivial homomorphism



may exist only if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are linked with an affine action of the Weyl group

 
  of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
 . This follows easily from the Harish-Chandra theorem on infinitesimal central characters.
Each homomorphism of Verma modules is injective and the dimension



for any 
 
 
 
 . So, there exists a nonzero 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to a (unique) submodule of 
 
 
 
 .
The full classification of Verma module homomorphisms was done by Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand1 and Verma2 and can be summed up in the following statement:

There exists a nonzero homomorphism 
 
 
 
  if and only if there exists a sequence of weights








such that 
 
 
 
  for some positive roots 
 
 
 
  (and 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding root reflection and 
 
 
 
  is the sum of all fundamental weights) and for each 
 
 
 
  is a natural number (
 
 
 
  is the coroot associated to the root 
 
 
 
 ).

If the Verma modules 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are regular, then there exists a unique dominant weight

 
  and unique elements w, w′ of the Weyl group W such that

P
 
 


and



where 
 
 
 
  is the affine action of the Weyl group. If the weights are further integral, then there exists a nonzero homomorphism



if and only if



in the Bruhat ordering of the Weyl group.
Jordan–Hölder series
Let


 
  be a sequence of 
 
 
 
 -modules so that the quotient B/A is irreducible with highest weight μ. Then there exists a nonzero homomorphism 
 
 
 
 .
An easy consequence of this is, that for any highest weight modules

 
  such that


 
  there exists a nonzero homomorphism 
 
 
 
 .
Bernstein–Gelfand–Gelfand resolution
Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite-dimensional irreducible representation of the Lie algebra

 
  with highest weight λ. We know from the section about homomorphisms of Verma modules that there exists a homomorphism



if and only if



in the Bruhat ordering of the Weyl group. The following theorem describes a resolution of 
 
 
 
  in terms of Verma modules (it was proved by Bernstein–Gelfand–Gelfand in 19753) :

There exists an exact sequence of 
 
 
 
 -homomorphisms


 
  where n is the length of the largest element of the Weyl group.

A similar resolution exists for generalized Verma modules as well. It is denoted shortly as the BGG resolution.
Recently, these resolutions were studied in special cases, because of their connections to invariant differential operators in a special type of Cartan geometry, the parabolic geometries. These are Cartan geometries modeled on the pair (G, P) where G is a Lie group and P a parabolic subgroup).4
See also

Generalized Verma module
Weyl module

Notes
References


.

.

.

.


.

"
Category:Representation theory of Lie algebras



Bernstein I.N., Gelfand I.M., Gelfand S.I., Structure of Representations that are generated by vectors of highest weight, Functional. Anal. Appl. 5 (1971)↩
Verma N., Structure of certain induced representations of complex semisimple Lie algebras, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 74 (1968)↩
Bernstein I. N., Gelfand I. M., Gelfand S. I., Differential Operators on the Base Affine Space and a Study of g-Modules, Lie Groups and Their Representations, I. M. Gelfand, Ed., Adam Hilger, London, 1975.↩
For more information, see: Eastwood M., Variations on the de Rham complex, Notices Amer. Math. Soc, 1999 - ams.org. Calderbank D.M., Diemer T., Differential invariants and curved Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand sequences, Arxiv preprint math.DG/0001158, 2000 - arxiv.org 1. Cap A., Slovak J., Soucek V., Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand sequences, Arxiv preprint math.DG/0001164, 2000 - arxiv.org 2↩




