


N-skeleton




N-skeleton

(Figure)
This hypercube graph is the  of the tesseract.


This article is not about the topological skeleton concept of computer graphics


In mathematics, particularly in algebraic topology, the  of a topological space X presented as a simplicial complex (resp. CW complex) refers to the subspace Xn that is the union of the simplices of X (resp. cells of X) of dimensions  In other words, given an inductive definition of a complex, the  is obtained by stopping at the .
These subspaces increase with n. The  is a discrete space, and the  a topological graph. The skeletons of a space are used in obstruction theory, to construct spectral sequences by means of filtrations, and generally to make inductive arguments. They are particularly important when X has infinite dimension, in the sense that the Xn do not become constant as 
In geometry
In geometry, a  of  P (functionally represented as skelk(P)) consists of all  elements of dimension up to k.1
For example:

skel0(cube) = 8 vertices
 
skel1(cube) = 8 vertices, 12 edges
 
skel2(cube) = 8 vertices, 12 edges, 6 square faces
 

For simplicial sets
The above definition of the skeleton of a simplicial complex is a particular case of the notion of skeleton of a simplicial set. Briefly speaking, a simplicial set 
 
 
 
  can be described by a collection of sets 
 
 
 
 , together with face and degeneracy maps between them satisfying a number of equations. The idea of the n-skeleton 
 
 
 
  is to first discard the sets 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and then to complete the collection of the 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  to the "smallest possible" simplicial set so that the resulting simplicial set contains no non-degenerate simplices in degrees 
 
 
 
 .
More precisely, the restriction functor


 
  has a left adjoint, denoted 
 
 
 
 .2 (The notations 
 
 
 
  are comparable with the one of image functors for sheaves.) The n-skeleton of some simplicial set 
 
 
 
  is defined as



Coskeleton
Moreover, 
 
 
 
  has a right adjoint 
 
 
 
 . The n-coskeleton is defined as


 
  For example, the 0-skeleton of K is the constant simplicial set defined by 
 
 
 
 . The 0-coskeleton is given by the Cech nerve


 
  (The boundary and degeneracy morphisms are given by various projections and diagonal embeddings, respectively.)
The above constructions work for more general categories (instead of sets) as well, provided that the category has fiber products. The coskeleton is needed to define the concept of hypercovering in homotopical algebra and algebraic geometry.3
References
External links



"
Category:Algebraic topology Category:General topology



Peter McMullen, Egon Schulte, Abstract Regular Polytopes, Cambridge University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-521-81496-0 (Page 29)
, section IV.3.2





