


Distribution (differential geometry)




Distribution (differential geometry)

In differential geometry, a discipline within mathematics, a distribution is a subset of the tangent bundle of a manifold satisfying certain properties. Distributions are used to build up notions of integrability, and specifically of a foliation of a manifold.
Even though they share the same name, distributions we discuss in this article have nothing to do with distributions in the sense of analysis.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
  manifold of dimension 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that for each 
 
 
 
 , we assign an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspace

 
  of the tangent space in such a way that for a neighbourhood

 
  of 
 
 
 
  there exist 
 
 
linearly independent smooth vector fields

 
  such that for any point 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
span

 
  We let 
 
 
 
  refer to the collection of all the 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and we then call 
 
 
 
  a distribution of dimension 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 , or sometimes a 


 
 -plane distribution on 
 
 
 
  The set of smooth vector fields 
 
 
 
  is called a local basis of 
 
 

Involutive distributions
We say that a distribution 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is involutive if for every point 
 
 
 
  there exists a local basis 
 
 
 
  of the distribution in a neighbourhood of 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  (the Lie bracket of two vector fields) is in the span of 
 
 
 
  That is, if 
 
 
 
  is a linear combination of 
 
 
 
  Normally this is written as 
 
 

Involutive distributions are the tangent spaces to foliations. Involutive distributions are important in that they satisfy the conditions of the Frobenius theorem, and thus lead to integrable systems.
A related idea occurs in Hamiltonian mechanics: two functions f and g on a symplectic manifold are said to be in mutual involution if their Poisson bracket vanishes.
Generalized distributions
A generalized distribution, or Stefan-Sussmann distribution, is similar to a distribution, but the subspaces 
 
 
 
  are not required to all be of the same dimension. The definition requires that the 
 
 
 
  are determined locally by a set of vector fields, but these will no longer be linearly independent everywhere. It is not hard to see that the dimension of 
 
 
 
  is lower semicontinuous, so that at special points the dimension is lower than at nearby points.
One class of examples is furnished by a non-free action of a Lie group on a manifold, the vector fields in question being the infinitesimal generators of the group action (a free action gives rise to a genuine distribution). Another arises in dynamical systems, where the set of vector fields in the definition is the set of vector fields that commute with a given one. There are also examples and applications in Control theory, where the generalized distribution represents infinitesimal constraints of the system.
References

William M. Boothby. Section IV. 8. Frobenius's Theorem in An Introduction to Differentiable Manifolds and Riemannian Geometry, Academic Press, San Diego, California, 2003.
P. Stefan, Accessible sets, orbits and foliations with singularities. Proc. London Math. Soc. 29 (1974), 699-713.
H.J. Sussmann, Orbits of families of vector fields and integrability of distributions. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 180 (1973), 171-188.

External links



"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Foliations


