   Glyoxylic acid      Glyoxylic acid   Glyoxylic acid or oxoacetic acid is an organic compound . Together with acetic acid , glycolic acid , and oxalic acid , glyoxylic acid is one of the C 2  carboxylic acids . It is a colourless solid that occurs naturally and is useful industrially.  Structure and nomenclature  Glyoxylic acid is usually described with the chemical formula OCHCO 2 H, i.e. containing an aldehyde  functional group (see image in upper right). In fact the aldehyde is not observed in solution or as a solid. In general aldehydes with electron-withdrawing substituents often exist mainly as their hydrate. Thus, the formula for glyoxylic acid is really (HO) 2 CHCO 2 H, described as the "monohydrate." This diol exists in equilibrium with the dimeric hemiacetal in solution: 1 Henry's law constant of glyoxylic acid is K H = 1.09 × 10 4 × exp[(40.0 × 10 3 /R) × (1/T − 1/298)]. 2   2 (HO) 2 CHCO 2 H    ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   O[(HO)CHCO 2 H] 2 + H 2 O   Occurrences and Preparations  The conjugate base of gloxylic acid is known as glyoxylate and is the form that the compound exists in solution at neutral pH. Glyoxylate is an intermediate of the glyoxylate cycle , which enables organisms , such as bacteria, 3 fungi, and plants 4 to convert fatty acids into carbohydrates . Glyoxylate is the byproduct of the amidation process in biosynthesis of several amidated peptides.  The compound is formed by organic oxidation of glyoxal with hot nitric acid , the main side product being oxalic acid.  Ozonolysis of maleic acid is also effective. 5  Historically glyoxylic acid was prepared from oxalic acid electrosynthetically : 6 7   380px    In organic synthesis, lead dioxide anodes were applied for the production of glyoxylic acid from oxalic acid in a sulfuric acid electrolyte. 8  Reactions and uses  Glyoxylic acid is about 10x stronger acid than acetic acid, with an acid dissociation constant of 4.7 × 10 −4 (pK a = 3.32):   (HO) 2 CHCOOH    ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   (HO) 2 CHCO 2 − + H +    With base, glyoxylic acid disproportionates :   2 OCHCOOH + H 2 O → HOCH 2 COOH + HOOC–COOH   Even though the aldehyde is a very minor component of its solutions (as with formaldehyde solutions), glyoxylic acid behaves as an aldehyde in its reactions (again like formaldehyde). For example, it gives heterocycles upon condensation with urea and 1,2-diaminobenzene .  Phenol derivatives  Its condensation with phenols is versatile. The immediate product is 4-hydroxymandelic acid . This species reacts with ammonia to give hydroxyphenylglycine, a precursor to the drug amoxicillin . Reduction of the 4-hydroxymandelic acid gives 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid , a precursor to the drug atenolol . Condensations with guaiacol in place of phenol provides a route to vanillin , a net formylation . 9 10 11  Hopkins Cole reaction  Glyoxylic acid is one of the chemicals used in the Hopkins Cole reaction , used to check for the presence of tryptophan in proteins.  Safety  The compound is not very toxic with an  for rats of 2500 mg/kg.  References    "  Category:Carboxylic acids  Category:Aldehydes     Georges Mattioda and Yani Christidis “Glyoxylic Acid” Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2002, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩   ↩  ↩  ↩   ↩  ↩     