


Lie algebra cohomology




Lie algebra cohomology

In mathematics, Lie algebra cohomology is a cohomology theory for Lie algebras. It was defined by  in order to give an algebraic construction of the cohomology of the underlying topological spaces of compact Lie groups. In the paper above, a specific chain complex, called the Koszul complex, is defined for a module over a Lie algebra, and its cohomology is taken in the normal sense.
Motivation
If G is a compact simply connected Lie group, then it is determined by its Lie algebra, so it should be possible to calculate its cohomology from the Lie algebra. This can be done as follows. Its cohomology is the de Rham cohomology of the complex of differential forms on G. This can be replaced by the complex of equivariant differential forms, which can in turn be identified with the exterior algebra of the Lie algebra, with a suitable differential. The construction of this differential on an exterior algebra makes sense for any Lie algebra, so is used to define Lie algebra cohomology for all Lie algebras. More generally one uses a similar construction to define Lie algebra cohomology with coefficients in a module.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie algebra over a commutative ring R with universal enveloping algebra

 
 , and let M be a representation of 
 
 
 
  (equivalently, a 
 
 
 
 -module). Considering R as a trivial representation of 
 
 
 
 , one defines the cohomology groups








(see Ext functor for the definition of Ext). Equivalently, these are the right derived functors of the left exact invariant submodule functor








Analogously, one can define Lie algebra homology as








(see Tor functor for the definition of Tor), which is equivalent to the left derived functors of the right exact coinvariants functor








Some important basic results about the cohomology of Lie algebras include Whitehead's lemmas, Weyl's theorem, and the Levi decomposition theorem.
Chevalley-Eilenberg complex
The Lie algebra cohomology of the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  over the field 
 
 
 
 , with values in the left 
 
 
 
 -module 
 
 
 
  can be computed using the Chevalley-Eilenberg complex

 
 . The 
 
 
 
 -cochains in this complex are the alternating 
 
 
 
 -multilinear functions 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  variables with values in 
 
 
 
 . The coboundary of an 
 
 
 
 -cochain is the 
 
 
 
 -cochain 
 
 
 
  given by1






where the caret signifies omitting that argument.
Cohomology in small dimensions
The zeroth cohomology group is (by definition) the invariants of the Lie algebra acting on the module:



The first cohomology group is the space 
 
 
 
  of derivations modulo the space 
 
 
 
  of inner derivations


 
  where a derivation is a map 
 
 
 
  from the Lie algebra to 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  and is called inner if it is given by


 
  for some 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
The second cohomology group


 
  is the space of equivalence classes of Lie algebra extensions


 
  of the Lie algebra by the module 
 
 
 
 .
There do not seem to be any similar easy interpretations for the higher cohomology groups.
See also

BRST formalism in theoretical physics.

References





External links
"
Category:Cohomology theories Category:Homological algebra Category:Lie algebras



↩




