


Filtered algebra




Filtered algebra

In mathematics, a filtered algebra is a generalization of the notion of a graded algebra. Examples appear in many branches of mathematics, especially in homological algebra and representation theory.
A filtered algebra over the field

 
  is an algebra

 
  over 
 
 
 
  which has an increasing sequence 
 
 
 
  of subspaces of 
 
 
 
  such that



and that is compatible with the multiplication in the following sense



Associated graded algebra
In general there is the following construction that produces a graded algebra out of a filtered algebra.
If 
 
 
 
  is a filtered algebra then the associated graded algebra

 
  is defined as follows: G_n\,, 
where,


 
  and



|2= the multiplication is defined by



for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . (More precisely, the multiplication map 
 
 
 
  is combined from the maps



for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .) }} The multiplication is well defined and endows 
 
 
 
  with the structure of a graded algebra, with gradation 
 
 
 
  Furthermore if 
 
 
 
  is associative then so is 
 
 
 
 . Also if 
 
 
 
  is unital, such that the unit lies in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  will be unital as well.
As algebras 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are distinct (with the exception of the trivial case that 
 
 
 
  is graded) but as vector spaces they are isomorphic.
Examples
Any graded algebra graded by ℕ, for example 
 
 
 
 , has a filtration given by 
 
 
 
 .
An example of a filtered algebra is the Clifford algebra

 
  of a vector space 
 
 
 
  endowed with a quadratic form

 
  The associated graded algebra is 
 
 
 
 , the exterior algebra of 
 
 

The symmetric algebra on the dual of an affine space is a filtered algebra of polynomials; on a vector space, one instead obtains a graded algebra.
The universal enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra

 
  is also naturally filtered. The PBW theorem states that the associated graded algebra is simply 
 
 
 
 .
Scalar differential operators on a manifold 
 
 
 
  form a filtered algebra where the filtration is given by the degree of differential operators. The associated graded algebra is the commutative algebra of smooth functions on the cotangent bundle 
 
 
 
  which are polynomial along the fibers of the projection 
 
 
 
 .
The group algebra of a group with a length function is a filtered algebra.
See also

Filtration (mathematics)
Length function

References



"
Category:Algebras Category:Homological algebra


