


Breusch–Pagan test




Breusch–Pagan test

In statistics, the Breusch–Pagan test, developed in 1979 by Trevor Breusch and Adrian Pagan,1 is used to test for heteroskedasticity in a linear regression model. It was independently suggested with some extension by R. Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg in 1983.2 It tests whether the estimated variance of the residuals from a regression are dependent on the values of the independent variables. In that case, heteroskedasticity is present.
Suppose that we estimate the regression model



and obtain from this fitted model a set of values for 
 
 
 
 , the residuals. Ordinary least squares constrains these so that their mean is 0 and so, given the assumption that their variance does not depend on the independent variables, an estimate of this variance can be obtained from the average of the squared values of the residuals. If the assumption is not held to be true, a simple model might be that the variance is linearly related to independent variables. Such a model can be examined by regressing the squared residuals on the independent variables, using an auxiliary regression equation of the form



This is the basis of the Breusch–Pagan test. If an F-test confirms that the independent variables are jointly significant then the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity can be rejected.
The Breusch–Pagan test tests for conditional heteroscedasticity. It is a chi-squared test: the test statistic is nχ2 with k degrees of freedom. It tests the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity. If the Chi Squared value is significant with p-value below an appropriate threshold (e.g. p\sigma_i^2 = h(z_i'\gamma) for the variances of the observations where 
 
 
 
  explain the difference in the variances. The null hypothesis is equivalent to the 
 
 
 
  parameter restrictions:


 
  The following Lagrange multiplier (LM) yields the test statistic for the Breusch–Pagan test:


 
  This test is analogous to following the simple three-step procedure:3

Step 1: Apply OLS in the model



 
  and compute the regression residuals.

Step 2: Perform the auxiliary regression





Step 3: The test statistic is the result of the coefficient of determination of the auxiliary regression in Step 2 and sample size 
 
 
 
  with:



 
  The test statistic is asymptotically distributed as 
 
 
 
  under the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity.4
Software
In R, this test is performed by function ncvTest available in the car package,5 or by function '''bptest '''available in the lmtest package.6
In Stata, one specifies the full regression, and then enters the command estat hettest followed by all independent variables.7
In SAS, breusch pagan can be obtained using the Proc Model option.
In Python, there is a method het_breushpagan in statsmodels.stats.diagnostic (the statsmodels package) for breusch-pagan test.
See also

White test

References
Further reading






"
Category:Statistical tests Category:Regression diagnostics



↩
↩
↩
↩
inside-R: ncvTest {car}↩
R documentation about bptest↩
↩




