


Current (mathematics)




Current (mathematics)

In mathematics, more particularly in functional analysis, differential topology, and geometric measure theory, a k-current in the sense of Georges de Rham is a functional on the space of compactly supported differential k-forms, on a smooth manifold M. Formally currents behave like Schwartz distributions on a space of differential forms. In a geometric setting, they can represent integration over a submanifold, generalizing the Dirac delta function, or more generally even directional derivatives of delta functions (multipoles) spread out along subsets of M.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the space of smooth m-forms with compact support on a smooth manifold

 
 . A current is a linear functional on 
 
 
 
  which is continuous in the sense of distributions. Thus a linear functional



is an m-current if it is continuous in the following sense: If a sequence 
 
 
 
  of smooth forms, all supported in the same compact set, is such that all derivatives of all their coefficients tend uniformly to 0 when 
 
 
 
  tends to infinity, then 
 
 
 
  tends to 0.
The space 
 
 
 
  of m-dimensional currents on 
 
 
 
  is a real vector space with operations defined by



Much of the theory of distributions carries over to currents with minimal adjustments. For example, one may define the support of a current 
 
 
 
  as the complement of the biggest open set

 
  such that


 
  whenever 
 
 

The linear subspace of 
 
 
 
  consisting of currents with support (in the sense above) that is a compact subset of 
 
 
 
  is denoted 
 
 
 
 .
Homological theory
Integration over a compact rectifiable oriented submanifold M (with boundary) of dimension m defines an m-current, denoted by 
 
 
 
 :



If the boundary ∂M of M is rectifiable, then it too defines a current by integration, and by virtue of Stokes' theorem one has:



This relates the exterior derivative d with the boundary operator ∂ on the homology of M.
In view of this formula we can define a boundary operator on arbitrary currents



via duality with the exterior derivative by



for all compactly supported (m−1)-forms ω.
Certain subclasses of currents which are closed uder 
 
 
 
  can be used instead of all currents to create a homology theory, which can satisfy the Eilenberg–Steenrod axioms in certain cases. A classical example is the subclass of integral currents on Lipschitz neighborhood retracts.
Topology and norms
The space of currents is naturally endowed with the weak-* topology, which will be further simply called weak convergence. A sequence Tk of currents, converges to a current T if



It is possible to define several norms on subspaces of the space of all currents. One such norm is the mass norm. If ω is an m-form, then define its comass by



So if ω is a simple m-form, then its mass norm is the usual L∞-norm of its coefficient. The mass of a current T is then defined as



The mass of a current represents the weighted area of the generalized surface. A current such that M(T)  \mathbf F (T) := \inf \{\mathbf M(T - \partial A) + \mathbf M(A) \colon A\in\mathcal E_{m+1}\}.
Two currents are close in the mass norm if they coincide away from a small part. On the other hand, they are close in the flat norm if they coincide up to a small deformation.
Examples
Recall that



so that the following defines a 0-current:



In particular every signed regular measure

 
  is a 0-current:



Let (x, y, z) be the coordinates in ℝ3. Then the following defines a 2-current (one of many):



See also

Georges de Rham
Herbert Federer
Differential geometry
Varifold

References


.

.

.


"
Category:Differential topology Category:Generalized manifolds


