


Grothendieck spectral sequence




Grothendieck spectral sequence

In mathematics, in the field of homological algebra, the Grothendieck spectral sequence, introduced in Tôhoku paper, is a spectral sequence that computes the derived functors of the composition of two functors

 
 , from knowledge of the derived functors of F and G.
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two additive and left exact functors between abelian categories such that 
 
 
 
  takes F-acyclic objects (e.g., injective objects) to 
 
 
 
 -acyclic objects and if 
 
 
 
  has enough injectives, then there is a spectral sequence for each object 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  that admits an F-acyclic resolution:



Many spectral sequences in algebraic geometry are instances of the Grothendieck spectral sequence, for example the Leray spectral sequence.
The exact sequence of low degrees reads

0 → R1G(FA) → R1(GF)(A) → G(R1F(A)) → R2G(FA) → R2(GF)(A).
 

Examples
The Leray spectral sequence
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are topological spaces, let


 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the category of sheaves of abelian groups on X and Y, respectively and


 
  be the category of abelian groups. For a continuous map



there is the (left-exact) direct image functor


 
 .
We also have the global section functors


 
 ,
and



Then since



and the functors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfy the hypotheses (since the direct image functor has an exact left adjoint 
 
 
 
 , pushforwards of injectives are injective and in particular acyclic for the global section functor), the sequence in this case becomes:



for a sheaf

 
  of abelian groups on 
 
 
 
 , and this is exactly the Leray spectral sequence.
Local-to-global Ext spectral sequence
There is a spectral sequence relating the global Ext and the sheaf Ext: let F, G be sheaves of modules over a ringed space

 
 ; e.g., a scheme. Then


1 This is an instance of the Grothendieck spectral sequence: indeed,


 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, 
 
 
 
  sends injective 
 
 
 
 -modules to flaque sheaves,2 which are 
 
 
 
 -acyclic. Hence, the hypothesis is satisfied.
Derivation
We shall use the following lemma:
Proof: Let 
 
 
 
  be the kernel and the image of 
 
 
 
 . We have


 
 , which splits and implies 
 
 
 
  is injective and the first part of the lemma. Next we look at


 
  It splits. Thus,


 
  Similarly we have (using the early splitting):


 
 . The second part now follows. 
 
 

We now construct a spectral sequence. Let 
 
 
 
  be an F-acyclic resolution of A. Writing 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , we have:


 
  Take injective resolutions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the first and the third nonzero terms. By the horseshoe lemma, their direct sum 
 
 
 
  is an injective resolution of 
 
 
 
 . Hence, we found an injective resolution of the complex:


 
  such that each row 
 
 
 
  satisfies the hypothesis of the lemma (cf. the Cartan–Eilenberg resolution.)
Now, the double complex 
 
 
 
  gives rise to two spectral sequences, horizontal and vertical, which we are now going to examine. On the one hand, by definition,


 
 , which is always zero unless q = 0 since 
 
 
 
  is G-acyclic by hypothesis. Hence, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, by the definition and the lemma,


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is an injective resolution of 
 
 
 
  (it is a resolution since its cohomology is trivial),


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the same limiting term, the proof is complete. 
 
 

Notes
References




"
Category:Spectral sequences









