


Bauer–Fike theorem




Bauer–Fike theorem

In mathematics, the Bauer–Fike theorem is a standard result in the perturbation theory of the eigenvalue of a complex-valued diagonalizable matrix. In its substance, it states an absolute upper bound for the deviation of one perturbed matrix eigenvalue from a properly chosen eigenvalue of the exact matrix. Informally speaking, what it says is that the sensitivity of the eigenvalues is estimated by the condition number of the matrix of eigenvectors.
The theorem was proved by Friedrich L. Bauer and C. T. Fike in 1960.
The setup
In what follows we assume that:

 is a diagonalizable matrix;
 is the non-singular eigenvector matrix such that  VΛV −1}}, where 
 
 
 
  is a diagonal matrix.
If  is invertible, its condition number in 

 
 -norm is denoted by  and defined by:









The Bauer–Fike Theorem

Bauer–Fike Theorem. Let 
 
 
 
  be an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
  then there exists 
 
 
 
  such that:
 
 




Proof. We can suppose 
 
 
 
 , otherwise take 
 
 
 
  and the result is trivially true since . Since 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
  and so



However our assumption, 
 
 
 
 , implies that: 
 
 
 
  and therefore we can write:



This reveals 
 
 
 
  to be an eigenvalue of



Since all 
 
 
 
 -norms are consistent matrix norms we have λ{{!}} ≤ {{!!}}A{{!!}}p}} where 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
 . In this instance this gives us:



But  is a diagonal matrix, the 
 
 
 
 -norm of which is easily computed:



whence:



An Alternate Formulation
The theorem can also be reformulated to better suit numerical methods. In fact, dealing with real eigensystem problems, one often has an exact matrix 
 
 
 
 , but knows only an approximate eigenvalue-eigenvector couple,  and needs to bound the error. The following version comes in help.

Bauer–Fike Theorem (Alternate Formulation). Let  be an approximate eigenvalue-eigenvector couple, and  Ava − λava}}. Then there exists 
 
 
 
  such that:
 
 




Proof. We can suppose , otherwise take  λa}} and the result is trivially true since . So  exists, so we can write:



since 
 
 
 
  is diagonalizable; taking the 
 
 
 
 -norm of both sides, we obtain:



However



is a diagonal matrix and its 
 
 
 
 -norm is easily computed:



whence:



A Relative Bound
Both formulations of Bauer–Fike theorem yield an absolute bound. The following corollary is useful whenever a relative bound is needed:

Corollary. Suppose 
 
 
 
  is invertible and that 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
 . Then there exists 
 
 
 
  such that:
 
 




Note. A−1δA{{!!}}}} can be formally viewed as the relative variation of

 
 , just as 
 
 
 
  is the relative variation of 
 
 
 
 .
Proof. Since 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , by multiplying by  from left we have:



If we set:



then we have:



which means that 
 
 
 
  is an eigenvalue of , with 
 
 
 
  as an eigenvector. Now, the eigenvalues of  are , while it has the same eigenvector matrix as 
 
 
 
 . Applying the Bauer–Fike theorem to  with eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 , gives us:



The Case of Normal Matrices
If 
 
 
 
  is normal, 
 
 
 
  is a unitary matrix, therefore:



so that  1}}. The Bauer–Fike theorem then becomes:



Or in alternate formulation:



which obviously remains true if 
 
 
 
  is a Hermitian matrix. In this case, however, a much stronger result holds, known as the Weyl's theorem on eigenvalues. In the hermitian case one can also restate the Bauer–Fike theorem in the form that the map 
 
 
 
  that maps a matrix to its spectrum is a non-expansive function with respect to the Hausdorff distance on the set of compact subsets of 
 
 
 
 .
References




"
Category:Spectral theory Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Articles containing proofs


