


Kretschmann scalar




Kretschmann scalar

In the theory of Lorentzian manifolds, particularly in the context of applications to general relativity, the Kretschmann scalar is a quadratic scalar invariant. It was introduced by Erich Kretschmann.1
Definition
The Kretschmann invariant is23


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Riemann curvature tensor. Because it is a sum of squares of tensor components, this is a quadratic invariant.
For Schwarzschild black hole, the Kretschmann scalar is4



Relation to other invariants
Another possible invariant (which has been employed for example in writing the gravitational term of the Lagrangian for some higher-order gravity theories) is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Weyl tensor, the conformal curvature tensor which is also the completely traceless part of the Riemann tensor. In 
 
 
 
  dimensions this is related to the Kretschmann invariant by5


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Ricci curvature tensor and 
 
 
 
  is the Ricci scalar curvature (obtained by taking successive traces of the Riemann tensor). The Ricci tensor vanishes in vacuum spacetimes (such as the Schwarzschild solution mentioned above), and hence there the Riemann tensor and the Weyl tensor coincide, as do their invariants.
The Kretschmann scalar and the Chern-Pontryagin scalar


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the left dual of the Riemann tensor, are mathematically analogous (to some extent, physically analogous) to the familiar invariants of the electromagnetic field tensor



See also

Carminati-McLenaghan invariants, for a set of invariants.
Classification of electromagnetic fields, for more about the invariants of the electromagnetic field tensor.
Curvature invariant, for curvature invariants in Riemannian and pseudo-Riemannian geometry in general.
Curvature invariant (general relativity).
Ricci decomposition, for more about the Riemann and Weyl tensor.

References
Further reading





"
Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Lorentzian manifolds Category:Tensors in general relativity












