


Direct image functor




Direct image functor

In mathematics, in the field of sheaf theory and especially in algebraic geometry, the direct image functor generalizes the notion of a section of a sheaf to the relative case.
Definition
Let f: X → Y be a continuous mapping of topological spaces, and Sh(–) the category of sheaves of abelian groups on a topological space. The direct image functor



sends a sheaf F on X to its direct image presheaf



which turns out be a sheaf on Y.
This assignment is functorial, i.e. a morphism of sheaves φ: F → G on X gives rise to a morphism of sheaves f∗(φ): f∗(F) → f∗(G) on Y.
Example
If Y is a point, then the direct image equals the global sections functor. Let f: X → Y be a continuous map of topological spaces or a morphism of schemes. Then the exceptional inverse image is a functor f!: D(Y) → D(X).
Variants
A similar definition applies to sheaves on topoi, such as etale sheaves. Instead of the above preimage f−1(U) the fiber product of U and X over Y is used.
Higher direct images
The direct image functor is left exact, but usually not right exact. Hence one can consider the right derived functors of the direct image. They are called higher direct images and denoted Rq f∗.
One can show that there is a similar expression as above for higher direct images: for a sheaf F on X, Rq f∗(F) is the sheaf associated to the presheaf



Properties

The direct image functor is right adjoint to the inverse image functor, which means that for any continuous 
 
 
 
  and sheaves 
 
 
 
  respectively on X, Y, there is a natural isomorphism:



 
 .

If f is the inclusion of a closed subspace X ⊂ Y then f∗ is exact. Actually, in this case f∗ is an equivalence between sheaves on X and sheaves on Y supported on X. It follows from the fact that the stalk of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and zero otherwise (here the closeness of X in Y is used).

See also

Proper base change theorem

References


, esp. section II.4

"
Category:Sheaf theory Category:Continuous mappings


