


Tensor product of modules




Tensor product of modules
In [[mathematics]], the '''tensor product of modules''' is a construction that allows arguments about [[bilinear map|bilinear]] maps (e.g. multiplication) to be carried out in terms of linear maps ([[mo
 dule homomorphism]]s). The module construction is analogous to the construction of the tensor product of vector spaces, but can be carried out for a pair of modules over a commutative ring resulting in a third module, and also for a pair of a right-module and a left-module over any ring, with result an abelian group. Tensor products are important in areas of abstract algebra, homological algebra, algebraic topology and algebraic geometry. The universal property of the tensor product of vector spaces extends to more general situations in abstract algebra. It allows the study of bilinear or multilinear operations via linear operations. The tensor product of an algebra and a module can be used for extension of scalars. For a commutative ring, the tensor product of modules can be iterated to form the tensor algebra of a module, allowing one to define multiplication in the module in a universal way.
Balanced product
For a ring R, a right R-module M, a left R-module N, and an abelian group G, a map  is said to be R-balanced, R-middle-linear or an R-balanced product if for all m, m′ in M, n, n′ in N, and r in R the following hold:






φ(m, n + n′) = φ(m, n) + φ(m, n′)

(Dlφ)



φ(m + m′, n) = φ(m, n) + φ(m′, n)

(Drφ)



φ(m ⋅ r, n) = φ(m, r ⋅ n)

(Aφ)





The set of all such balanced products over R from  to G is denoted by .
If φ, ψ are balanced products, then the operations  and −φ defined pointwise are each a balanced product. This turns the set  into an abelian group.
For M and N fixed, the map  is a functor from the category of abelian groups to the category of sets. The morphism part is given by mapping a group homomorphism  to the function , which goes from  to .

Remarks:


Property (Dl) states the left and property (Dr) the right distributivity of φ over addition.
Property (A) resembles some associative property of φ.
Every ring R is an R-R-bimodule. So the ring multiplication  in R is an R-balanced product .

Definition
For a ring R, a right R-module M, a left R-module N, the tensor product over R



is an abelian group together with a balanced product (as defined above)



which is universal in the following sense:1
(Figure)
Tensor product of modules2.svg


For every abelian group G and every balanced product
 
 



there is a unique group homomorphism
 
 



such that
 
 




As with all universal properties, the above property defines the tensor product uniquely up to a unique isomorphism: any other object and balanced product with the same properties will be isomorphic to  and ⊗. Indeed, the mapping ⊗ is called canonical, or more explicitly: the canonical mapping (or balanced product) of the tensor product.2
The definition does not prove the existence of ; see below for a construction.
The tensor product can also be defined as a representing object for the functor ; explicitly, this means there is a natural isomorphism:


 
  This is a succinct way of stating the universal mapping property given above. (A priori, if one is given this is natural isomorphism, then 
 
 
 
  can be recovered by taking 
 
 
 
  and then mapping the identity map.)
Similarly, given the natural identification 
 
 
 
 
 ,3 one can also define  by the formula


 
 . This is known as the tensor-hom adjunction; see also .
For each x in M, y in N, one writes

x ⊗ y


for the image of (x, y) under the canonical map 
 
 
 
 . It is often called a pure tensor. Strictly speaking, the correct notation would be x ⊗R y but it is conventional to drop R here. Then, immediately from the definition, there are relations:






x ⊗ (y + y′) = x ⊗ y + x ⊗ y′

(Dl⊗)



(x + x′) ⊗ y = x ⊗ y + x′ ⊗ y

(Dr⊗)



(x ⋅ r) ⊗ y = x ⊗ (r ⋅ y)

(A⊗)





The universal property of a tensor product has the following important consequence:  Proof: For the first statement, let L be the subgroup of 
 
 
 
  generated by elements of the form in question, 
 
 
 
  and q the quotient map to Q. We have
 
 
 
  as well as 
 
 
 
 . Hence, by the uniqueness part of the universal property, q = 0. The second statement is because to define a module homomorphism, it is enough to define it on the generating set of the module. 
 
 

The proposition says that one can work with explicit elements of the tensor products instead of invoking the universal property directly each time. This is very convenient in practice. For example, if R is commutative, then 
 
 
 
  can naturally be furnished with the R-scalar multiplication by extending


 
 , to the whole 
 
 
 
 
  by the previous proposition (strictly speaking, what is needed is a bimodule structure not commutativity; see a paragraph below). Equipped with this R-module structure, 
 
 
 
  satisfies a universal property similar to the above: for any R-module G, there is a natural isomorphism:


R-bilinear maps from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
If R is not necessarily commutative but if M has a left action by a ring S (for example, R), then 
 
 
 
 
  can be given the left S-module structure, like above, by the formula


 
 . If N has a right action by a ring S, then, in the analogous way, 
 
 
 
  becomes a right S-module.
Tensor product of linear maps and a change of base ring
Given linear maps 
 
 
 
  of right modules over a ring R and 
 
 
 
  of left modules, there is a unique group homomorphism


 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
The construction has a consequence that tensoring is a functor: each right R-module M determines the functor


 
  from the category of left modules to the category of abelian groups that sends N to  and a module homomorphism f to the group homomorphism .
If 
 
 
 
  is a ring homomorphism and if M is a right S-module and N a left S-module, then there is the canonical surjective homomorphism:


 
  induced by 
 
 
 
 
 .4 (The resulting map is surjective since pure tensors  generate the whole module.) In particular, taking R to be Z, this shows every tensor product of modules is a quotient of a tensor product of abelian groups.
See also: .
Several modules
(This section need to be updated. For now, see  for the more general discussion.)
It is possible to extend the definition to a tensor product of any number of modules over the same commutative ring. For example, the universal property of

M1 ⊗ M2 ⊗ M3


is that each trilinear map on

M1 × M2 × M3 → Z


corresponds to a unique linear map

M1 ⊗ M2 ⊗ M3 → Z.
 

The binary tensor product is associative: (M1 ⊗ M2) ⊗ M3 is naturally isomorphic to M1 ⊗ (M2 ⊗ M3). The tensor product of three modules defined by the universal property of trilinear maps is isomorphic to both of these iterated tensor products.
Properties
Let R1, R2, R3, R be rings, not necessarily commutative.

For a R1-R2-bimodule M12 and a left R2-module M20 the tensor product








is a left R1-module.
 


For a right R2-module M02 and an R2-R3-bimodule M23 the tensor product








is a right R3-module.
 


(associativity) For a right R1-module M01, an R1-R2-bimodule M12, and a left R2-module M20 we have





 
 .5





Since R is an R-R-bimodule, we have the tensor product








with the ring multiplication
 
 



as its canonical balanced product.
 

Let R be a commutative ring, and M, N and P be R-modules. Then

(identity)










(associativity)





6



Thus
 
 



is well-defined.
 


(symmetry)








In fact, for any permutation σ of the set { 1, 2, …, n }, there is a unique isomorphism
 
 



under which 
 
 
 
  maps to 
 
 



(distributive property)








In fact,
 
 



for an index set I of arbitrary cardinality.
 


(commutes with finite product) for any finitely many 
 
 
 
 
 ,










(commutes with localization) for any multiplicatively closed subset S of R,








as 
 
 
 
 -module. Since 
 
 
 
  is an R-algebra and 
 
 
 
 
 , this is a special case of:
 


(commutes with base extension) If S is an R-algebra, writing 
 
 
 
 ,





7



cf. .
 


(commutes with direct limit) for any direct system of R-modules Mi,










(tensoring is right exact) if 
 
 
 
  is an exact sequence of R-modules, then








is an exact sequence of R-modules, where 
 
 
 
  This is a consequence of:
 


(adjoint relation) 
 
 
 
 .
(tensor-hom relation) there is a canonical R-linear map:








which is an isomorphism if either M or P is a finitely generated projective module (see  for the non-commutative case);8 more generally, there is a canonical R-linear map:
 
 



which is an isomorphism if either 
 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is a pair of finitely generated projective modules.
 

To give a practical example, suppose M, N are free modules with bases 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then M is the direct sum

 
  and the same for N. By the distributive property, one has:


 
 ; i.e., 
 
 
 
  are the R-basis of 
 
 
 
 . Even if M is not free, a free presentation of M can be used to compute tensor products.
The tensor product, in general, does not commute with inverse limit: on the one hand,


 
  (cf. "examples"). On the other hand,


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  are the ring of p-adic integers and the field of p-adic numbers. See also "profinite integer" for an example in the similar spirit.
If R is not commutative, the order of tensor products could matter in the following way: we "use up" the right action of M and the left action of N to form the tensor product 
 
 
 
 ; in particular, 
 
 
 
  would not even be defined. If M, N are bi-modules, then 
 
 
 
  has the left action coming from the left action of M and the right action coming from the right action of N; those actions need not be the same as the left and right actions of 
 
 
 
 .
The associativity holds more generally for non-commutative rings: if M is a right R-module, N a (R, S)-module and P a left S-module, then


 
  as abelian group.
The general form of adjoint relation of tensor products says: if R is not necessarily commutative, M is a right R-module, N is a (R, S)-module, P is a right S-module, then as abelian group


9 where 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
  See also: tensor-hom adjunction.
Extension of scalars
The adjoint relation in the general form has an important special case: for any R-algebra S, M a right R-module, P a right S-module, using 
 
 
 
 , we have the natural isomorphism:


 
  This says that the functor 
 
 
 
  is a left adjoint to the forgetful functor 
 
 
 
 , which restricts an S-action to an R-action. Because of this, 
 
 
 
  is often called the extension of scalars from R to S. In the representation theory, when R, S are group algebras, the above relation becomes the Frobenius reciprocity.
Example
 
 
 
  for any R-algebra S (i.e., a free module remains free after extending scalars.)
Example: For a commutative ring 
 
 
 
 
  and a commutative R-algebra S, we have:



 
 ; in fact, more generally,


 
  an ideal.

Example: Using the fact 
 
 
 
 , by the previous example and the Chinese remainder theorem, we have: as ring


 
  (this gives an example when a tensor product is a direct product.)
Example
 
 
 
  where i is the imaginary unit.
See also: Weil restriction.
Examples
Let G be an abelian group in which every element has finite order (that is G is a torsion abelian group; for example G can be a finite abelian group or Q/Z). Then


 
 .10 Indeed, any element x of 
 
 
 
  is of the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 
  is the order of 
 
 
 
 , then we compute:


 
  Similarly, one sees



Here are some useful identities: Let R be a commutative ring, I, J ideals, M, N R-modules. Then



 
 . If M is flat, 
 
 
 
 
 .





 
 .

Proof: Tensoring with M the exact sequence 
 
 
 
  gives


 
  where f is given by 
 
 
 
 
 . Since the image of f is IM, we get the first part of 1. If M is flat, f is injective and so is an isomorphism onto its image. 2. follows from 1. and 3. is because


 
 . 
 
 

Example: If G is an abelian group, 
 
 
 
 ; this follows from 1.
Example
 
 
 
 ; this follows from 3.
Example: Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the group of n-th roots of unity. It is a cyclic group and cyclic groups are classified by orders. Thus, non-canonically, 
 
 
 
  and thus, when g is the gcd of n and m,



Example: Consider 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is obtained from 
 
 
 
 
  by imposing 
 
 
 
 -linearity on the middle, we have the surjection


 
  whose kernel is generated by elements of the form 
 
 
 
  where r, s, x, u are integers and s is nonzero. Since


 
  the kernel actually vanishes; hence, 
 
 

Example: We propose to compare 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Like in the previous example, we have
 
 
 
  as abelian group and thus as Q-vector space (any Z-linear map between Q-vector spaces is Q-linear). As Q-vector space, 
 
 
 
  has dimension (cardinarity of a basis) of continuum. Hence, 
 
 
 
 
  has a Q-basis indexed by a product of continuums; thus its Q-dimension is continuum. Hence, for dimension reason, there is a non-canonical isomorphism of Q-vector spaces:


 
 .
Construction
The construction of  takes a quotient of a free abelian group with basis the symbols , used here to denote the ordered pair , for m in M and n in N by the subgroup generated by all elements of the form

−m ∗ (n + n′) + m ∗ n + m ∗ n′
−(m + m′) ∗ n + m ∗ n + m′ ∗ n
(m · r) ∗ n − m ∗ (r · n)

where m, m′ in M, n, n′ in N, and r in R. The quotient map which takes  to the coset containing ; that is,


 
  is balanced, and the subgroup has been chosen minimally so that this map is balanced. The universal property of ⊗ follows from the universal properties of a free abelian group and a quotient.
More category-theoretically, let σ be the given right action of R on M; i.e., σ(m, r) = m · r and τ the left action of R of N. Then the tensor product of M and N over R can be defined as the coequalizer:


 
  together with the requirements






If S is a subring of a ring R, then 
 
 
 
  is the quotient group of 
 
 
 
  by the subgroup generated by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the image of 
 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
  In particular, any tensor product of R-modules can be constructed, if so desired, as a quotient of a tensor product of abelian groups by imposing the R-balanced product property.
In the construction of the tensor product over a commutative ring R, the R-module structure can be built in from the start by forming the quotient of a free R-module by the submodule generated by the elements given above for the general construction, augmented by the elements . Alternately, the general construction can be given a Z(R)-module structure by defining the scalar action by  when this is well-defined, which is precisely when r ∈ Z(R), the centre of R.
The direct product of M and N is rarely isomorphic to the tensor product of M and N. When R is not commutative, then the tensor product requires that M and N be modules on opposite sides, while the direct product requires they be modules on the same side. In all cases the only function from  to G that is both linear and bilinear is the zero map.
As linear maps
In the general case, not all the properties of a tensor product of vector spaces extend to modules. Yet, some useful properties of the tensor product, considered as module homomorphisms, remain.
Dual module
The dual module of a right R-module E, is defined as  with the canonical left R-module structure, and is denoted E∗.11 The canonical structure is the pointwise operations of addition and scalar multiplication. Thus, E∗ is the set of all R-linear maps  (also called linear forms), with operations





 
  The dual of a left R-module is defined analogously, with the same notation.
There is always a canonical homomorphism  from E to its second dual. It is an isomorphism if E is a free module of finite rank. In general, E is called a reflexive module if the canonical homomorphism is an isomorphism.
Duality pairing
We denote the natural pairing of its dual E∗ and a right R-module E, or of a left R-module F and its dual F∗ as





 
  The pairing is left R-linear in its left argument, and right R-linear in its right argument:



An element as a (bi)linear map
In the general case, each element of the tensor product of modules gives rise to a left R-linear map, to a right R-linear map, and to an R-bilinear form. Unlike the commutative case, in the general case the tensor product is not an R-module, and thus does not support scalar multiplication.

Given right R-module E and right R-module F, there is a canonical homomorphism  such that  is the map .12
Given left R-module E and right R-module F, there is a canonical homomorphism  such that  is the map .13

Both cases hold for general modules, and become isomorphisms if the modules E and F are restricted to being finitely generated projective modules (in particular free modules of finite ranks). Thus, an element of a tensor product of modules over a ring R maps canonically onto an R-linear map, though as with vector spaces, constraints apply to the modules for this to be equivalent to the full space of such linear maps.

Given right R-module E and left R-module F, there is a canonical homomorphism  such that  is the map . Thus, an element of a tensor product ξ ∈ F∗ ⊗R E∗ may be thought of giving rise to or acting as an R-bilinear map .

Trace
Let R be a commutative ring and E an R-module. Then there is a canonical R-linear map:


 
  induced by 
 
 
 
 ; it is the unique R-linear corresponding to the duality pairing.
If E is a finitely generated projective R-module, then one can identify 
 
 
 
  through the canonical homomorphism mentioned above and then the above is the trace map:


 
  When R is a field, this is the usual trace of a linear transformation.
Example from differential geometry: tensor field
The most prominent example of a tensor product of modules in differential geometry is the tensor product of the spaces of vector fields and differential forms. More precisely, if R is the (commutative) ring of smooth functions on a smooth manifold M, then one puts


 
  where Γ means the space of sections and the superscript 
 
 
 
  means tensoring p times over R. By definition, an element of 
 
 
 
  is a tensor field of type (p, q).
As R-modules, 
 
 
 
  is the dual module of 
 
 
14
To lighten the notation, put 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
 .15 When p, q ≥ 1, for each (k, l) with 1 ≤ k ≤ p, 1 ≤ l ≤ q, there is an R-multilinear map:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  means 
 
 
 
 
  and the hat means a term is omitted. By the universal property, it corresponds to a unique R-linear map:


 
  It is called the contraction of tensors in the index (k, l). Unwinding what the universal property says one sees:



Remark: The preceding discussion is standard in textbooks on differential geometry (e.g., Helgason). In a way, the sheaf-theoretic construction (i.e., the language of sheaf of modules) is more natural and increasingly more common; for that, see the section .
Relationship to flat modules
In general, 
 
 
 
  is a bifunctor which accepts a right and a left R module pair as input, and assigns them to the tensor product in the category of abelian groups.
By fixing a right R module M, a functor 
 
 
 
  arises, and symmetrically a left R module N could be fixed to create a functor 
 
 
 
 
 . Unlike the Hom bifunctor

 
 , the tensor functor is covariant in both inputs.
It can be shown that M⊗- and -⊗N are always right exact functors, but not necessarily left exact. By definition, a module T is a flat module if T⊗- is an exact functor.
If {mi}i∈I and {nj}j∈J are generating sets for M and N, respectively, then {mi⊗nj}i∈I,j∈J will be a generating set for M⊗N. Because the tensor functor M⊗R- sometimes fails to be left exact, this may not be a minimal generating set, even if the original generating sets are minimal. If M is a flat module, the functor  is exact by the very definition of a flat module. If the tensor products are taken over a field F, we are in the case of vector spaces as above. Since all F modules are flat, the bifunctor  is exact in both positions, and the two given generating sets are bases, then 
 
 
 
  indeed forms a basis for .
When the tensor products are taken over a field F so that -⊗- is exact in both positions, and the generating sets are bases of M and N, it is true that 
 
 
 
  indeed forms a basis for M⊗F N.
See also: pure submodule.
Additional structure
If S and T are commutative R-algebras, then S ⊗R T will be a commutative R-algebra as well, with the multiplication map defined by  and extended by linearity. In this setting, the tensor product become a fibered coproduct in the category of R-algebras.
If M and N are both R-modules over a commutative ring, then their tensor product is again an R-module. If R is a ring, RM is a left R-module, and the commutator

rs − sr


of any two elements r and s of R is in the annihilator of M, then we can make M into a right R module by setting

mr = rm.
 

The action of R on M factors through an action of a quotient commutative ring. In this case the tensor product of M with itself over R is again an R-module. This is a very common technique in commutative algebra.
Generalization
Tensor product of complexes of modules
If X, Y are complexes of R-modules (R a commutative ring), then their tensor product is the complex given by


16
For example, if C is a chain complex of flat abelian groups and if G is an abelian group, then the homology group of 
 
 
 
 
  is the homology group of C with coefficients in G (see also: universal coefficient theorem.)
Tensor product of sheaves of modules
In this setup, for example, one can define a tensor field on a smooth manifold M as a (global or local) section of the tensor product (called tensor bundle)


 
  where O is the sheaf of rings of smooth functions on M and the bundles 
 
 
 
  are viewed as locally free sheaves on M. See also: http://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php/Tensor_bundle
The exterior bundle on M is the subbundle of the tensor bundle consisting of all antisymmetric covariant tensors. Sections of the exterior bundle are differential forms on M.
See also: Tensor product bundle.
One important case when one forms a tensor product over a sheaf of non-commutative rings appears in theory of D-modules; this sheaf of rings over which tensor products are formed is the sheaf of differential operators.
See also

Tor functor
Tensor product of algebras
Tensor product of fields

Notes


References

Bourbaki, Algebra


.

.
Peter May (1999), A concise course in algebraic topology, University of Chicago Press.

"
Category:Module theory Category:Multilinear algebra Category:Homological algebra Category:Binary operations



Hazewinkel, et al. (2004), [http://books.google.com.br/books?id=AibpdVNkFDYC&pg;;=PA95 p. 95], Prop. 4.5.1↩
↩
First, if , then the claimed identification is given by 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . In general, 
 
 
 
 
  has the structure of a right R-module by 
 
 
 
 . Thus, for any Z-bilinear map f, f′ is R-linear 
 
 
↩
↩
↩
The first three properties (plus identities on morphisms) say that the category of R-modules, with R commutative, forms a symmetric monoidal category.↩
Proof: (using associativity in a general form) 
 
 
↩
↩
↩
Example 3.6 of http://www.math.uconn.edu/~kconrad/blurbs/linmultialg/tensorprod.pdf↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
This is actually the definition of differential one-forms, global sections of 
 
 
 
 , in Helgason, but is equivalent to the usual definition that does not use module theory.↩
↩




