


Floquet theory




Floquet theory

Floquet theory is a branch of the theory of ordinary differential equations relating to the class of solutions to periodic linear differential equations of the form



with 
 
 
 
  a piecewise continuous periodic function with period 
 
 
 
  and defines the state of the stability of solutions.
The main theorem of Floquet theory, Floquet's theorem, due to , gives a canonical form for each fundamental matrix solution of this common linear system. It gives a coordinate change

 
  with 
 
 
 
  that transforms the periodic system to a traditional linear system with constant, real coefficients.
In solid-state physics, the analogous result is known as Bloch's theorem.
Note that the solutions of the linear differential equation form a vector space. A matrix 
 
 
 
  is called a fundamental matrix solution if all columns are linearly independent solutions. A matrix 
 
 
 
  is called a principal fundamental matrix solution if all columns are linearly independent solutions and there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is the identity. A principal fundamental matrix can be constructed from a fundamental matrix using 
 
 
 
 . The solution of the linear differential equation with the initial condition 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is any fundamental matrix solution.
Floquet's theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be a linear first order differential equation, where 
 
 
 
  is a column vector of length 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  an 
 
 
 
  periodic matrix with period 
 
 
 
  (that is 
 
 
 
  for all real values of 
 
 
 
 ). Let 
 
 
 
  be a fundamental matrix solution of this differential equation. Then, for all 
 
 
 
 ,



Here



is known as the monodromy matrix. In addition, for each matrix 
 
 
 
  (possibly complex) such that



there is a periodic (period 
 
 
 
 ) matrix function 
 
 
 
  such that



Also, there is a real matrix 
 
 
 
  and a real periodic (period-
 
 
 
 ) matrix function 
 
 
 
  such that



In the above 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
  matrices.
Consequences and applications
This mapping 
 
 
 
  gives rise to a time-dependent change of coordinates (
 
 
 
 ), under which our original system becomes a linear system with real constant coefficients 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is continuous and periodic it must be bounded. Thus the stability of the zero solution for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is determined by the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
 .
The representation 
 
 
 
  is called a Floquet normal form for the fundamental matrix 
 
 
 
 .
The eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  are called the characteristic multipliers of the system. They are also the eigenvalues of the (linear) Poincaré maps 
 
 
 
 . A Floquet exponent (sometimes called a characteristic exponent), is a complex 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a characteristic multiplier of the system. Notice that Floquet exponents are not unique, since 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an integer. The real parts of the Floquet exponents are called Lyapunov exponents. The zero solution is asymptotically stable if all Lyapunov exponents are negative, Lyapunov stable if the Lyapunov exponents are nonpositive and unstable otherwise.

Floquet theory is very important for the study of dynamical systems.
Floquet theory shows stability in Hill differential equation (introduced by George William Hill) approximating the motion of the moon as a harmonic oscillator in a periodic gravitational field.
Bond softening and bond hardening in intense laser fields can be described in terms of solutions obtained from the Floquet theorem.

References

C. Chicone. Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications. Springer-Verlag, New York 1999.



, Translation of Mathematical Monographs, 19, 294p.
W. Magnus, S. Winkler. Hill's Equation, Dover-Phoenix Editions, ISBN 0-486-49565-5.
N.W. McLachlan, Theory and Application of Mathieu Functions, New York: Dover, 1964.

M.S.P. Eastham, "The Spectral Theory of Periodic Differential Equations", Texts in Mathematics, Scottish Academic Press, Edinburgh, 1973. ISBN 978-0-7011-1936-2.

External links



"
Category:Dynamical systems *


