


Berezinian




Berezinian

In mathematics and theoretical physics, the Berezinian or superdeterminant is a generalization of the determinant to the case of supermatrices. The name is for Felix Berezin. The Berezinian plays a role analogous to the determinant when considering coordinate changes for integration on a supermanifold.
Definition
The Berezinian is uniquely determined by two defining properties:








where str(X) denotes the supertrace of X. Unlike the classical determinant, the Berezinian is defined only for invertible supermatrices.
The simplest case to consider is the Berezinian of a supermatrix with entries in a field K. Such supermatrices represent linear transformations of a super vector space over K. A particular even supermatrix is a block matrix of the form


 
  Such a matrix is invertible if and only if both A and D are invertible matrices over K. The Berezinian of X is given by



For a motivation of the negative exponent see the substitution formula in the odd case.
More generally, consider matrices with entries in a supercommutative algebra R. An even supermatrix is then of the form


 
  where A and D have even entries and B and C have odd entries. Such a matrix is invertible if and only if both A and D are invertible in the commutative ring R0 (the even subalgebra of R). In this case the Berezinian is given by



or, equivalently, by



These formulas are well-defined since we are only taking determinants of matrices whose entries are in the commutative ring R0. The matrix



is known as the Schur complement of A relative to 
 
 

An odd matrix X can only be invertible if the number of even dimensions equals the number of odd dimensions. In this case, invertibility of X is equivalent to the invertibility of JX, where


 
  Then the Berezinian of X is defined as



Properties

The Berezinian of X is always a unit in the ring R0.





 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the supertranspose of X.




Berezinian module
The determinant of an endomorphism of a free module M can be defined as the induced action on the 1-dimensional highest exterior power of M. In the supersymmetric case there is no highest exterior power, but there is a still a similar definition of the Berezinian as follows.
Suppose that M is a free module of dimension (p,q) over R. Let A be the (super)symmetric algebra S*(M*) of the dual M* of M. Then an automorphism of M acts on the ext module


 
  (which has dimension (1,0) if q is even and dimension (0,1) if q is odd)) as multiplication by the Berezianian.
See also

Berezin integration

References





"
Category:Super linear algebra Category:Determinants


