


Dirac equation in the algebra of physical space




Dirac equation in the algebra of physical space

The Dirac equation, as the relativistic equation that describes spin 1/2 particles in quantum mechanics can be written in terms of the Algebra of physical space (APS), which is a case of a Clifford algebra or geometric algebra that is based in the use of paravectors.
The Dirac equation in APS, including the electromagnetic interaction, reads



Another form of the Dirac equation in terms of the Space time algebra was given earlier by David Hestenes.
In general, the Dirac equation in the formalism of geometric algebra has the advantage of providing a direct geometric interpretation.
Relation with the standard form
The spinor can be written in a null basis as


 
  such that the representation of the spinor in terms of the Pauli matrices is






The standard form of the Dirac equation can be recovered by decomposing the spinor in its right and left-handed spinor components, which are extracted with the help of the projector


 
  such that





 
  with the following matrix representation






The Dirac equation can be also written as



Without electromagnetic interaction, the following equation is obtained from the two equivalent forms of the Dirac equation



so that



or in matrix representation


 
  where the second column of the right and left spinors can be dropped by defining the single column chiral spinors as






The standard relativistic covariant form of the Dirac equation in the Weyl representation can be easily identified 
 
 
 
  such that



Given two spinors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in APS and their respective spinors in the standard form as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , one can verify the following identity


 
 , such that



Electromagnetic gauge
The Dirac equation is invariant under a global right rotation applied on the spinor of the type


 
  so that the kinetic term of the Dirac equation transforms as


 
  where we identify the following rotation


 
  The mass term transforms as


 
  so that we can verify the invariance of the form of the Dirac equation. A more demanding requirement is that the Dirac equation should be invariant under a local gauge transformation of the type 
 
 

In this case, the kinetic term transforms as


 
 , so that the left side of the Dirac equation transforms covariantly as


 
  where we identify the need to perform an electromagnetic gauge transformation. The mass term transforms as in the case with global rotation, so, the form of the Dirac equation remains invariant.
Current
The current is defined as


 
  which satisfies the continuity equation



Second order Dirac equation
An application of the Dirac equation on itself leads to the second order Dirac equation



Free particle solutions
Positive energy solutions
A solution for the free particle with momentum 
 
 
 
  and positive energy 
 
 
 
  is



This solution is unimodular



and the current resembles the classical proper velocity






Negative energy solutions
A solution for the free particle with negative energy and momentum 
 
 
 
  is



This solution is anti-unimodular



and the current resembles the classical proper velocity 
 
 



 
  but with a remarkable feature: "the time runs backwards"



Dirac Lagrangian
The Dirac Lagrangian is



See also

Paravector
Algebra of physical space
Geometric algebra
Two-body Dirac equations

References
Textbooks

Baylis, William (2002). Electrodynamics: A Modern Geometric Approach (2nd ed.). Birkhäuser. ISBN 0-8176-4025-8


W. E. Baylis, editor, Clifford (Geometric) Algebra with Applications to Physics, Mathematics, and Engineering, Birkhäuser, Boston 1996.

Articles

Baylis, William, Classical eigenspinors and the Dirac equation, Phys. Rev. A 45, 4293–4302 (1992)


Hestenes D., Observables, operators, and complex numbers in the Dirac theory, J. Math. Phys. 16, 556 (1975)

"
Category:Quantum mechanics Category:Quantum field theory Category:Spinors Category:Equations of physics Equation in the algebra of physical space Algebra of physical space


