


Weak convergence (Hilbert space)




Weak convergence (Hilbert space)

In mathematics, weak convergence in a Hilbert space is convergence of a sequence of points in the weak topology.
Properties

If a sequence converges strongly, then it converges weakly as well.


Since every closed and bounded set is weakly relatively compact (its closure in the weak topology is compact), every bounded sequence

 
  in a Hilbert space H contains a weakly convergent subsequence. Note that closed and bounded sets are not in general weakly compact in Hilbert spaces (consider the set consisting of an orthonormal basis in an infinitely dimensional Hilbert space which is closed and bounded but not weakly compact since it doesn't contain 0). However, bounded and weakly closed sets are weakly compact so as a consequence every convex bounded closed set is weakly compact.


As a consequence of the principle of uniform boundedness, every weakly convergent sequence is bounded.


The norm is (sequentially) weakly lower-semicontinuous: if 
 
 
 
  converges weakly to x, then










and this inequality is strict whenever the convergence is not strong. For example, infinite orthonormal sequences converge weakly to zero, as demonstrated below.
 


If 
 
 
 
  converges weakly to 
 
 
 
  and we have the additional assumption that 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  converges to 
 
 
 
  strongly:










If the Hilbert space is finite-dimensional, i.e. a Euclidean space, then the concepts of weak convergence and strong convergence are the same.

Example
(Figure)
The first 3 functions in the sequence 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . As 
 
 

 
  converges weakly to 
 
 
 
 .

The Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  is the space of the square-integrable functions on the interval 
 
 
 
  equipped with the inner product defined by


 
  (see Lp space). The sequence of functions 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
  converges weakly to the zero function in 
 
 
 
 , as the integral


 
  tends to zero for any square-integrable function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity, i.e.


 
  Although 
 
 
 
  has an increasing number of 0's in 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity, it is of course not equal to the zero function for any 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  does not converge to 0 in the 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  norms. This dissimilarity is one of the reasons why this type of convergence is considered to be "weak."
Weak convergence of orthonormal sequences
Consider a sequence 
 
 
 
  which was constructed to be orthonormal, that is,



where 
 
 
 
  equals one if m = n and zero otherwise. We claim that if the sequence is infinite, then it converges weakly to zero. A simple proof is as follows. For x ∈ H, we have


 
  (Bessel's inequality)
where equality holds when {en} is a Hilbert space basis. Therefore


 
  (since the series above converges, its corresponding sequence must go to zero)
i.e.



Banach–Saks theorem
The Banach–Saks theorem states that every bounded sequence 
 
 
 
  contains a subsequence 
 
 
 
  and a point x such that



converges strongly to x as N goes to infinity.
Generalizations
The definition of weak convergence can be extended to Banach spaces. A sequence of points 
 
 
 
  in a Banach space B is said to converge weakly to a point x in B if



for any bounded linear functional

 
  defined on 
 
 
 
 , that is, for any 
 
 
 
  in the dual space

 
  If 
 
 
 
  is a Hilbert space, then, by the Riesz representation theorem, any such 
 
 
 
  has the form



for some 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , so one obtains the Hilbert space definition of weak convergence.
"
Category:Hilbert space


