


Atom (measure theory)




Atom (measure theory)

In mathematics, more precisely in measure theory, an atom is a measurable set which has positive measure and contains no set of smaller but positive measure. A measure which has no atoms is called non-atomic or atomless.
Definition
Given a measurable space

 
  and a measure

 
  on that space, a set 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is called an atom if



and for any measurable subset 
 
 
 
  with



the set 
 
 
 
  has measure zero.
Examples

Consider the set X={1, 2, ..., 9, 10} and let the sigma-algebra 
 
 
 
  be the power set of X. Define the measure 
 
 
 
  of a set to be its cardinality, that is, the number of elements in the set. Then, each of the singletons {i}, for i=1,2, ..., 9, 10 is an atom.
Consider the Lebesgue measure on the real line. This measure has no atoms.

Non-atomic measures
A measure which has no atoms is called non-atomic. In other words, a measure is non-atomic if for any measurable set 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  there exists a measurable subset B of A such that



A non-atomic measure with at least one positive value has an infinite number of distinct values, as starting with a set A with 
 
 
 
  one can construct a decreasing sequence of measurable sets



such that



This may not be true for measures having atoms; see the first example above.
It turns out that non-atomic measures actually have a continuum of values. It can be proved that if μ is a non-atomic measure and A is a measurable set with 
 
 
 
  then for any real number b satisfying



there exists a measurable subset B of A such that



This theorem is due to Wacław Sierpiński.12 It is reminiscent of the intermediate value theorem for continuous functions.
Sketch of proof of Sierpiński's theorem on non-atomic measures. A slightly stronger statement, which however makes the proof easier, is that if 
 
 
 
  is a non-atomic measure space and 
 
 
 
 , there exists a function 
 
 
 
  that is monotone with respect to inclusion, and a right-inverse to 
 
 
 
 . That is, there exists a one-parameter family of measurable sets S(t) such that for all 
 
 






 
  The proof easily follows from Zorn's lemma applied to the set of all monotone partial sections to 
 
 
 
  :


 
  ordered by inclusion of graphs, 
 
 
 
  It's then standard to show that every chain in 
 
 
 
  has an upper bound in 
 
 
 
 , and that any maximal element of 
 
 
 
  has domain 
 
 
 
  proving the claim.
See also

Atom (order theory) — an analogous concept in order theory
Dirac delta function
Elementary event, also known as an atomic event

Notes


References




"
Category:Measure theory



↩
↩




