


Computation in the limit




Computation in the limit

In computability theory, a function is called limit computable if it is the limit of a uniformly computable sequence of functions. The terms computable in the limit and limit recursive are also used. One can think of limit computable functions as those admitting an eventually correct computable guessing procedure at their true value. A set is limit computable just when its characteristic function is limit computable.
If the sequence is uniformly computable relative to D, then the function is limit computable in D.
Formal definition
A total function

 
  is limit computable if there is a total computable function

 
  such that



The total function 
 
 
 
  is limit computable in D if there is a total function 
 
 
computable in D also satisfying



A set of natural numbers is defined to be computable in the limit if and only if its characteristic function is computable in the limit. In contrast, the set is computable if and only if it is computable in the limit by a function 
 
 
 
  and there is a second computable function that takes input i and returns a value of t large enough the 
 
 
 
  has stabilized.
Limit lemma
The limit lemma states that a set of natural numbers is limit computable if and only if the set is computable from 
 
 
 
  (the Turing jump of the empty set). The relativized limit lemma states that a set is limit computable in 
 
 
 
  if and only if it is computable from 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, the limit lemma (and its relativization) hold uniformly. Thus one can go from an index for the function 
 
 
 
  to an index for 
 
 
 
  relative to 
 
 
 
 . One can also go from an index for 
 
 
 
  relative to 
 
 
 
  to an index for some 
 
 
 
  that has limit 
 
 
 
 .
Proof
As 
 
 
 
  is a [computably enumerable] set, it must be computable in the limit itself as the computable function can be defined


 
  whose limit 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity is the characteristic function of 
 
 
 
 .
It therefore suffices to show that if limit computability is preserved by Turing reduction, as this will show that all sets computable from 
 
 
 
  are limit computable. Fix sets 
 
 
 
  which are identified with their characteristic functions and a computable function 
 
 
 
  with limit 
 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that 
 
 
 
  for some Turing reduction 
 
 
 
  and define a computable function 
 
 
 
  as follows


 
  Now suppose that the computation 
 
 
 
  converges in 
 
 
 
  steps and only looks at the first 
 
 
 
  bits of 
 
 
 
 . Now pick 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 

 
 . If 
 
 
 
  then the computation 
 
 
 
  converges in at most 
 
 
 
  steps to 
 
 
 
 . Hence 
 
 
 
  has a limit of 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  is limit computable.
As the 
 
 
 
  sets are just the sets computable from 
 
 
 
  by Post's theorem, the limit lemma also entails that the limit computable sets are the 
 
 
 
  sets.
Limit computable real numbers
A real number x is computable in the limit if there is a computable sequence 
 
 
 
  of rational numbers (or, which is equivalent, computable real numbers) which converges to x. In contrast, a real number is computable if and only if there is a sequence of rational numbers which converges to it and which has a computable modulus of convergence.
When a real number is viewed as a sequence of bits, the following equivalent definition holds. An infinite sequence 
 
 
 
  of binary digits is computable in the limit if and only if there is a total computable function 
 
 
 
  taking values in the set 
 
 
 
  such that for each i the limit 
 
 
 
  exists and equals 
 
 
 
 . Thus for each i, as t increases the value of 
 
 
 
  eventually becomes constant and equals 
 
 
 
 . As with the case of computable real numbers, it is not possible to effectively move between the two representations of limit computable reals.
Examples

The real whose binary expansion encodes the halting problem is computable in the limit but not computable.
The real whose binary expansion encodes the truth set of first-order arithmetic is not computable in the limit.

See also

Specker sequence

References

J. Schmidhuber, "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit", International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science, 2002.
R. Soare. Recursively Enumerable Sets and Degrees. Springer-Verlag 1987.

"
Category:Computability theory Category:Theory of computation


