


European Community number




European Community number

The European Community number (EC Number) is a unique seven-digit identifier that was assigned to substances for regulatory purposes within the European Union by the European Commission. The so-called EC Inventory comprises three individual inventories, EINECS, ELINCS and the NLP list.1
Structure
The EC Number may be written in a general form as: NNN-NNN-R,2 where R is a check digit and N represents integers. The check digit is calculated using the ISBN method. According to this method, the check digit R is the following sum modulo 11:



If the remainder R is equal to 10, that combination of digits is not used for an EC number. To illustrate, the EC number of dexamethasone is 200-003-9. N1 is 2, N2 through N5 are 0, and N6 is 3.



The remainder is 9, which is the check digit.
EC Inventory
The EC Inventory includes the substances in the following inventories. The content of these inventories is fixed and official.




Inventory

Scope

Format

No. of entries (if fixed No. of entries)





European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances (EINECS)

Substances, excluding polymers, that were recorded as being commercially available in the EU from 1 January 1971 to 18 September 1981.3 These were considered registered under Article 8(1) of the Dangerous Substances Directive (67/548/EEC). They are considered phase-in substances under the REACH Regulation.

2xx-xxx-x
 3xx-xxx-x

100,2044



European List of Notified Chemical Substances (ELINCS)

Substances notified under the Dangerous Substances Directive Notification of New Substances (NONS) that became commercially available after 18 September 1981.

4xx-xxx-x

4,381



No Longer Polymers (NLP)

The definition of polymers was changed in April, 1992{{cite journal

publisher= European Commission

date = 30 April 1992



List numbers
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) also applies the EC number format to what it calls "List number".5 The number are assigned under the REACH Regulation without being legally recognised. Hence, they are not official because they have not been published in the Official Journal of the European Union. List numbers are administrative tools only and shall not be used for any official purposes.




Scope

Format





Automatically assigned, e.g. to pre-registrations of substances with a CAS No.

6xx-xxx-x



Assigned to substances after inquiries by the ECHA Substance ID Team

7xx-xxx-x



Automatically assigned to substances identified only with a CAS No. (continuation of the 6xx-xxx-x series)

8xx-xxx-x



Automatically assigned, e.g. to pre-registrations without a CAS No. or other numerical identifier (including reaction masses of more than one substance)

9xx-xxx-x



See also

Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
European chemical Substances Information System
CAS registry number

References
External links
"
Category:Chemical numbering schemes Category:European Union law







Registered substances at European Chemicals Agency (ECHA)




