


Proofs of quadratic reciprocity




Proofs of quadratic reciprocity

In number theory, the law of quadratic reciprocity, like the Pythagorean theorem, has lent itself to an unusual number of proofs. Several hundred proofs of the law of quadratic reciprocity have been found.
Proofs that are accessible
Of relatively elementary, combinatorial proofs, there are two which apply types of double counting. One by Gotthold Eisenstein counts lattice points. Another applies Zolotarev's lemma to Z/pqZ expressed by the Chinese remainder theorem as Z/pZ×Z/qZ, and calculates the signature of a permutation.
Eisenstein's proof
Eisenstein's proof of quadratic reciprocity is a simplification of Gauss's third proof. It is more geometrically intuitive and requires less technical manipulation.
The point of departure is "Eisenstein's lemma", which states that for distinct odd primes p, q,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the floor function (the largest integer less than or equal to x), and where the sum is taken over the even integers u = 2, 4, 6, ..., p−1. For example,


 
  This result is very similar to Gauss's lemma, and can be proved in a similar fashion (proof given below).
Using this representation of (q/p), the main argument is quite elegant. The sum 
 
 
 
  counts the number of lattice points with even x-coordinate in the interior of the triangle ABC in the following diagram:



(Figure)
Lattice point diagram


| 



Because each column has an even number of points (namely q−1 points), the number of such lattice points in the region BCYX is the same modulo 2 as the number of such points in the region CZY:
(Figure)
The number of points with even x-coordinate inside BCYX (marked by O's) is equal modulo 2 to the number of such points in CZY (marked by X's)

Then by flipping the diagram in both axes, we see that the number of points with even x-coordinate inside CZY is the same as the number of points inside AXY having odd x-coordinates:
(Figure)
The number of points with even x-coordinate inside CZY is equal to the number of points with odd x-coordinate inside AXY

The conclusion is that


 
  where μ is the total number of lattice points in the interior of AYX. Switching p and q, the same argument shows that


 
  where ν is the number of lattice points in the interior of WYA. Since there are no lattice points on the line AY itself (because p and q are relatively prime), and since the total number of points in the rectangle WYXA is


 
  we obtain finally



Proof of Eisenstein's lemma
For an even integer u in the range 1 ≤ u ≤ p−1, denote by r(u) the least positive residue of qu modulo p. (For example, for p = 11, q = 7, we allow u = 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and the corresponding values of r(u) are 3, 6, 9, 1, 4.) The numbers (−1)r(u)r(u), again treated as least positive residues modulo p, are all even (in our running example, they are 8, 6, 2, 10, 4.) Furthermore, they are all distinct, because if (−1)r(u)r(u) ≡ (−1)r(t)r(t) mod p, then we may divide out by q to obtain u ≡ ±t mod p. This forces u ≡ t mod p, because both u and t are even, whereas p is odd. Since there exactly (p−1)/2 of them and they are distinct, they must be simply a rearrangement of the even integers 2, 4, ..., p−1. Multiplying them together, we obtain


 
  Dividing out successively by 2, 4, ..., p−1 on both sides (which is permissible since none of them are divisible by p) and rearranging, we have


 
  On the other hand, by the definition of r(u) and the floor function,


 
  and so since p is odd and u is even, we see that 
 
 
 
  and r(u) are congruent modulo 2. Finally this shows that


 
  We are finished because the left hand side is just an alternative expression for (q/p).
Proof using algebraic number theory
The proof presented here is by no means the simplest known; however, it is quite a deep one, in the sense that it motivates some of the ideas of Artin reciprocity.
Cyclotomic field setup
Suppose that p is an odd prime. The action takes place inside the cyclotomic field


 
  where ζp is a primitive pth root of unity. The basic theory of cyclotomic fields informs us that there is a canonical isomorphism


 
  which sends the automorphism σa satisfying


 
  to the element



(This is because the morphism of reduction from Z to Z/qZ is injective on the set of p-th roots of unity)
Now consider the subgroup H of squares of elements of G. Since G is cyclic, H has index 2 in G, so the subfield corresponding to H under the Galois correspondence must be a quadratic extension of Q. (In fact it is the unique quadratic extension of Q contained in L.) The Gaussian period theory determines which one; it turns out to be


 
  where



At this point we start to see a hint of quadratic reciprocity emerging from our framework. On one hand, the image of H in


 
  consists precisely of the (nonzero) quadratic residues modulo p. On the other hand, H is related to an attempt to take the square root of p (or possibly of −p). In other words, if now q is an odd prime (different from p), we have so far shown that



The Frobenius automorphism
Choose any prime ideal β of the ring of integers OL lying over q, which is unramified, and let


 
  be the Frobenius automorphism associated to β; the characteristic property of 
 
 
 
  is that


 
  for any x in OL. (The existence of such a Frobenius element depends on quite a bit of algebraic number theory machinery.)
The key fact about 
 
 
 
  that we need is that for any subfield K of L,


 
  Indeed, let δ be any ideal of OK below β (and hence above q). Then, since


 
  for any x in OK, we see that


 
  is a Frobenius for δ. A standard result concerning 
 
 
 
  is that its order is equal to the corresponding inertial degree; that is,


 
  The left hand side is equal to 1 if and only if φ fixes K, and the right hand side is equal to one if and only q splits completely in K, so we are done.
Now, since the pth roots of unity are distinct modulo β (i.e. the polynomial Xp − 1 is separable in characteristic q), we must have


 
  that is, 
 
 
 
  coincides with the automorphism σq defined earlier. Taking K to be the quadratic field in which we are interested, we obtain the equivalence



Completing the proof
Finally we must show that


 
  Once we have done this, the law of quadratic reciprocity falls out immediately since


 
  if p = 1 mod 4, and


 
  if p = 3 mod 4.
To show the last equivalence, suppose first that


 
  In this case, there is some integer x (not divisible by q) such that


 
  say


 
  for some integer c. Let


 
  and consider the ideal


 
  of K. It certainly divides the principal ideal (q). It cannot be equal to (q), since


 
  is not divisible by q. It cannot be the unit ideal, because then


 
  is divisible by q, which is again impossible. Therefore (q) must split in K.
Conversely, suppose that (q) splits, and let β be a prime of K above q. Then


 
  so we may choose some


 
  where a and b are in Q. Actually, since


 
  elementary theory of quadratic fields implies that the ring of integers of K is precisely


 
  so the denominators of a and b are at worst equal to 2. Since q ≠ 2, we may safely multiply a and b by 2, and assume that


 
  where now a and b are in Z. In this case we have


 
  so


 
  However, q cannot divide b, since then also q divides a, which contradicts our choice of


 
  Therefore, we may divide by b modulo q, to obtain


 
  as desired.
References
Every textbook on elementary number theory (and quite a few on algebraic number theory) has a proof of quadratic reciprocity. Two are especially noteworthy:
Franz Lemmermeyer's Reciprocity Laws: From Euler to Eisenstein has many proofs (some in exercises) of both quadratic and higher-power reciprocity laws and a discussion of their history. Its immense bibliography includes literature citations for 196 different published proofs.
Kenneth Ireland and Michael Rosen's A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory also has many proofs of quadratic reciprocity (and many exercises), and covers the cubic and biquadratic cases as well. Exercise 13.26 (p 202) says it all


Count the number of proofs to the law of quadratic reciprocity given thus far in this book and devise another one.










G. Rousseau. "On the Quadratic Reciprocity Law", J. Austral. Math. Soc. (Series A), v51, 1991, 423–425. (online)


L. Washington. Introduction to Cyclotomic Fields, 2nd ed.

External links

Chronology of Proofs of the Quadratic Reciprocity Law (233 proofs!)

"
Category:Algebraic number theory Category:Article proofs


