


Weierstrass point




Weierstrass point

In mathematics, a Weierstrass point

 
  on a nonsingular algebraic curve

 
  defined over the complex numbers is a point such that there are more functions on 
 
 
 
 , with their poles restricted to 
 
 
 
  only, than would be predicted by the Riemann–Roch theorem. That is, looking at the vector spaces



where 
 
 
 
  is the space of meromorphic functions on 
 
 
 
  whose order at 
 
 
 
  is at least − 
 
 
 
  and with no other poles.
The concept is named after Karl Weierstrass.
We know three things: the dimension is at least 1, because of the constant functions on 
 
 
 
 , it is non-decreasing, and from the Riemann–Roch theorem the dimension eventually increments by exactly 1 as we move to the right. In fact if 
 
 
 
  is the genus of 
 
 
 
 , the dimension from the 
 
 
 
 -th term is known to be


 
 , for 
 
 
 
 .
Our knowledge of the sequence is therefore

1, ?, ?, ..., ?, g, g + 1, g + 2, ... .
 

What we know about the ? entries is that they can increment by at most 1 each time (this is a simple argument: if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the same order of pole at 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  will have a pole of lower order if the constant 
 
 
 
  is chosen to cancel the leading term). There are



question marks here, so the cases 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  need no further discussion and do not give rise to Weierstrass points.
Assume therefore 
 
 
 
 . There will be 
 
 
 
  steps up, and 
 
 
 
  steps where there is no increment. A non-Weierstrass point of 
 
 
 
  occurs whenever the increments are all as far to the right as possible: i.e. the sequence looks like

1, 1, ..., 1, 2, 3, 4, ..., g − 1, g, g + 1, ... .
 

Any other case is a Weierstrass point. A Weierstrass gap for 
 
 
 
  is a value of 
 
 
 
  such that no function on 
 
 
 
  has exactly a 
 
 
 
 -fold pole at 
 
 
 
  only. The gap sequence is



for a non-Weierstrass point. For a Weierstrass point it contains at least one higher number. (The Weierstrass gap theorem or Lückensatz is the statement that there must be 
 
 
 
  gaps.)
For hyperelliptic curves, for example, we may have a function 
 
 
 
  with a double pole at 
 
 
 
  only. Its powers have poles of order 
 
 
 
  and so on. Therefore such a 
 
 
 
  has the gap sequence

1, 3, 5, ..., 2g − 1.
 

In general if the gap sequence is



the weight of the Weierstrass point is



This is introduced because of a counting theorem: on a Riemann surface the sum of the weights of the Weierstrass points is


 
 .
For example a hyperelliptic Weierstrass point, as above, has weight g(g − 1)/2. Therefore there are (at most) 2(g + 1) of them; as those can be found (for example, the six points of ramification when g = 2 and 
 
 
 
  is presented as a ramified covering of the projective line) this exhausts all the Weierstrass points on 
 
 
 
 .
Further information on the gaps comes from applying Clifford's theorem. Multiplication of functions gives the non-gaps a semigroup structure, and an old question of Adolf Hurwitz asked for a characterization of the semigroups occurring. A new necessary condition was found by Buchweitz in 1980, and he gave an example of a subsemigroup of the nonnegative integers with 16 gaps that does not occur as the semigroup of non-gaps at a point on a curve of genus 16. A definition of Weierstrass point for a nonsingular curve over a field of positive characteristic was given by F. K. Schmidt in 1939.
References




"
Category:Algebraic curves Category:Riemann surfaces


