


Degree of a continuous mapping




Degree of a continuous mapping

 In topology, the degree of a continuous mapping between two compact oriented manifolds of the same dimension is a number that represents the number of times that the domain manifold wraps around the range manifold under the mapping. The degree is always an integer, but may be positive or negative depending on the orientations.
The degree of a map was first defined by Brouwer,1 who showed that the degree is homotopy invariant (invariant among homotopies), and used it to prove the Brouwer fixed point theorem. In modern mathematics, the degree of a map plays an important role in topology and geometry. In physics, the degree of a continuous map (for instance a map from space to some order parameter set) is one example of a topological quantum number.
Definitions of the degree
From Sn to Sn
The simplest and most important case is the degree of a continuous map from the 

 
 -sphere

 
  to itself (in the case 
 
 
 
 , this is called the winding number):
Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous map. Then 
 
 
 
  induces a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 th homology group. Considering the fact that 
 
 
 
 , we see that 
 
 
 
  must be of the form 
 
 
 
  for some fixed 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
  is then called the degree of 
 
 
 
 .
Between manifolds
Algebraic topology
Let X and Y be closed connected oriented m-dimensional manifolds. Orientability of a manifold implies that its top homology group is isomorphic to Z. Choosing an orientation means choosing a generator of the top homology group.
A continuous map f : X→Y induces a homomorphism f* from Hm(X) to Hm(Y). Let [X], resp. [Y] be the chosen generator of Hm(X), resp. Hm(Y) (or the fundamental class of X, Y). Then the degree of f is defined to be f*([X]). In other words,



If y in Y and f −1(y) is a finite set, the degree of f can be computed by considering the m-th local homology groups of X at each point in f −1(y).
Differential topology
In the language of differential topology, the degree of a smooth map can be defined as follows: If f is a smooth map whose domain is a compact manifold and p is a regular value of f, consider the finite set



By p being a regular value, in a neighborhood of each xi the map f is a local diffeomorphism (it is a covering map). Diffeomorphisms can be either orientation preserving or orientation reversing. Let r be the number of points xi at which f is orientation preserving and s be the number at which f is orientation reversing. When the domain of f is connected, the number r − s is independent of the choice of p (though n is not!) and one defines the degree of f to be r − s. This definition coincides with the algebraic topological definition above.
The same definition works for compact manifolds with boundary but then f should send the boundary of X to the boundary of Y.
One can also define degree modulo 2 (deg2(f)) the same way as before but taking the fundamental class in Z2 homology. In this case deg2(f) is an element of Z2 (the field with two elements), the manifolds need not be orientable and if n is the number of preimages of p as before then deg2(f) is n modulo 2.
Integration of differential forms gives a pairing between (C∞-)singular homology and de Rham cohomology:  = ∫cω, where [c] is a homology class represented by a cycle c and ω a closed form representing a de Rham cohomology class. For a smooth map f : X→Y between orientable m-manifolds, one has



where f* and f* are induced maps on chains and forms respectively. Since f*[X] = deg f · [Y], we have



for any m-form ω on Y.
Maps from closed region
If 
 
 
 
 is a bounded region, 
 
 
 
  smooth, 
 
 
 
  a regular value of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then the degree 
 
 
 
  is defined by the formula


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Jacobi matrix of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . This definition of the degree may be naturally extended for non-regular values 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a point close to 
 
 
 
 .
The degree satisfies the following properties:2

If 
 
 
 
 , then there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
Decomposition property:



 
 , if 
 
 
 
  are disjoint parts of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

Homotopy invariance: If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are homotopy equivalent via a homotopy 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 

The function 
 
 
 
  is locally constant on 
 
 


These properties characterise the degree uniquely and the degree may be defined by them in an axiomatic way.
In a similar way, we could define the degree of a map between compact oriented manifolds with boundary.
Properties
The degree of a map is a homotopy invariant; moreover for continuous maps from the sphere to itself it is a complete homotopy invariant, i.e. two maps 
 
 
 
  are homotopic if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
In other words, degree is an isomorphism 
 
 
 
 .
Moreover, the Hopf theorem states that for any 
 
 
 
  closed oriented manifold M, two maps 
 
 
 
  are homotopic if and only if 
 
 

A self-map 
 
 
 
  of the n-sphere is extendable to a map 
 
 
 
  from the n-ball to the n-sphere if and only if 
 
 
 
 . (Here the function F extends f in the sense that f is the restriction of F to 
 
 
 
 .)
See also

Covering number, a similarly named term
Density (polytope), a polyhedral analog
Topological degree theory

Notes
References






External links


TopDeg: Software tool for computing the topological degree of a continuous function (LGPL-3)

"
Category:Algebraic topology Category:Differential topology Category:Continuous mappings



↩
↩




