


Colin de Verdière graph invariant




Colin de Verdière graph invariant

Colin de Verdière's invariant is a graph parameter 
 
 
 
  for any graph G, introduced by Yves Colin de Verdière in 1990. It was motivated by the study of the maximum multiplicity of the second eigenvalue of certain Schrödinger operators.1
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a loopless simple graph. Assume without loss of generality that 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 
  is the largest corank of any symmetric matrix

 
  such that:

(M1) for all 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 

 
  if i and j are adjacent, and 
 
 
 
 
  if i and j are nonadjacent;
(M2) M has exactly one negative eigenvalue, of multiplicity 1;
(M3) there is no nonzero matrix 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and such that 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 
 .23

Characterization of known graph families
Several well-known families of graphs can be characterized in terms of their Colin de Verdière invariants:


if and only if G has no edges;45

if and only if G is a linear forest (disjoint union of paths);67

if and only if G is outerplanar;89

if and only if G is planar;1011

if and only if G is linklessly embeddable graph1213

These same families of graphs also show up in connections between the Colin de Verdière invariant of a graph and the structure of its complement graph:

If the complement of an n-vertex graph is a linear forest, then ;1415
If the complement of an n-vertex graph is outerplanar, then ;1617
If the complement of an n-vertex graph is planar, then .1819

Graph minors
A minor of a graph is another graph formed from it by contracting edges and by deleting edges and vertices. The Colin de Verdière invariant is minor-monotone, meaning that taking a minor of a graph can only decrease or leave unchanged its invariant:

If H is a minor of G then 
 
 
 
 .20


By the Robertson–Seymour theorem, for every k there exists a finite set H of graphs such that the graphs with invariant at most k are the same as the graphs that do not have any member of H as a minor.  lists these sets of forbidden minors for k ≤ 3; for k = 4 the set of forbidden minors consists of the seven graphs in the Petersen family, due to the two characterizations of the linklessly embeddable graphs as the graphs with μ ≤ 4 and as the graphs with no Petersen family minor.21
Chromatic number
conjectured that any graph with Colin de Verdière invariant μ may be colored with at most μ + 1 colors. For instance, the linear forests have invariant 1, and can be 2-colored; the outerplanar graphs have invariant two, and can be 3-colored; the planar graphs have invariant 3, and (by the four color theorem) can be 4-colored.
For graphs with Colin de Verdière invariant at most four, the conjecture remains true; these are the linklessly embeddable graphs, and the fact that they have chromatic number at most five is a consequence of a proof by  of the Hadwiger conjecture for K6-minor-free graphs.
Other properties
If a graph has crossing number k, it has Colin de Verdière invariant at most k + 3. For instance, the two Kuratowski graphs K5 and K3,3 can both be drawn with a single crossing, and have Colin de Verdière invariant at most four.22
Influence
Colin de Verdière invariant is defined from a special class of matrices corresponding to a graph instead of just a single matrix related to the graph. Along the same line other graph parameters are defined and studied such as minimum rank of a graph, minimum semidefinite rank of a graph and minimum skew rank of a graph.
Notes
References


. Translated by Neil Calkin as .

.


.
.

"
Category:Graph invariants Category:Graph minor theory






.↩


 does not state this case explicitly, but it follows from his characterization of these graphs as the graphs with no triangle graph or claw minor.↩



.↩

.↩

.↩











