


Marginal value




Marginal value

A marginal value is

a value that holds true given particular constraints,
the change in a value associated with a specific change in some independent variable, whether it be of that variable or of a dependent variable, or
[when underlying values are quantified] the ratio of the change of a dependent variable to that of the independent variable.

(This third case is actually a special case of the second).
In the case of differentiability, at the limit, a marginal change is a mathematical differential, or the corresponding mathematical derivative.
These uses of the term “marginal” are especially common in economics, and result from conceptualizing constraints as borders or as margins.1 The sorts of marginal values most common to economic analysis are those associated with unit changes of resources and, in mainstream economics, those associated with infinitesimal changes. Marginal values associated with units are considered because many decisions are made by unit, and marginalism explains unit price in terms of such marginal values. Mainstream economics uses infinitesimal values in much of its analysis for reasons of mathematical tractability.
Quantified conception
Assume a functional relationship



Discrete change
If the value of 
 
 
 
  is discretely changed from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  while other independent variables remain unchanged, then the marginal value of the change in 
 
 
 
  is


 
  and the “marginal value” of 
 
 
 
  may refer to


 
  or to



Example
If an individual saw her income increase from $50000 to $55000 per annum, and part of her response was to increase yearly purchases of amontillado from 2 casks to three casks, then

the marginal increase in her income was $5000
the marginal effect on her purchase of amontillado was an increase of 1 cask, or of 1 cask per $5000.

Infinitesimal margins
If infinitesimal values are considered, then a marginal value of 
 
 
 
  would be 
 
 
 
 , and the “marginal value” of 
 
 
 
  would typically refer to



(For a linear functional relationship 
 
 
 
 , the marginal value of 
 
 
 
  will simply be the co-efficient of 
 
 
 
  (in this case, 
 
 
 
 ) and this will not change as 
 
 
 
  changes. However, in the case where the functional relationship is non-linear, say 
 
 
 
 , the marginal value of 
 
 
 
  will be different for different values of 
 
 
 
 .)
Example
Assume that, in some economy, aggregate consumption is well-approximated by


 
  where



 
  is aggregate income.

Then the marginal propensity to consume is



See also

Marginal concepts

References


"
Category:Economics terminology Category:Marginal concepts



Wicksteed, Philip Henry; The Common Sense of Political Economy (1910), [http://www.econlib.org/cgi-bin/searchbooks.pl?searchtype=BookSearchPara&id;;=wkCS&query;=margin Bk I Ch 2 and elsewhere].




