


Schnyder's theorem




Schnyder's theorem

In graph theory, Schnyder's theorem is a characterization of planar graphs in terms of the order dimension of their incidence posets. It is named after Walter Schnyder, who published its proof in Schnyder|1989}}|1989.
The incidence poset 
 
 
 
  of an undirected graph

 
  with vertex set 
 
 
 
  and edge set 
 
 
 
  is the partially ordered set of height 2 that has 
 
 
 
  as its elements. In this partial order, there is an order relation 
 
 

The order dimension of a partial order is the smallest number of total orderings whose intersection is the given partial order; such a set of orderings is called a realizer of the partial order. Schnyder's theorem states that a graph 
 
 
 
  is planar if and only if the order dimension of 
 
 
 
  is at most three.
Extensions
This theorem has been generalized by  to a tight bound on the dimension of the height-three partially ordered sets formed analogously from the vertices, edges and faces of a convex polyhedron, or more generally of an embedded planar graph: in both cases, the order dimension of the poset is at most four. However, this result cannot be generalized to higher-dimensional convex polytopes, as there exist four-dimensional polytopes whose face lattices have unbounded order dimension.
Even more generally, for abstract simplicial complexes, the order dimension of the face poset of the complex is at most 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the minimum dimension of a Euclidean space in which the complex has a geometric realization .
Other graphs
As Schnyder observes, the incidence poset of a graph G has order dimension two if and only if the graph is a path or a subgraph of a path. For, the only possible realizer for the incidence poset consists of two total orders that (when restricted to the graph's vertices) are the reverse of each other; otherwise, the intersection of the two orders would include an order relation between two vertices, which is not allowed for incidence posets. But two total orders on the vertices that are the reverse of each other can realize any subgraph of a path, by including the edges of the path in the ordering immediately following the later of the two edge endpoints.
If a graph can be colored with four colors, then its incidence poset has order dimension at most four .
The incidence poset of a complete graph on n vertices has order dimension $\Theta(\log\log n)$ .
References


.

.

.

.

.

.

"
Category:Order theory Category:Planar graphs Category:Theorems in graph theory


