


Dirichlet's test




Dirichlet's test

In mathematics, Dirichlet's test is a method of testing for the convergence of a series. It is named after its author Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet, and was published posthumously in the Journal de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées in 1862.1
Statement
The test states that if 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of real numbers and 
 
 
 
 
  a sequence of complex numbers satisfying
:* 
 
 

:* 
 
 

:* 
 
 
 
  for every positive integer N
where M is some constant, then the series



converges.
Proof
Let 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
From summation by parts, we have that 
 
 
 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
  is bounded by M and 
 
 
 
 , the first of these terms approaches zero, 
 
 
 
 
  as n→∞.
On the other hand, since the sequence 
 
 
 
  is decreasing, 
 
 
 
  is positive for all k, so 
 
 
 
 . That is, the magnitude of the partial sum of Bn, times a factor, is less than the upper bound of the partial sum Bn (a value M) times that same factor.
But 
 
 
 
 , which is a telescoping series that equals 
 
 
 
 
  and therefore approaches 
 
 
 
  as n→∞. Thus, 
 
 
 
  converges.
In turn, 
 
 
 
  converges as well by the Direct Comparison test. The series 
 
 
 
  converges, as well, by the Absolute convergence test. Hence 
 
 
 
 
  converges.
Applications
A particular case of Dirichlet's test is the more commonly used alternating series test for the case


 
 .
Another corollary is that 
 
 
 
  converges whenever 
 
 
 
  is a decreasing sequence that tends to zero.
Improper integrals
An analogous statement for convergence of improper integrals is proven using integration by parts. If the integral of a function f is uniformly bounded over all intervals, and g is a monotonically decreasing non-negative function, then the integral of fg is a convergent improper integral.
Notes


References

Hardy, G. H., A Course of Pure Mathematics, Ninth edition, Cambridge University Press, 1946. (pp. 379–380).


Voxman, William L., Advanced Calculus: An Introduction to Modern Analysis, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1981. (§8.B.13-15) ISBN 0-8247-6949-X.

External links

Proof at PlanetMath.org

"
Category:Mathematical series Category:Convergence tests



Démonstration d’un théorème d’Abel. Journal de mathématiques pures et appliquées 2nd series, tome 7 (1862), p. 253-255.↩




