


Ultrahydrophobicity




Ultrahydrophobicity

 Superhydrophobic surfaces are highly hydrophobic, i.e., extremely difficult to wet. The contact angles of a water droplet exceeds 150° and the roll-off angle/contact angle hysteresis is less than 10°.1 This is also referred to as the Lotus effect, after the superhydrophobic leaves of the lotus plant. Droplet impacting on these kind of surfaces can fully rebound like an elastic ball,23 or pancake.4
Theory
In 1805, Thomas Young defined the contact angle θ by analyzing the forces acting on a fluid droplet resting on a solid surface surrounded by a gas.5 







where
 
 

 
  = Interfacial tension between the solid and gas


 
  = Interfacial tension between the solid and liquid


 
  = Interfacial tension between the liquid and gas


θ can be measured using a contact angle goniometer.
Wenzel determined that when the liquid is in intimate contact with a microstructured surface, θ will change to 
 
 









where r is the ratio of the actual area to the projected area.6 Wenzel's equation shows that microstructuring a surface amplifies the natural tendency of the surface. A hydrophobic surface (one that has an original contact angle greater than 90°) becomes more hydrophobic when microstructured – its new contact angle becomes greater than the original. However, a hydrophilic surface (one that has an original contact angle less than 90°) becomes more hydrophilic when microstructured – its new contact angle becomes less than the original.7
Cassie and Baxter found that if the liquid is suspended on the tops of microstructures, θ will change to 
 
 





 
  = φ(cos θ + 1) – 1
 



where φ is the area fraction of the solid that touches the liquid.8 Liquid in the Cassie-Baxter state is more mobile than in the Wenzel state.
It can be predicted whether the Wenzel or Cassie-Baxter state should exist by calculating the new contact angle with both equations. By a minimization of free energy argument, the relation that predicted the smaller new contact angle is the state most likely to exist. Stated mathematically, for the Cassie-Baxter state to exist, the following inequality must be true.9


cos θ < (φ-1)/(r - φ)
 



A recent alternative criteria for the Cassie-Baxter state asserts that the Cassie-Baxter state exists when the following 2 criteria are met: 1) Contact line forces overcome body forces of unsupported droplet weight and 2) The microstructures are tall enough to prevent the liquid that bridges microstructures from touching the base of the microstructures.10
Contact angle is a measure of static hydrophobicity, and contact angle hysteresis and slide angle are dynamic measures. Contact angle hysteresis is a phenomenon that characterizes surface heterogeneity.11 When a pipette injects a liquid onto a solid, the liquid will form some contact angle. As the pipette injects more liquid, the droplet will increase in volume, the contact angle will increase, but its three phase boundary will remain stationary until it suddenly advances outward. The contact angle the droplet had immediately before advancing outward is termed the advancing contact angle. The receding contact angle is now measured by pumping the liquid back out of the droplet. The droplet will decrease in volume, the contact angle will decrease, but its three phase boundary will remain stationary until it suddenly recedes inward. The contact angle the droplet had immediately before receding inward is termed the receding contact angle. The difference between advancing and receding contact angles is termed contact angle hysteresis and can be used to characterize surface heterogeneity, roughness, and mobility. Surfaces that are not homogeneous will have domains which impede motion of the contact line. The slide angle is another dynamic measure of hydrophobicity and is measured by depositing a droplet on a surface and tilting the surface until the droplet begins to slide. Liquids in the Cassie-Baxter state generally exhibit lower slide angles and contact angle hysteresis than those in the Wenzel state.
A simple model can be used to predict the effectiveness of a manmade micro- or nano-fabricated surface for its conditional state (wenzel or cassie-baxter), contact angle and contact angle hysteresis.12 The main factor of this model is the contact line density, Λ, which is the total perimeter of asperities over a given unit area.
The critical contact line density Λc is a function of body and surface forces, as well as the projected area of the droplet.



where

ρ = density of the liquid droplet
 
g = acceleration due to gravity
 
V = volume of the liquid droplet
 
θa = advancing appearant contact angle
 
θa,0 = advancing contact angle of a smooth substrate
 
γ = surface tension of the liquid
 
w = tower wall angle
 

If Λ > Λc, drops are suspended in the cassie-baxter state. Otherwise, the droplet will collapse into the wenzel state.
To calculate updated advancing and receding contact angles in the cassie-baxter state, the following equations can be used.




with also the wenzel state:




where

λp = linear fraction of contact line on the asperities
 
θr,0 = receding contact angle of a smooth substrate
 
θair = contact angle between liquid and air (typically assumed to be 180°)
 

Unitary versus hierarchical roughness structures
(Figure)
Unitary roughness structure versus hierarchical structure.jpg

M. Nosonovsky and B. Bhushan studied the effect of unitary (non-hierarchical) structures of micro and nano roughness, and hierarchical structures (micro roughness covered with nano roughness).13 They found that hierarchical structure was not only necessary for a high contact angle but essential for the stability of the water-solid and water-air interfaces (the composite interface). Due to an external perturbation, a standing capillary wave can form at the liquid–air interface. If the amplitude of the capillary wave is greater than the height of the asperity, the liquid can touch the valley between the asperities; and if the angle under which the liquid comes in contact with the solid is greater than h0, it is energetically profitable for the liquid to fill the valley. The effect of capillary waves is more pronounced for small asperities with heights comparable to the wave amplitude. For example in the case of unitary roughness, where the amplitude of asperity is very low. This is why the likelihood of instability of a unitary interface will be very high.
Examples in nature
Many very hydrophobic materials found in nature rely on Cassie's law and are biphasic on the submicrometer level with one component air. The Lotus effect is based on this principle. Inspired by it, a lot of functional superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared.14
Water striders are insects that live on the surface film of water, and their bodies are effectively unwettable due to specialized pubescence referred to as hydrofuge; many of the body surfaces are covered with specialized "hairpiles", composed of tiny hairs spaced so closely that there are more than one thousand microhairs per mm, resulting in a hydrophobic surface.15 Similar hydrofuge surfaces are known in other insects, including aquatic insects that spend most of their lives submerged, with hydrophobic hairs preventing entry of water into the respiratory system.
Some birds are great swimmers, due to their hydrophobic feather coating. Penguins are coated in a layer of air, and can release that trapped air to accelerate rapidly when needed to jump out of water and land on higher ground. Wearing an air coat when swimming reduces the drag, and also acts as heat insulator.
Recent research
 
Dettre and Johnson discovered in 1964 that the superhydrophobic, Lotus Effect phenomenon was related to rough hydrophobic surfaces, and they developed a theoretical model based on experiments with glass beads coated with paraffin or TFE telomer. The self-cleaning property of superhydrophobic micro-nanostructured surfaces was reported in 1977.16 Perfluoroalkyl, perfluoropolyether and RF plasma formed superhydrophobic materials were developed, used for electrowetting and commercialized for bio-medical applications between 1986 and 1995.171819




Richard, Denis, Christophe Clanet, and David Quéré. "Surface phenomena: Contact time of a bouncing drop." Nature 417.6891 (2002): 811-811
Bird, James C., et al. "Reducing the contact time of a bouncing drop." Nature 503.7476 (2013): 385-388
Yahua Liu, Lisa Moevius, Xinpeng Xu,Tiezheng Qian, Julia M Yeomans, Zuankai Wang. "Pancake bouncing on superhydrophobic surfaces." Nature Physics, 10, 515-519 (2014)



















