


Radiant exitance




Radiant exitance
In [[radiometry]], '''radiant exitance''' is the [[radiant flux]] ''emitted'' by a ''surface'' per unit area, and '''spectral exitance''' is the radiant exitance of a ''surface'' per unit [[frequency]] or [[wavelength]], depending on whether the [[Spectral radiometric qu
 antity|spectrum]] is taken as a function of frequency or of wavelength. This is the emitted component of radiosity. The SI unit of radiant exitance is the watt per square metre (), while that of spectral exitance in frequency is the watt per square metre per hertz (W·m−2·Hz−1) and that of spectral exitance in wavelength is the watt per square metre per metre (W·m−3)—commonly the watt per square metre per nanometre (). The CGS unit erg per square centimeter per second () is often used in astronomy. "Radiant emittance" is an old term for this quantity. Radiant exitance is often called "intensity" in branches of physics other than radiometry, but in radiometry this usage leads to confusion with radiant intensity.
Mathematical definitions
Radiant exitance
Radiant exitance of a surface, denoted Me ("e" for "energetic", to avoid confusion with photometric quantities), is defined as1


 
  where

∂ is the partial derivative symbol;
Φe is the radiant flux emitted;
A is the area.

If we want to talk about the radiant flux received by a surface, we speak of irradiance.
The radiance exitance of a black surface, according to the Stefan–Boltzmann law, is equal to:


 
  where

σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant;
T is the temperature of that surface,

so for a real surface, the radiant exitance is equal to:


 
  where ε is the emissivity of that surface.
Spectral exitance
Spectral exitance in frequency of a surface, denoted Me,ν, is defined as2


 
  where ν is the frequency.
Spectral exitance in wavelength of a surface, denoted Me,λ, is defined as3


 
  where λ is the wavelength.
The spectral exitance of a black surface around a given frequency or wavelength, according to the Lambert's cosine law and the Planck's law, is equal to:





 
  where

h is the Planck constant;
ν is the frequency;
λ is the wavelength;
k is the Boltzmann constant;
c is the speed of light in the medium;
T is the temperature of that surface,

so for a real surface, the spectral exitance is equal to:






SI radiometry units
See also

Radiosity

References
"
Category:Physical quantities Category:Radiometry










