


Perfect fluid




Perfect fluid

 In physics, a perfect fluid is a fluid that can be completely characterized by its rest frame mass density

 
 ; and isotropic pressure p.
Real fluids are "sticky" and contain (and conduct) heat. Perfect fluids are idealized models in which these possibilities are neglected. Specifically, perfect fluids have no shear stresses, viscosity, or heat conduction.
In space-positive Metric signature tensor notation, the stress–energy tensor of a perfect fluid can be written in the form


 
  where U is the velocity vector field of the fluid and where 
 
 
 
  is the metric tensor of Minkowski spacetime.
In time-positive Metric signature tensor notation, the stress–energy tensor of a perfect fluid can be written in the form


 
  where U is the velocity vector field of the fluid and where 
 
 
 
  is the metric tensor of Minkowski spacetime
This takes on a particularly simple form in the rest frame


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the energy density and 
 
 
 
  is the pressure of the fluid.
Perfect fluids admit a Lagrangian formulation, which allows the techniques used in field theory, in particular, quantization, to be applied to fluids. This formulation can be generalized, but unfortunately, heat conduction and anisotropic stresses cannot be treated in these generalized formulations.
Perfect fluids are often used in general relativity to model idealized distributions of matter, such as the interior of a star or an isotropic universe. In the latter case, the equation of state of the perfect fluid may be used in Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker equations to describe the evolution of the universe.
See also

Equation of state
Ideal gas
Fluid solutions in general relativity

References

The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time, by S.W.Hawking and G.F.R.Ellis, Cambridge University Press, 1973. ISBN 0-521-20016-4, ISBN 0-521-09906-4 (pbk.)

External links

Mark D. Roberts, [A Fluid Generalization of Membranes http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0406164 hep-th/0406164].

"
Category:Fluid mechanics


