


K-ary tree




K-ary tree

In graph theory, a k-ary tree is a rooted tree in which each node has no more than k children. It is also sometimes known as a k-way tree, an N-ary tree, or an M-ary tree. A binary tree is the special case where k=2.
Types of k-ary trees

A full k-ary tree is a k-ary tree where within each level every node has either 0 or k children.
A perfect k-ary tree is a full 1 k-ary tree in which all leaf nodes are at the same depth.2
A complete k-ary tree is a k-ary tree which is maximally space efficient. It must be completely filled on every level (meaning that each node on that level has k children) except for the last level. However, if the last level is not complete, then all nodes of the tree must be "as far left as possible". 3

Properties of k-ary trees

For a k-ary tree with height h, the upper bound for the maximum number of leaves is 
 
 
 
 .
The height ''h ''of a k-ary tree does not include the root node, with a tree containing only a root node having a height of 0.
The total number of nodes in a perfect k-ary tree is 
 
 
 
 , while the height h is




Note : A Tree containing only one node is taken to be of height 0 for this formula to be applicable.
Note : Formula is not applicable for a 2-ary tree with height 0, as the ceiling operator approximates and simplifies the true formula, which can be described as



Methods for storing k-ary trees
Arrays
k-ary trees can also be stored in breadth-first order as an implicit data structure in arrays, and if the tree is a complete k-ary tree, this method wastes no space. In this compact arrangement, if a node has an index i, its c-th child is found at index 
 
 
 
 , while its parent (if any) is found at index 

 (assuming the root has index zero). This method benefits from more compact storage and better locality of reference, particularly during a preorder traversal.
See also

Left-child right-sibling binary tree
Binary tree

References



External links

N-ary trees, Bruno R. Preiss, P.Eng.

"
Category:Trees (graph theory) Category:Trees (data structures)










