


Plastic number




Plastic number








Binary



Decimal



Hexadecimal



Continued fraction1



Algebraic form



In mathematics, the plastic number ρ (also known as the plastic constant or the minimal Pisot number) is a mathematical constant which is the unique real solution of the cubic equation



It has the exact value2








Its decimal expansion begins with .3 and at least 10,000,000,000 decimal digits have been computed.4
The plastic number is also sometimes called the silver number, but that name is more commonly used for the silver ratio

 
 .
Properties
The powers of the plastic number A(n) = ρn satisfy the recurrence relation A(n) = A(n − 2) + A(n − 3) for n > 2. Hence it is the limiting ratio of successive terms of any (non-zero) integer sequence satisfying this recurrence such as the Padovan sequence and the Perrin sequence, and bears the same relationship to these sequences as the golden ratio does to the Fibonacci sequence and the silver ratio does to the Pell numbers.
Because the plastic number has minimal polynomial  0,}} it is also a solution of the polynomial equation p(x) = 0 for every polynomial p that is a multiple of  but not for any other polynomials with integer coefficients. Since the discriminant of minimal polynomial is -23, its splitting field over rationals is 
 
 
 
 . This field is also Hilbert class field of 
 
 
 
 .
The plastic number satisfies the nested radical recurrence:5



The plastic number is the smallest Pisot–Vijayaraghavan number. Its algebraic conjugates are


 
  of absolute value ≈ 0.868837 . This value is also 
 
 
 
  because the product of the three roots of the minimal polynomial is 1.
The plastic number can be written using the Hyperbolic cosine and its inverse:



(See Cubic function#Trigonometric (and hyperbolic) method.)
History
The name plastic number (het plastische getal in Dutch) was given to this number in 1928 by Dom Hans van der Laan. Unlike the names of the golden ratio and silver ratio, the word plastic was not intended to refer to a specific substance, but rather in its adjectival sense, meaning something that can be given a three-dimensional shape.6 This is because, according to Padovan, the characteristic ratios of the number, 3/4 and 1/7, relate to the limits of human perception in relating one physical size to another.
Notes
References


.

.

.

.

External links

Tales of a Neglected Number by Ian Stewart

"
Category:Irrational numbers Category:Mathematical constants



Sequence  in the OEIS

Sequence  in the OEIS.
http://www.komsta.net/computations

;.




