


Uniformization (set theory)




Uniformization (set theory)

In set theory, the axiom of uniformization, a weak form of the axiom of choice, states that if 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are Polish spaces, then there is a subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  that is a partial function from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , and whose domain (in the sense of the set of all 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  exists) equals


 
  Such a function is called a uniformizing function for 
 
 
 
 , or a uniformization of 
 
 
 
 .
(Figure)
Uniformization of relation R (light blue) by function f (red).

To see the relationship with the axiom of choice, observe that 
 
 
 
  can be thought of as associating, to each element of 
 
 
 
 , a subset of 
 
 
 
 . A uniformization of 
 
 
 
  then picks exactly one element from each such subset, whenever the subset is nonempty. Thus, allowing arbitrary sets X and Y (rather than just Polish spaces) would make the axiom of uniformization equivalent to AC.
A pointclass

 
  is said to have the uniformization property if every relation 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  can be uniformized by a partial function in 
 
 
 
 . The uniformization property is implied by the scale property, at least for adequate pointclasses of a certain form.
It follows from ZFC alone that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the uniformization property. It follows from the existence of sufficient large cardinals that



 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the uniformization property for every natural number

 
 .
Therefore, the collection of projective sets has the uniformization property.
Every relation in L(R) can be uniformized, but not necessarily by a function in L(R). In fact, L(R) does not have the uniformization property (equivalently, L(R) does not satisfy the axiom of uniformization).
 
(Note: it's trivial that every relation in L(R) can be uniformized in V, assuming V satisfies AC. The point is that every such relation can be uniformized in some transitive inner model of V in which AD holds.)


References



"
Category:Set theory Category:Descriptive set theory Category:Axiom of choice


