   Algebra (disambiguation)      Algebra (disambiguation)   The word 'algebra' is used for various branches and structures of mathematics. For their overview, see Algebra .  The bare word "algebra"  The bare word "algebra" can mean:   Elementary algebra  Abstract algebra  Algebra over a field   In universal algebra , algebra has an axiomatic definition, roughly as an instance of any of a number of algebraic structures, such as groups, rings, etc.  Branches of mathematics   Elementary algebra , i.e. "high-school algebra."  Abstract algebra  Linear algebra  Relational algebra  Universal algebra   The term is also traditionally used for the field of:   Computer algebra , dealing with software systems for symbolic mathematical computation, which often offer capabilities beyond what is normally understood to be "algebra".   Mathematical structures  Vector space with multiplication   "Algebra", or to be verbose, algebra over a field : a vector space equipped with a bilinear vector product   Some notable algebras in this sense are:   In ring theory and linear algebra :  Algebra over a commutative ring : a module equipped with a bilinear product. Generalization of algebras over a field.  Associative algebra : a module equipped with an associative bilinear vector product  Superalgebra : a    ℤ  2     subscript  ℤ  2    \mathbb{Z}_{2}   - graded algebra  Lie algebras , Poisson algebras , and Jordan algebras are important examples of (potentially) nonassociative algebras.   In functional analysis :  Banach algebra : an associative algebra  A over the real or complex numbers which at the same time is also a Banach space .  Operator algebra : continuous  linear operators on a topological vector space with multiplication given by the composition.  *-algebra : An algebra with a notion of adjoints .  C* algebra : a Banach algebra equipped with a unary involution operation.  Von Neumann algebra (or W*-algebra )     See also coalgebra , the dual notion.  Other structures  A different class of "algebras" consists of objects which generalize logical connectives , sets , and lattices .   In logic :  Relational algebra , in which a set of finitary relations that is closed under certain operators.  Boolean algebra and Boolean algebra (structure)  Heyting algebra   In measure theory :  Algebra over a set : a collection of sets closed under finite unions and complementation  Sigma algebra : a collection of sets closed under countable unions and complementation    The term "algebra" can also describe more general structures:   In category theory and computer science :  F-algebra and F-coalgebra  T-algebra    Other   Algebra Blessett , singer from the U.S, goes by the stage name Algebra .   See also   Algebraic (disambiguation)  List of all articles whose title begins with "algebra"   "   