


Loop space




Loop space

In topology, a branch of mathematics, the loop space ΩX of a pointed topological space X is the space of based maps from the circle S1 to X with the compact-open topology. Two elements of a loop space can be naturally concatenated. With this concatenation operation, a loop space is an A∞-space. The adjective A∞ describes the manner in which concatenating loops is homotopy coherently associative.
The quotient of the loop space ΩX by the equivalence relation of pointed homotopy is the fundamental group π1(X).
The iterated loop spaces of X are formed by applying Ω a number of times.
An analogous construction of topological spaces without basepoint is the free loop space. The free loop space of a topological space X is the space of maps from S1 to X with the compact-open topology. That is to say, the free loop space of a topological space X is the function space

 
 . The free loop space of X is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
The free loop space construction is right adjoint to the cartesian product with the circle, while the loop space construction is right adjoint to the reduced suspension. This adjunction accounts for much of the importance of loop spaces in stable homotopy theory.
Relation between homotopy groups of a space and those of its loop space
The basic relation between the homotopy groups is 
 
 
 
 .1
More generally,


 
  where, 
 
 
 
  is the set of homotopy classes of maps 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the suspension of A. In general 
 
 
 
  does not have a group structure for arbitrary spaces 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . However, it can be shown that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  do have natural group structures when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are pointed, and the aforesaid isomorphism is of those groups. 2
Note that setting 
 
 
 
  (the 
 
 
 
  sphere) gives the earlier result.
See also

fundamental group
path (topology)
loop group
free loop
quasigroup

References




"
Category:Topology Category:Homotopy theory Category:Topological spaces



http://topospaces.subwiki.org/wiki/Loop_space_of_a_based_topological_space↩
 (chapter 8, section 2)↩




