


Universal bundle




Universal bundle

In mathematics, the universal bundle in the theory of fiber bundles with structure group a given topological group

 
 , is a specific bundle over a classifying space

 
 , such that every bundle with the given structure group

 
  over 
 
 
 
 
  is a pullback by means of a continuous map

 
 .
Existence of a universal bundle
In the CW complex category
When the definition of the classifying space takes place within the homotopy category of CW complexes, existence theorems for universal bundles arise from Brown's representability theorem.
For compact Lie groups
We will first prove:

Proposition. Let 
 
 
 
  be a compact Lie group. There exists a contractible space 
 
 
 
  on which 
 
 
 
  acts freely. The projection 
 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -principal fibre bundle.
 

Proof. There exists an injection of 
 
 
 
  into a unitary group

 
  for 
 
 
 
  big enough.1 If we find 
 
 
 
 
  then we can take 
 
 
 
  to be 
 
 
 
 . The construction of 
 
 
 
  is given in classifying space for 
 
 
.
The following Theorem is a corollary of the above Proposition.

Theorem. If 
 
 
 
 
  is a paracompact manifold and 
 
 
 
  is a principal 
 
 
 
 -bundle, then there exists a map 
 
 
 
 , unique up to homotopy, such that 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to , the pull-back of the 
 
 
 
 
 -bundle 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 .
 

Proof. On one hand, the pull-back of the bundle 
 
 
 
  by the natural projection  is the bundle 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, the pull-back of the principal 
 
 
 
 
 -bundle 
 
 
 
  by the projection  is also 
 
 




Since 
 
 
 
  is a fibration with contractible fibre 
 
 
 
 , sections of 
 
 
 
  exist.2 To such a section 
 
 
 
  we associate the composition with the projection . The map we get is the 
 
 
 
  we were looking for.
For the uniqueness up to homotopy, notice that there exists a one to one correspondence between maps 
 
 
 
  such that  is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  and sections of 
 
 
 
 . We have just seen how to associate a 
 
 
 
  to a section. Inversely, assume that 
 
 
 
  is given. Let  be an isomorphism:



Now, simply define a section by



Because all sections of 
 
 
 
  are homotopic, the homotopy class of 
 
 
 
  is unique.
Use in the study of group actions
The total space of a universal bundle is usually written 
 
 
 
 . These spaces are of interest in their own right, despite typically being contractible. For example in defining the homotopy quotient or homotopy orbit space of a group action of 
 
 
 
 , in cases where the orbit space is pathological (in the sense of being a non-Hausdorff space, for example). The idea, if 
 
 
 
  acts on the space 
 
 
 
 , is to consider instead the action on 
 
 
 
 , and corresponding quotient. See equivariant cohomology for more detailed discussion.
If 
 
 
 
  is contractible then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are homotopy equivalent spaces. But the diagonal action on 
 
 
 
 , i.e. where 
 
 
 
  acts on both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  coordinates, may be well-behaved when the action on 
 
 
 
  is not.
See also: equivariant cohomology#Homotopy quotient.
Examples

Classifying space for U(n)

See also

Chern class

External links

[http://planetmath.org/?op=getobj&from;;=objects&id;=3663 PlanetMath page of universal bundle examples]

Notes
"
Category:Homotopy theory Category:Fiber bundles



J. J. Duistermaat and J. A. Kolk,-- Lie Groups, Universitext, Springer. Corollary 4.6.5
A.~Dold -- Partitions of Unity in the Theory of Fibrations,Annals of Math., vol. 78, No 2 (1963)




