


Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process




Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process

In mathematics, the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process (named after Leonard Ornstein and George Eugene Uhlenbeck), is a stochastic process that, roughly speaking, describes the velocity of a massive Brownian particle under the influence of friction. The process is stationary, Gaussian, and Markovian, and is the only nontrivial process that satisfies these three conditions, up to allowing linear transformations of the space and time variables.1 Over time, the process tends to drift towards its long-term mean: such a process is called mean-reverting.
The process can be considered to be a modification of the random walk in continuous time, or Wiener process, in which the properties of the process have been changed so that there is a tendency of the walk to move back towards a central location, with a greater attraction when the process is further away from the centre. The Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process can also be considered as the continuous-time analogue of the discrete-time AR(1) process.
Representation via a stochastic differential equation
An Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process, xt, satisfies the following stochastic differential equation:



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are parameters and 
 
 
 
  denotes the Wiener process.
The above representation can be taken as the primary definition of an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process.2.
Fokker–Planck equation representation
The probability density function ƒ(x, t) of the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process satisfies the Fokker–Planck equation



The Green function of this linear parabolic partial differential equation, taking 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for simplicity, and the initial condition consisting of a unit point mass at location 
 
 
 
  is



The stationary solution of this equation is the limit for time tending to infinity which is a Gaussian distribution with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 




Application in physical sciences
The Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process is a prototype of a noisy relaxation process. Consider for example a Hookean spring with spring constant 
 
 
 
  whose dynamics is highly overdamped with friction coefficient 
 
 
 
 . In the presence of thermal fluctuations with temperature

 
 , the length 
 
 
 
  of the spring will fluctuate stochastically around the spring rest length 
 
 
 
 ; its stochastic dynamic is described by an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process with:



where 
 
 
 
  is derived from the Stokes–Einstein equation

 
  for the effective diffusion constant.
In physical sciences, the stochastic differential equation of an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process is rewritten as a Langevin equation


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is white Gaussian noise with 
 
 

At equilibrium, the spring stores an average energy 
 
 
 
  in accordance with the equipartition theorem.
Application in financial mathematics
The Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process is one of several approaches used to model (with modifications) interest rates, currency exchange rates, and commodity prices stochastically. The parameter 
 
 
 
  represents the equilibrium or mean value supported by fundamentals; 
 
 
 
  the degree of volatility around it caused by shocks, and 
 
 
 
  the rate by which these shocks dissipate and the variable reverts towards the mean. One application of the process is a trading strategy known as pairs trade.345
Mathematical properties
The Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process is an example of a Gaussian process that has a bounded variance and admits a stationary probability distribution, in contrast to the Wiener process; the difference between the two is in their "drift" term. For the Wiener process the drift term is constant, whereas for the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process it is dependent on the current value of the process: if the current value of the process is less than the (long-term) mean, the drift will be positive; if the current value of the process is greater than the (long-term) mean, the drift will be negative. In other words, the mean acts as an equilibrium level for the process. This gives the process its informative name, "mean-reverting." The stationary (long-term) variance is given by



The Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process is the continuous-time analogue of the discrete-time AR(1) process.
(Figure)
three sample paths of different OU-processes with θ = 1, μ = 1.2, σ = 0.3:
blue: initial value a = 0 (a.s.)
green: initial value a = 2 (a.s.)
red: initial value normally distributed so that the process has invariant measure

Solution
This stochastic differential equation is solved by variation of parameters.. Changing variable



we get



Integrating from 0 to t we get



whereupon we see



Formulas for moments of nonstationary processes
From this representation, the first moment is given by (assuming that x0 is a constant)



The Itō isometry can be used to calculate the covariance function by



Thus if s  \operatorname{cov}(x_s,x_t) = \frac{\sigma^2}{2\theta}\left( e^{-\theta(t-s)} - e^{-\theta(t+s)} \right). 
Alternative representation for nonstationary processes
It is also possible (and often convenient) to represent xt (unconditionally, i.e. as 
 
 
 
 ) as a scaled time-transformed Wiener process :



or conditionally (given x0) as



The time integral of this process can be used to generate noise with a 1/ƒ power spectrum.
Scaling limit interpretation
The Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process can be interpreted as a scaling limit of a discrete process, in the same way that Brownian motion is a scaling limit of random walks. Consider an urn containing 
 
 
 
  blue and yellow balls. At each step a ball is chosen at random and replaced by a ball of the opposite colour (equivalently, a ball chosen uniformly at random changes color). Let 
 
 
 
  be the number of blue balls in the urn after 
 
 
 
  steps. Then 
 
 
 
  converges in law to an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process as 
 
 
 
  tends to infinity.
Generalizations
It is possible to extend Ornstein–Uhlenbeck processes to processes where the background driving process is a Lévy process (instead of a simple Brownian motion). These processes are widely studied by Ole Barndorff-Nielsen and Neil Shephard, and others.
In addition, in finance, stochastic processes are used the volatility increases for larger values of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the CKLS (Chan–Karolyi–Longstaff–Sanders) process6 with the volatility term replaced by 
 
 
 
  can be solved in closed form for 
 
 
 
  or 1, as well as for 
 
 
 
 , which corresponds to the conventional OU process.
Limitations
See also

The Vasicek model of interest rates is an example of an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process.
Short rate model – contains more examples.
Cointelation7

Notes
References








External links

Review of Statistical Arbitrage, Cointegration, and Multivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck, Attilio Meucci
A Stochastic Processes Toolkit for Risk Management, Damiano Brigo, Antonio Dalessandro, Matthias Neugebauer and Fares Triki
Simulating and Calibrating the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process, M.A. van den Berg
Maximum likelihood estimation of mean reverting processes, Jose Carlos Garcia Franco


"
Category:Stochastic differential equations Category:Stochastic processes Category:Variants of random walks






Advantages of Pair Trading: Market Neutrality
An Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Framework for Pairs Trading
Chan et al. (1992)





