


Finite strain theory




Finite strain theory

In continuum mechanics, the finite strain theory—also called large strain theory, or large deformation theory—deals with deformations in which both rotations and strains are arbitrarily large, i.e. invalidates the assumptions inherent in infinitesimal strain theory. In this case, the undeformed and deformed configurations of the continuum are significantly different and a clear distinction has to be made between them. This is commonly the case with elastomers, plastically-deforming materials and other fluids and biological soft tissue.
Displacement
 The displacement of a body has two components: a rigid-body displacement and a deformation.

A rigid-body displacement consists of a simultaneous translation and rotation of the body without changing its shape or size.
Deformation implies the change in shape and/or size of the body from an initial or undeformed configuration 
 
 
 
  to a current or deformed configuration 
 
 
 
  (Figure 1).

A change in the configuration of a continuum body can be described by a displacement field. A displacement field is a vector field of all displacement vectors for all particles in the body, which relates the deformed configuration with the undeformed configuration. Relative displacement between particles occurs if and only if deformation has occurred. If displacement occurs without deformation, then it is deemed a rigid-body displacement.
Material coordinates (Lagrangian description)
The displacement of particles indexed by variable 
 
 
 
  may be expressed as follows. The vector joining the positions of a particle in the undeformed configuration 
 
 
 
  and deformed configuration 
 
 
 
  is called the displacement vector. Using 
 
 
 
  in place of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in place of 
 
 
 
 , both of which are vectors from the origin of the coordinate system to each respective point, we have the Lagrangian description of the displacement vector:



Where 
 
 
 
  is the unit vector that defines the basis of the material (body-frame) coordinate system.
Expressed in terms of the material coordinates, the displacement field is:



The partial derivative of the displacement vector with respect to the material coordinates yields the material displacement gradient tensor

 
 . Thus we have,


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient tensor.
Spatial coordinates (Eulerian description)
In the Eulerian description, the vector joining the positions of a particle 
 
 
 
  in the undeformed configuration and deformed configuration is called the displacement vector:



Where 
 
 
 
  is the unit vector that defines the basis of the spatial (lab-frame) coordinate system.
Expressed in terms of spatial coordinates, the displacement field is:



The partial derivative of the displacement vector with respect to the spatial coordinates yields the spatial displacement gradient tensor

 
 . Thus we have,



Relationship between the material and spatial coordinate systems


 
  are the direction cosines between the material and spatial coordinate systems with unit vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. Thus



The relationship between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is then given by



Knowing that


 
  then



Combining the coordinate systems of deformed and undeformed configurations
It is common to superimpose the coordinate systems for the deformed and undeformed configurations, which results in 
 
 
 
 , and the direction cosines become Kronecker deltas, i.e.



Thus in material (deformed) coordinates, the displacement may be expressed as:



And in spatial (undeformed) coordinates, the displacement may be expressed as:



Deformation gradient tensor
 The deformation gradient tensor 
 
 
 
  is related to both the reference and current configuration, as seen by the unit vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , therefore it is a two-point tensor.
Due to the assumption of continuity of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  has the inverse 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the spatial deformation gradient tensor. Then, by the implicit function theorem,1 the Jacobian determinant 
 
 
 
  must be nonsingular, i.e. 
 
 

The material deformation gradient tensor

 
  is a second-order tensor that represents the gradient of the mapping function or functional relation 
 
 
 
 , which describes the motion of a continuum. The material deformation gradient tensor characterizes the local deformation at a material point with position vector 
 
 
 
 , i.e. deformation at neighbouring points, by transforming (linear transformation) a material line element emanating from that point from the reference configuration to the current or deformed configuration, assuming continuity in the mapping function 
 
 
 
 , i.e. differentiable function of 
 
 
 
  and time 
 
 
 
 , which implies that cracks and voids do not open or close during the deformation. Thus we have,



Relative displacement vector
Consider a particle or material point

 
  with position vector 
 
 
 
  in the undeformed configuration (Figure 2). After a displacement of the body, the new position of the particle indicated by 
 
 
 
  in the new configuration is given by the vector position 
 
 
 
 . The coordinate systems for the undeformed and deformed configuration can be superimposed for convenience.
Consider now a material point 
 
 
 
  neighboring 
 
 
 
 , with position vector 
 
 
 
 . In the deformed configuration this particle has a new position 
 
 
 
  given by the position vector 
 
 
 
 . Assuming that the line segments 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  joining the particles 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in both the undeformed and deformed configuration, respectively, to be very small, then we can express them as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus from Figure 2 we have



where 
 
 
 
  is the relative displacement vector, which represents the relative displacement of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  in the deformed configuration.
Taylor approximation
For an infinitesimal element 
 
 
 
 
 , and assuming continuity on the displacement field, it is possible to use a Taylor series expansion around point 
 
 
 
 , neglecting higher-order terms, to approximate the components of the relative displacement vector for the neighboring particle 
 
 
 
  as


 
  Thus, the previous equation 
 
 
 
  can be written as



Time-derivative of the deformation gradient
Calculations that involve the time-dependent deformation of a body often require a time derivative of the deformation gradient to be calculated. A geometrically consistent definition of such a derivative requires an excursion into differential geometry2 but we avoid those issues in this article.
The time derivative of 
 
 
 
  is


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the velocity. The derivative on the right hand side represents a material velocity gradient. It is common to convert that into a spatial gradient, i.e.,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the spatial velocity gradient. If the spatial velocity gradient is constant, the above equation can be solved exactly to give


 
  assuming 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 . There are several methods of computing the exponential above.
Related quantities often used in continuum mechanics are the rate of deformation tensor and the spin tensor defined, respectively, as:


 
  The rate of deformation tensor gives the rate of stretching of line elements while the spin tensor indicates the rate of rotation or vorticity of the motion.
Transformation of a surface and volume element
To transform quantities that are defined with respect to areas in a deformed configuration to those relative to areas in a reference configuration, and vice versa, we use Nanson's relation, expressed as



where 
 
 
 
  is an area of a region in the deformed configuration, 
 
 
 
  is the same area in the reference configuration, and 
 
 
 
  is the outward normal to the area element in the current configuration while 
 
 
 
  is the outward normal in the reference configuration, 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient, and 
 
 
 
 .
The corresponding formula for the transformation of the volume element is









Derivation of Nanson's relation





To see how this formula is derived, we start with the oriented area elements in the reference and current configurations:


 
  The reference and current volumes of an element are


 
  where 
 
 
 
 . Therefore,


 
  or,


 
  so,


 
  So we get


 
  or,








Polar decomposition of the deformation gradient tensor
(Figure)
Figure 3. Representation of the polar decomposition of the deformation gradient

The deformation gradient 
 
 
 
 , like any second-order tensor, can be decomposed, using the polar decomposition theorem, into a product of two second-order tensors (Truesdell and Noll, 1965): an orthogonal tensor and a positive definite symmetric tensor, i.e.



where the tensor 
 
 
 
  is a proper orthogonal tensor, i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , representing a rotation; the tensor 
 
 
 
  is the right stretch tensor; and 
 
 
 
  the left stretch tensor. The terms right and left means that they are to the right and left of the rotation tensor 
 
 
 
 , respectively. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both positive definite, i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and symmetric tensors, i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , of second order.
This decomposition implies that the deformation of a line element 
 
 
 
  in the undeformed configuration onto 
 
 
 
  in the deformed configuration, i.e. 
 
 
 
 , may be obtained either by first stretching the element by 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 , followed by a rotation 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 ; or equivalently, by applying a rigid rotation 
 
 
 
  first, i.e. 
 
 
 
 , followed later by a stretching 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
  (See Figure 3).
It can be shown that,



so that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the same eigenvalues or principal stretches, but different eigenvectors or principal directions

 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. The principal directions are related by



This polar decomposition is unique as 
 
 
 
  is non-symmetric.
Deformation tensors
Several rotation-independent deformation tensors are used in mechanics. In solid mechanics, the most popular of these are the right and left Cauchy-Green deformation tensors.
Since a pure rotation should not induce any stresses in a deformable body, it is often convenient to use rotation-independent measures of deformation in continuum mechanics. As a rotation followed by its inverse rotation leads to no change (
 
 
 
 ) we can exclude the rotation by multiplying 
 
 
 
  by its transpose.
The Right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor
In 1839, George Green introduced a deformation tensor known as the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor or Green's deformation tensor, defined as:34



Physically, the Cauchy-Green tensor gives us the square of local change in distances due to deformation, i.e. 
 
 

Invariants of 
 
 
 
  are often used in the expressions for strain energy density functions. The most commonly used invariants are


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are stretch ratios for the unit fibers that are initially oriented along the directions of three axis in the coordinate systems.
The Finger deformation tensor
The IUPAC recommends5 that the inverse of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor (called the Cauchy tensor in that document), i. e., 
 
 
 
 , be called the Finger tensor. However, that nomenclature is not universally accepted in applied mechanics.



The Left Cauchy-Green or Finger deformation tensor
Reversing the order of multiplication in the formula for the right Green-Cauchy deformation tensor leads to the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor which is defined as:



The left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor is often called the Finger deformation tensor, named after Josef Finger (1894).678
Invariants of 
 
 
 
  are also used in the expressions for strain energy density functions. The conventional invariants are defined as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the determinant of the deformation gradient.
For nearly incompressible materials, a slightly different set of invariants is used:



The Cauchy deformation tensor
Earlier in 1828,9 Augustin Louis Cauchy introduced a deformation tensor defined as the inverse of the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, 
 
 
 
 . This tensor has also been called the Piola tensor10 and the Finger tensor11 in the rheology and fluid dynamics literature.



Spectral representation
If there are three distinct principal stretches

 
 , the spectral decompositions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is given by



Furthermore,






Observe that


 
  Therefore the uniqueness of the spectral decomposition also implies that 
 
 
 
 . The left stretch (
 
 
 
 ) is also called the spatial stretch tensor while the right stretch (
 
 
 
 ) is called the material stretch tensor.
The effect of 
 
 
 
  acting on 
 
 
 
  is to stretch the vector by 
 
 
 
  and to rotate it to the new orientation 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,


 
  In a similar vein,









Examples





Uniaxial extension of an incompressible material This is the case where a specimen is stretched in 1-direction with a stretch ratio of 
 
 
 
 . If the volume remains constant, the contraction in the other two directions is such that 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . Then:





Simple shear



Rigid body rotation








Derivatives of stretch
Derivatives of the stretch with respect to the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor are used to derive the stress-strain relations of many solids, particularly hyperelastic materials. These derivatives are


 
  and follow from the observations that



Physical interpretation of deformation tensors
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Cartesian coordinate system defined on the undeformed body and let 
 
 
 
  be another system defined on the deformed body. Let a curve 
 
 
 
  in the undeformed body be parametrized using 
 
 
 
 . Its image in the deformed body is 
 
 
 
 .
The undeformed length of the curve is given by


 
  After deformation, the length becomes


 
 
  Note that the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor is defined as


 
  Hence,


 
  which indicates that changes in length are characterized by 
 
 
 
 .
Finite strain tensors
The concept of strain is used to evaluate how much a given displacement differs locally from a rigid body displacement.1213 One of such strains for large deformations is the Lagrangian finite strain tensor, also called the Green-Lagrangian strain tensor or Green – St-Venant strain tensor, defined as



or as a function of the displacement gradient tensor


 
  or



The Green-Lagrangian strain tensor is a measure of how much 
 
 
 
 
  differs from 
 
 
 
 .
The Eulerian-Almansi finite strain tensor, referenced to the deformed configuration, i.e. Eulerian description, is defined as



or as a function of the displacement gradients we have









Derivation of the Lagrangian and Eulerian finite strain tensors





A measure of deformation is the difference between the squares of the differential line element 
 
 
 
 , in the undeformed configuration, and 
 
 
 
 , in the deformed configuration (Figure 2). Deformation has occurred if the difference is non zero, otherwise a rigid-body displacement has occurred. Thus we have,


 
  In the Lagrangian description, using the material coordinates as the frame of reference, the linear transformation between the differential lines is


 
  Then we have,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the components of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, 
 
 
 
 . Then, replacing this equation into the first equation we have,


 
  or


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , are the components of a second-order tensor called the Green – St-Venant strain tensor or the Lagrangian finite strain tensor,


 
  In the Eulerian description, using the spatial coordinates as the frame of reference, the linear transformation between the differential lines is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the components of the spatial deformation gradient tensor, 
 
 
 
 . Thus we have


 
  where the second order tensor 
 
 
 
  is called Cauchy's deformation tensor, 
 
 
 
 . Then we have,


 
  or


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , are the components of a second-order tensor called the Eulerian-Almansi finite strain tensor,


 
  Both the Lagrangian and Eulerian finite strain tensors can be conveniently expressed in terms of the displacement gradient tensor. For the Lagrangian strain tensor, first we differentiate the displacement vector 
 
 
 
  with respect to the material coordinates 
 
 
 
  to obtain the material displacement gradient tensor, 
 
 



 
  Replacing this equation into the expression for the Lagrangian finite strain tensor we have


 
  or


 
  Similarly, the Eulerian-Almansi finite strain tensor can be expressed as








Seth-Hill family of generalized strain tensors
B. R. Seth from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur was the first to show that the Green and Almansi strain tensors are special cases of a more general strain measure.1415 The idea was further expanded upon by Rodney Hill in 1968.16 The Seth-Hill family of strain measures (also called Doyle-Ericksen tensors)17 can be expressed as



For different values of 
 
 
 
  we have:


 
  The second-order approximation of these tensors is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the infinitesimal strain tensor.
Many other different definitions of tensors 
 
 
 
  are admissible, provided that they all satisfy the conditions that:18



 
  vanishes for all rigid-body motions
the dependence of 
 
 
 
  on strain gradient tensor 
 
 
 
  is continuous, continuously differentiable and monotonic
it is also desired that 
 
 
 
  reduces to the infinitesimal strain tensor 
 
 
 
  as the norm 
 
 


An example is the set of tensors


 
  which do not belong to the Seth-Hill class, but have the same 2nd-order approximation as the Seth-Hill measures at 
 
 
 
  for any value of 
 
 
 
 .19
Stretch ratio
The stretch ratio is a measure of the extensional or normal strain of a differential line element, which can be defined at either the undeformed configuration or the deformed configuration.
The stretch ratio for the differential element 
 
 
 
  (Figure) in the direction of the unit vector 
 
 
 
  at the material point 
 
 
 
 , in the undeformed configuration, is defined as



where 
 
 
 
  is the deformed magnitude of the differential element 
 
 
 
 .
Similarly, the stretch ratio for the differential element 
 
 
 
  (Figure), in the direction of the unit vector 
 
 
 
  at the material point 
 
 
 
 , in the deformed configuration, is defined as



The normal strain 
 
 
 
  in any direction 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as a function of the stretch ratio,



This equation implies that the normal strain is zero, i.e. no deformation, when the stretch is equal to unity. Some materials, such as elastometers can sustain stretch ratios of 3 or 4 before they fail, whereas traditional engineering materials, such as concrete or steel, fail at much lower stretch ratios, perhaps of the order of 1.001 (reference?)
Physical interpretation of the finite strain tensor
The diagonal components 
 
 
 
  of the Lagrangian finite strain tensor are related to the normal strain, e.g.



where 
 
 
 
  is the normal strain or engineering strain in the direction 
 
 
 
 .
The off-diagonal components 
 
 
 
  of the Lagrangian finite strain tensor are related to shear strain, e.g.



where 
 
 
 
  is the change in the angle between two line elements that were originally perpendicular with directions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
Under certain circumstances, i.e. small displacements and small displacement rates, the components of the Lagrangian finite strain tensor may be approximated by the components of the infinitesimal strain tensor






Derivation of the physical interpretation of the Lagrangian and Eulerian finite strain tensors





The stretch ratio for the differential element 
 
 
 
  (Figure) in the direction of the unit vector 
 
 
 
  at the material point 
 
 
 
 , in the undeformed configuration, is defined as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the deformed magnitude of the differential element 
 
 
 
 . Similarly, the stretch ratio for the differential element 
 
 
 
  (Figure), in the direction of the unit vector 
 
 
 
  at the material point 
 
 
 
 , in the deformed configuration, is defined as


 
  The square of the stretch ratio is defined as


 
  Knowing that


 
  we have


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are unit vectors. The normal strain or engineering strain 
 
 
 
  in any direction 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as a function of the stretch ratio,


 
  Thus, the normal strain in the direction 
 
 
 
  at the material point 
 
 
 
  may be expressed in terms of the stretch ratio as


 
  solving for 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  The shear strain, or change in angle between two line elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  initially perpendicular, and oriented in the principal directions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectivelly, can also be expressed as a function of the stretch ratio. From the dot product between the deformed lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the angle between the lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the deformed configuration. Defining 
 
 
 
  as the shear strain or reduction in the angle between two line elements that were originally perpendicular, we have


 
  thus,


 
  then


 
  or








Deformation tensors in curvilinear coordinates
A representation of deformation tensors in curvilinear coordinates is useful for many problems in continuum mechanics such as nonlinear shell theories and large plastic deformations. Let 
 
 
 
  be a given deformation where the space is characterized by the coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 . The tangent vector to the coordinate curve 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  The three tangent vectors at 
 
 
 
  form a basis. These vectors are related the reciprocal basis vectors by



Let us define a second-order tensor field 
 
 
 
  (also called the metric tensor) with components


 
  The Christoffel symbols of the first kind can be expressed as


 
  To see how the Christoffel symbols are related to the Right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor let us define two sets of bases



The deformation gradient in curvilinear coordinates
Using the definition of the gradient of a vector field in curvilinear coordinates, the deformation gradient can be written as



The right Cauchy-Green tensor in curvilinear coordinates
The right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor is given by


 
  If we express 
 
 
 
  in terms of components with respect to the basis {
 
 
 
 } we have


 
  Therefore


 
  and the Christoffel symbol of the first kind may be written in the following form.



Some relations between deformation measures and Christoffel symbols
Let us consider a one-to-one mapping from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and let us assume that there exist two positive definite, symmetric second-order tensor fields 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that satisfy


 
  Then,


 
  Noting that


 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have


 
 
  Define


 
 
  Hence


 
  Define


 
  Then


 
  Define the Christoffel symbols of the second kind as


 
  Then


 
 
  Therefore


 
  The invertibility of the mapping implies that


 
 
  We can also formulate a similar result in terms of derivatives with respect to 
 
 
 
 . Therefore



Compatibility conditions
The problem of compatibility in continuum mechanics involves the determination of allowable single-valued continuous fields on bodies. These allowable conditions leave the body without unphysical gaps or overlaps after a deformation. Most such conditions apply to simply-connected bodies. Additional conditions are required for the internal boundaries of multiply connected bodies.
Compatibility of the deformation gradient
The necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a compatible 
 
 
 
  field over a simply connected body are



Compatibility of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor
The necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a compatible 
 
 
 
  field over a simply connected body are


 
  We can show these are the mixed components of the Riemann-Christoffel curvature tensor. Therefore the necessary conditions for 
 
 
 
 -compatibility are that the Riemann-Christoffel curvature of the deformation is zero.
Compatibility of the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor
No general sufficiency conditions are known for the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor in three-dimensions. Compatibility conditions for two-dimensional 
 
 
 
  fields have been found by Janet Blume.2021
See also

Infinitesimal strain
Compatibility (mechanics)
Curvilinear coordinates
Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, the stress tensor for finite deformations.
Stress measures
Strain partitioning

References
Further reading



























External links

Prof. Amit Acharya's notes on compatibility on iMechanica
Deformations and Strain Chapter on www.continuummechanics.org

"
Category:Tensors Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Elasticity (physics) Category:Non-Newtonian fluids Category:Solid mechanics




A. Yavari, J.E. Marsden, and M. Ortiz, On spatial and material covariant balance laws in elasticity, Journal of Mathematical Physics, 47, 2006, 042903; pp. 1-53.
The IUPAC recommends that this tensor be called the Cauchy strain tensor.



Eduardo N. Dvorkin, Marcela B. Goldschmit, 2006 [http://books.google.com/books?id=MVqa05_2QmAC&pg;;=PA25 Nonlinear Continua], p. 25, Springer ISBN 3-540-24985-0.
The IUPAC recommends that this tensor be called the Green strain tensor.
Jirásek,Milan; Bažant, Z. P. (2002) [http://books.google.com/books?id=8mz-xPdvH00C&pg;;=PA463 Inelastic analysis of structures], Wiley, p. 463 ISBN 0-471-98716-6

J. N. Reddy, David K. Gartling (2000) [http://books.google.com/books?id=sv0VKLL5lWUC&pg;;=PA317 The finite element method in heat transfer and fluid dynamics], p. 317, CRC Press ISBN 1-4200-8598-0.





T.C. Doyle and J.L. Eriksen (1956). "Non-linear elasticity." Advances in Applied Mechanics 4, 53-115.
Z.P. Bažant and L. Cedolin (1991). Stability of Structures. Elastic, Inelastic, Fracture and Damage Theories. Oxford Univ. Press, New York (2nd ed. Dover Publ., New York 2003; 3rd ed., World Scientific 2010).
Z.P. Bažant (1998). "Easy-to-compute tensors with symmetric inverse approximating Hencky finite strain and its rate." J. of Materials of Technology ASME, 120 (April), 131-136.






