


Hypergeometric function




Hypergeometric function

In mathematics, the Gaussian or ordinary hypergeometric function 2F1(a,b;c;z) is a special function represented by the hypergeometric series, that includes many other special functions as specific or limiting cases. It is a solution of a second-order linear ordinary differential equation (ODE). Every second-order linear ODE with three regular singular points can be transformed into this equation.
For systematic lists of some of the many thousands of published identities involving the hypergeometric function, see the reference works by , , and . There is no known system for organizing all of the identities; indeed, there is no known algorithm that can generate all identities; a number of different algorithms are known that generate different series of identities. The theory of the algorithmic discovery of identities remains an active research topic.
History
The term "hypergeometric series" was first used by John Wallis in his 1655 book Arithmetica Infinitorum.
Hypergeometric series were studied by Leonhard Euler, but the first full systematic treatment was given by .
Studies in the nineteenth century included those of , and the fundamental characterisation by  of the hypergeometric function by means of the differential equation it satisfies.
Riemann showed that the second-order differential equation for 2F1(z), examined in the complex plane, could be characterised (on the Riemann sphere) by its three regular singularities.
The cases where the solutions are algebraic functions were found by Hermann Schwarz (Schwarz's list).
The hypergeometric series
The hypergeometric function is defined for 
 
 




It is undefined (or infinite) if c equals a non-positive integer. Here (q)n is the (rising) Pochhammer symbol, which is defined by:



The series terminates if either a or b is a nonpositive integer, in which case the function reduces to a polynomial:



For complex arguments z with |z| ≥ 1 it can be analytically continued along any path in the complex plane that avoids the branch points 0 and 1.
As 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is a positive integer, , but if we divide by 

, we have a limit:


 is the most usual type of generalized hypergeometric series , and is often designated simply 
 
 
 
 .
Special cases
Many of the common mathematical functions can be expressed in terms of the hypergeometric function, or as limiting cases of it. Some typical examples are









The confluent hypergeometric function (or Kummer's function) can be given as a limit of the hypergeometric function



so all functions that are essentially special cases of it, such as Bessel functions, can be expressed as limits of hypergeometric functions. These include most of the commonly used functions of mathematical physics.
Legendre functions are solutions of a second order differential equation with 3 regular singular points so can be expressed in terms of the hypergeometric function in many ways, for example



Several orthogonal polynomials, including Jacobi polynomials P and their special cases Legendre polynomials, Chebyshev polynomials, Gegenbauer polynomials can be written in terms of hypergeometric functions using



Other polynomials that are special cases include Krawtchouk polynomials, Meixner polynomials, Meixner–Pollaczek polynomials.
Elliptic modular functions can sometimes be expressed as the inverse functions of ratios of hypergeometric functions whose arguments a, b, c are 1, 1/2, 1/3, ... or 0. For example, if



then



is an elliptic modular function of τ.
Incomplete beta functions Bx(p,q) are related by



The complete elliptic integrals K and E are given by






The hypergeometric differential equation
The hypergeometric function is a solution of Euler's hypergeometric differential equation



which has three regular singular points: 0,1 and ∞. The generalization of this equation to three arbitrary regular singular points is given by Riemann's differential equation. Any second order differential equation with three regular singular points can be converted to the hypergeometric differential equation by a change of variables.
Solutions at the singular points
Solutions to the hypergeometric differential equation are built out of the hypergeometric series 2F1(a,b;c;z). The equation has two linearly independent solutions. At each of the three singular points 0, 1, ∞, there are usually two special solutions of the form xs times a holomorphic function of x, where s is one of the two roots of the indicial equation and x is a local variable vanishing at the regular singular point. This gives 3 × 2 = 6 special solutions, as follows.
Around the point z = 0, two independent solutions are, if c is not a non-positive integer,



and, on condition that c is not an integer,



If c is a non-positive integer 1−m, then the first of these solutions doesn't exist and must be replaced by 
 
 
 
  The second solution doesn't exist when c is an integer greater than 1, and is equal to the first solution, or its replacement, when c is any other integer. So when c is an integer, a more complicated expression must be used for a second solution, equal to the first solution multiplied by ln(z), plus another series in powers of z, involving the digamma function. See  for details.
Around z = 1, if c − a − b is not an integer, one has two independent solutions



and



Around z = ∞, if a − b is not an integer, one has two independent solutions



and



Again, when the conditions of non-integrality are not met, there exist other solutions that are more complicated.
Any 3 of the above 6 solutions satisfy a linear relation as the space of solutions is 2-dimensional, giving () = 20 linear relations between them called connection formulas.
Kummer's 24 solutions
A second order Fuchsian equation with n singular points has a group of symmetries acting (projectively) on its solutions, isomorphic to the Coxeter group Dn of order n!2n−1. For the hypergeometric equation n=3, so the group is of order 24 and is isomorphic to the symmetric group on 4 points, and was first described by Kummer. The isomorphism with the symmetric group is accidental and has no analogue for more than 3 singular points, and it is sometimes better to think of the group as an extension of the symmetric group on 3 points (acting as permutations of the 3 singular points) by a Klein 4-group (whose elements change the signs of the differences of the exponents at an even number of singular points). Kummer's group of 24 transformations is generated by the three transformations taking a solution F(a,b;c;z) to one of









which correspond to the transpositions (12), (23), and (34) under an isomorphism with the symmetric group on 4 points 1, 2, 3, 4. (The first and third of these are actually equal to F(a,b;c;z) whereas the second is an independent solution to the differential equation.)
Applying Kummer's 24=6×4 transformations to the hypergeometric function gives the 6 = 2×3 solutions above corresponding to each of the 2 possible exponents at each of the 3 singular points, each of which appears 4 times because of the identities









Q-form
The hypergeometric differential equation may be brought into the Q-form



by making the substitution w = uv and eliminating the first-derivative term. One finds that



and v is given by the solution to



which is



The Q-form is significant in its relation to the Schwarzian derivative.1
Schwarz triangle maps
The Schwarz triangle maps or Schwarz s-functions are ratios of pairs of solutions.



where k is one of the points 0, 1, ∞. The notation



is also sometimes used. Note that the connection coefficients become Möbius transformations on the triangle maps.
Note that each triangle map is regular at z ∈ {0, 1, ∞} respectively, with





 
  and



In the special case of λ, μ and ν real, with 0 ≤ λ,μ,ν 2F1, the value of the solutions at the endpoint will differ from the starting point.
Two fundamental solutions of the hypergeometric equation are related to each other by a linear transformation; thus the monodromy is a mapping (group homomorphism):



where π1 is the fundamental group. In other words, the monodromy is a two dimensional linear representation of the fundamental group. The monodromy group of the equation is the image of this map, i.e. the group generated by the monodromy matrices. If 1-a, c-a-b, a-b are non-integer rational numbers with denominators k,l,m then the monodromy group is finite if and only if 
 
 
 
 , see Schwarz's list or Kovacic's algorithm.
Integral formulas
Euler type
If B is the beta function then



provided |z| −a using the binomial theorem and then integrating term by term. This was given by Euler in 1748 and implies Euler's and Pfaff's hypergeometric transformations.
Other representations, corresponding to other branches, are given by taking the same integrand, but taking the path of integration to be a closed Pochhammer cycle enclosing the singularities in various orders. Such paths correspond to the monodromy action.
Barnes integral
Barnes used the theory of residues to evaluate the Barnes integral



as



where the contour is drawn to separate the poles 0, 1, 2... from the poles −a, −a − 1, ..., −b, −b − 1, ... .
John transform
The Gauss hypergeometric function can be written as a John transform .
Gauss' contiguous relations
The six functions



are called contiguous to . Gauss showed that  can be written as a linear combination of any two of its contiguous functions, with rational coefficients in terms of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . This gives



relations, given by identifying any two lines on the right hand side of



where  2F1(a, b; c; z), F(a+) {{=}} 2F1(a + 1, b; c; z)}}, and so on. Repeatedly applying these relations gives a linear relation over 
 
 
 
  between any three functions of the form



where m, n, and l are integers.
Gauss' continued fraction
Gauss used the contiguous relations to give several ways to write a quotient of two hypergeometric functions as a continued fraction, for example:



Transformation formulas
Transformation formulas relate two hypergeometric functions at different values of the argument z.
Fractional linear transformations
Euler's transformation is


 
  It follows by combining the two Pfaff transformations





 
  which in turn follow from Euler's integral representation. For extension of Euler's first and second transformations, see papers by Rathie & Paris and Rakha & Rathie.
Quadratic transformations
If two of the numbers 1 − c, c − 1, a − b, b − a, a + b − c, c − a − b are equal or one of them is 1/2 then there is a quadratic transformation of the hypergeometric function, connecting it to a different value of z related by a quadratic equation. The first examples were given by , and a complete list was given by . A typical example is



Higher order transformations
If 1−c, a−b, a+b−c differ by signs or two of them are 1/3 or −1/3 then there is a cubic transformation of the hypergeometric function, connecting it to a different value of z related by a cubic equation. The first examples were given by . A typical example is



There are also some transformations of degree 4 and 6. Transformations of other degrees only exist if a, b, and c are certain rational numbers, see , e.g.



Values at special points z
See  for a list of summation formulas at special points, most of which also appear in .  gives further evaluations at more points.  shows how most of these identities can be verified by computer algorithms.
===Special values at z = 1=== Gauss's theorem, named for Carl Friedrich Gauss, is the identity



which follows from Euler's integral formula by putting z = 1. It includes the Vandermonde identity as a special case.
For the special case where 
 
 
 
 ,



Dougall's formula generalizes this to the bilateral hypergeometric series at z = 1.
===Kummer's theorem (z = −1) === There are many cases where hypergeometric functions can be evaluated at z = −1 by using a quadratic transformation to change z = −1 to z = 1 and then using Gauss's theorem to evaluate the result. A typical example is Kummer's theorem, named for Ernst Kummer:



which follows from Kummer's quadratic transformations



and Gauss's theorem by putting z = −1 in the first identity. For generalization of Kummer's summation, see a paper by Lavoie, et al.
===Values at z = 1/2=== Gauss's second summation theorem is



Bailey's theorem is



For generalizations of Gauss's second summation theorem and Bailey's summation theorem, see a paper by Lavoie, et al.
Other points
There are many other formulas giving the hypergeometric function as an algebraic number at special rational values of the parameters, some of which are listed in  and . Some typical examples are given by



which can be restated as
$$T_a(\cos x)={}_2F_1\left(a,-a;\tfrac{1}{2};\tfrac{1}{2}(1-\cos x)\right)=\cos(a x)$$
whenever −π pHp are similar to generalized hypergeometric series, but summed over all integers

Binomial series 1F0
Confluent hypergeometric series 1F1(a;c;z)
Elliptic hypergeometric series where the ratio of terms is an elliptic function of the index
Euler hypergeometric integral, an integral representation of 2F1
Fox H-function, an extension of the Meijer G-function
Fox–Wright function, a generalization of the generalized hypergeometric function
Frobenius solution to the hypergeometric equation
General hypergeometric function introduced by I. M. Gelfand.
Generalized hypergeometric series pFq where the ratio of terms is a rational function of the index
Geometric series, where the ratio of terms is a constant
Heun function, solutions of second order ODE's with four regular singular points
Horn function, 34 distinct convergent hypergeometric series in two variables
Humbert series 7 hypergeometric functions of 2 variables
Hypergeometric differential equation, a second-order linear ordinary differential equation
Hypergeometric distribution, a discrete probability distribution
Hypergeometric function of a matrix argument, the multivariate generalization of the hypergeometric series
Kampé de Fériet function, hypergeometric series of two variables
Lauricella hypergeometric series, hypergeometric series of three variables
MacRobert E-function, an extension of the generalized hypergeometric series pFq to the case p>q+1.
Meijer G-function, an extension of the generalized hypergeometric series pFq to the case p>q+1.
Modular hypergeometric series, a terminating form of the elliptic hypergeometric series
Theta hypergeometric series A special sort of elliptic hypergeometric series

References



Bailey, W.N. (1935). Generalized Hypergeometric Series. Cambridge.
Beukers, Frits (2002), Gauss' hypergeometric function. (lecture notes reviewing basics, as well as triangle maps and monodromy)


Gasper, George & Rahman, Mizan (2004). Basic Hypergeometric Series, 2nd Edition, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and Its Applications, 96, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-83357-4.

(a reprint of this paper can be found in Carl Friedrich Gauss, Werke, p. 125)




(part 1 treats hypergeometric functions on Lie groups)



Lavoie, J.L., Grondin, F. & Rathie, A.K. (1996). Generalizations of Whipple's theorem on the sum of a 3F2, J. Comput. Appl. Math., 72, 293–300.


(a reprint of this paper can be found in )


(there is a 2008 paperback with ISBN 978-0-521-09061-2)




Rathie, Arjun K. & Paris, R.B. (2007). An extension of the Euler's-type transformation for the 3F2 series, Far East J. Math. Sci., 27(1), 43–48.
Rakha, M.A. & Rathie, Arjun K. (2011). Extensions of Euler's type-II transformation and Saalschutz's theorem, Bull. Korean Math. Soc., 48(1), 151–156.

External links


John Pearson, Computation of Hypergeometric Functions (University of Oxford, MSc Thesis)
Marko Petkovsek, Herbert Wilf and Doron Zeilberger, The book "A = B" (freely downloadable)


"
Category:Factorial and binomial topics * Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Mathematical series



Hille, Einar (1976), Ordinary differential equations in the complex domain, Dover, pp. 374–401, ISBN 0-486-69620-0, Chapter 10, "The Schwarzian".




