


Sequence transformation




Sequence transformation

In mathematics, a sequence transformation is an operator acting on a given space of sequences (a sequence space). Sequence transformations include linear mappings such as convolution with another sequence, and resummation of a sequence and, more generally, are commonly used for series acceleration, that is, for improving the rate of convergence of a slowly convergent sequence or series. Sequence transformations are also commonly used to compute the antilimit of a divergent series numerically, and are used in conjunction with extrapolation methods.
Overview
Classical examples for sequence transformations include the binomial transform, Möbius transform, Stirling transform and others.
Definitions
For a given sequence



the transformed sequence is



where the members of the transformed sequence are usually computed from some finite number of members of the original sequence, i.e.



for some 
 
 
 
 
  which often depends on 
 
 
 
  (cf. e.g. Binomial transform). In the simplest case, the 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  are real or complex numbers. More generally, they may be elements of some vector space or algebra.
In the context of acceleration of convergence, the transformed sequence is said to converge faster than the original sequence if



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the limit of 
 
 
 
 , assumed to be convergent. In this case, convergence acceleration is obtained. If the original sequence is divergent, the sequence transformation acts as extrapolation method to the antilimit 
 
 
 
 .
If the mapping 
 
 
 
  is linear in each of its arguments, i.e., for



for some constants 
 
 
 
 
  (which may depend on n), the sequence transformation 
 
 
 
  is called a linear sequence transformation. Sequence transformations that are not linear are called nonlinear sequence transformations.
Examples
Simplest examples of (linear) sequence transformations include shifting all elements, 
 
 
 
  (resp. = 0 if n + k (-1,1,0,\ldots), and is a discrete analog of the derivative. The binomial transform is another linear transformation of a still more general type.
An example of a nonlinear sequence transformation is Aitken's delta-squared process, used to improve the rate of convergence of a slowly convergent sequence. An extended form of this is the Shanks transformation. The Möbius transform is also a nonlinear transformation, only possible for integer sequences.
See also

Series acceleration
Minimum polynomial extrapolation

References



Hugh J. Hamilton, "Mertens' Theorem and Sequence Transformations", AMS (1947)

External links

Transformations of Integer Sequences, a subpage of the On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences

es:Transformación de sucesiones de:Folgentransformation fr:Delta-2 ru:Преобразование последовательностей"
Category:Mathematical series Category:Asymptotic analysis Category:Perturbation theory


