


Hidden Field Equations




Hidden Field Equations

Hidden Fields Equations (HFE) is a public key cryptosystem which was introduced at Eurocrypt in 1996 and proposed by  Jacques Patarin following the idea of the Matsumoto and Imai system. HFE is also known as HFE trapdoor function. It is based on polynomials over finite fields

 
  of different size to disguise the relationship between the private key and public key. HFE is in fact a family which consists of basic HFE and combinatorial versions of HFE. The HFE family of cryptosystems is based on the hardness of the problem of finding solutions to a system of multivariate quadratic equations (the so-called MQ problem) since it uses private affine transformations to hide the extension field and the private polynomials. Hidden Field Equations also have been used to construct digital signature schemes, e.g. Quartz and Sflash.1
Mathematical background
One of the central notions to understand how Hidden Field Equations work is to see that for two extension fields 
 
 

 
  over the same base field 
 
 
 
 
  one can interpret a system of 
 
 
 
  multivariate polynomials in 
 
 
 
  variables over 
 
 
 
  as a function 
 
 
 
  by using a suitable basis of 
 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . In almost all applications the polynomials are quadratic, i.e. they have degree 2.2 We start with the simplest kind of polynomials, namely monomials, and show how they lead to quadratic systems of equations.
Let us consider a finite field

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a power of 2, and an extension field 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 
  to be a basis of 
 
 
 
  as an 
 
 
vector space. Let 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
  and gcd

 
 
  and take a random element 
 
 
 
 . We represent 
 
 
 
  with respect to the basis as 
 
 
 
 . Define 
 
 
 
  by



The condition gcd

 
  is equivalent to requiring that the map 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is one to one and its inverse is the map 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the multiplicative inverse of 
 
 
 
 . Choose two secret affine transformation, i.e. two invertible 
 
 
 
  matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with entries in 
 
 
 
 
  and two vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of length 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  and define 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  via:



Let 
 
 
 
  be the matrix of linear transformation in the basis 
 
 
 
  such that



for 
 
 
 
 . Write all products of basis elements in terms of the basis, i.e.:



for each 
 
 
 
 . The system of 
 
 
 
  equations which is explicit in the 
 
 
 
 
  and quadratic in the 
 
 
 
  can be obtain by expanding (1) and equating to zero the coefficients of the 
 
 
 
 . By using the affine relations in (2) to replace the 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , the system of 
 
 
 
 
  equations is linear in the 
 
 
 
  and of degree 2 in the 
 
 
 
 . Applying linear algebra it will give 
 
 
 
  explicit equations, one for each 
 
 
 
  as polynomials of degree 2 in the 
 
 
 
 
 .3
Multivariate cryptosystem
The basic idea of the HFE family of using this as a multivariate cryptosystem is to build the secret key starting from a polynomial

 
  in one unknown 
 
 
 
  over some finite field

 
  (normally value 
 
 
 
  is used). This polynomial can be easily inverted over 
 
 
 
 
 , i.e. it is feasible to find any solutions to the equation 
 
 
 
  when such solution exist. The secret transformation either decryption and/or signature is based on this inversion. As explained above 
 
 
 
  can be identified with a system of 
 
 
 
  equations 
 
 
 
  using a fixed basis. To build a cryptosystem the polynomial

 
 
  must be transformed so that the public information hides the original structure and prevents inversion. This is done by viewing the finite fields

 
  as a vector space over 
 
 
 
  and by choosing two linear affine transformations

 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The triplet 
 
 
 
 
  constitute the private key. The private polynomial

 
  is defined over 
 
 
 
 .45 The public key is 
 
 
 
 . Below is the diagram for MQ-trapdoor 
 
 
 
  in HFE



HFE polynomial
The private polynomial

 
  with degree 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  is an element of 
 
 
 
 . If the terms of polynomial

 
 
  have at most quadratic terms over 
 
 
 
  then it will keep the public polynomial small.6 The case that 
 
 
 
  consists of monomials of the form 
 
 
 
 , i.e. with 2 powers of 
 
 
 
  in the exponent is the basic version of HFE, i.e. 
 
 
 
  is chosen as



The degree 
 
 
 
  of the polynomial is also known as security parameter and the bigger its value the better for security since the resulting set of quadratic equations resembles a randomly chosen set of quadratic equations. On the other side large 
 
 
 
  slows down the deciphering. Since 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial of degree at most 
 
 
 
 
  the inverse of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
  can be computed in 
 
 
 
  operations.7
Encryption and decryption
The public key is given by the 
 
 
 
  multivariate polynomials 
 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . It is thus necessary to transfer the message 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  in order to encrypt it, i.e. we assume that 
 
 
 
  is a vector 
 
 
 
 
 . To encrypt message 
 
 
 
  we evaluate each 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 . The ciphertext is 
 
 
 
 .
To understand decryption let us express encryption in terms of 
 
 
 
 
 . Note that these are not available to the sender. By evaluating the 
 
 
 
  at the message we first apply 
 
 
 
 , resulting in 
 
 
 
 . At this point 
 
 
 
  is transferred from 
 
 
 
 
  so we can apply the private polynomial 
 
 
 
  which is over 
 
 
 
  and this result is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . Once again, 
 
 
 
  is transferred to the vector 
 
 
 
 
  and the transformation 
 
 
 
  is applied and the final output 
 
 
 
  is produced from 
 
 
 
 .
To decrypt 
 
 
 
 , the above steps are done in reverse order. This is possible if the private key 
 
 
 
 
  is known. The crucial step in the deciphering is not the inversion of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  but rather the computations of the solution of 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is not necessary a bijection, one may find more than one solution to this inversion (there exist at most d different solutions 
 
 
 
 
  since 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial of degree d). The redundancy denoted as 
 
 
 
  is added at the first step to the message 
 
 
 
  in order to select the right 
 
 
 
  from the set of solutions 
 
 
 
 .8910 The diagram below shows the basic HFE for encryption.



HFE variations
Hidden Field Equations has four basic variations namely +,-,v and f and it is possible to combine them in various way. The basic principle is the following:

01. The + sign consists of linearity mixing of the public equations with some random equations.
 
02. The - sign is due to Adi Shamir and intends to remove the redundancy 'r' of the public equations.
 
03. The f sign consists of fixing some 
 
 
 
  input variables of the public key.
 
04. The v sign is defined as a construction and sometimes quite complex such that the inverse of the function can be found only if some v of the variables called vinegar variables are fixed. This idea is due to Jacques Patarin.
 

The operations above preserve to some extent the trapdoor solvability of the function.
HFE- and HFEv are very useful in signature schemes as they prevent from slowing down the signature generation and also enhance the overall security of HFE whereas for encryption both HFE- and HFEv will lead to a rather slow decryption process so neither too many equations can be removed (HFE-) nor too many variables should be added (HFEv). Both HFE- and HFEv were used to obtain Quartz.
For encryption, the situation is better with HFE+ since the decryption process takes the same amount of time, however the public key has more equations than variables.1112
HFE attacks
There are two famous recent attacks on HFE:
Recover the Private Key (Shamir-Kipnis): The key point of this attack is to recover the private key as sparse univariate polynomials over the extension field $\mathbb{F}_{q^n}$. The attack only works for basic HFE and fails for all its variations.
Fast Gröbner Bases (Faugere): The idea of Faugere's attacks is to use fast algorithm to compute a Gröbner basis of the system of polynomial equations. Faugere broke the HFE challenge 1 in 96 hours in 2002 and in 2003 Faugere and Joux worked together on the security of HFE.13
References

Nicolas T. Courtouis, Magnus Daum and Patrick Felke, On the Security of HFE, HFEv- and Quartz
Andrey Sidorenko, Hidden Field Equations, EIDMA Seminar 2004 Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
Yvo G. Desmet, Public Key Cryptography-PKC 2003, ISBN 3-540-00324-X

"
Category:Public-key encryption schemes Category:Finite fields Category:Multivariate cryptography



Christopher Wolf and Bart Preneel, Asymmetric Cryptography: Hidden Field Equations↩
Nicolas T. Courtois On Multivariate Signature-only public key cryptosystems↩
Ilia Toli Hidden Polynomial Cryptosystems↩

Jean Charles Faugere and Antoine Joux, Algebraic Cryptanalysis of Hidden Field Equations (HFE) Cryptosystems Using Grobner Bases↩

Nicolas T. Courtois, "The Security of Hidden Field Equations"↩


Jacques Patarin, Hidden Field Equations (HFE) and Isomorphic Polynomial (IP): two new families of asymmetric algorithm↩







