


Gauss's lemma (number theory)




Gauss's lemma (number theory)

Gauss's lemma in number theory gives a condition for an integer to be a quadratic residue. Although it is not useful computationally, it has theoretical significance, being involved in some proofs of quadratic reciprocity.
It made its first appearance in Carl Friedrich Gauss's third proof (1808)1 of quadratic reciprocity and he proved it again in his fifth proof (1818).2
Statement of the lemma
For any odd prime p let a be an integer that is coprime to p.
Consider the integers



and their least positive residues modulo p. (These residues are all distinct, so there are (p−1)/2 of them.)
Let n be the number of these residues that are greater than p/2. Then



where (a/p) is the Legendre symbol.
Example
Taking p = 11 and a = 7, the relevant sequence of integers is

7, 14, 21, 28, 35.
 

After reduction modulo 11, this sequence becomes

7, 3, 10, 6, 2.
 

Three of these integers are larger than 11/2 (namely 6, 7 and 10), so n = 3. Correspondingly Gauss's lemma predicts that


 
  This is indeed correct, because 7 is not a quadratic residue modulo 11.
The above sequence of residues

7, 3, 10, 6, 2
 

may also be written

-4, 3, -1, -5, 2.
 

In this form, the integers larger than 11/2 appear as negative numbers. It is also apparent that the absolute values of the residues are a permutation of the residues

1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
 

Proof
A fairly simple proof3 of the lemma, reminiscent of one of the simplest proofs of Fermat's little theorem, can be obtained by evaluating the product


 
  modulo p in two different ways. On one hand it is equal to



The second evaluation takes more work. If x is a nonzero residue modulo p, let us define the "absolute value" of x to be


 
  Since n counts those multiples ka which are in the latter range, and since for those multiples, −ka is in the first range, we have


 
  Now observe that the values |ra| are distinct for r = 1, 2, ..., (p−1)/2. Indeed, we have

|ra| ≡ |sa| (mod p),
 
ra ≡ ±sa (mod p),
 
r ≡ ±s (mod p) (because a is coprime to p), and
 

This gives r=s, since r,s are positive least residues. But there are exactly (p−1)/2 of them, so their values are a rearrangement of the integers 1, 2, ..., (p−1)/2. Therefore,


 
  Comparing with our first evaluation, we may cancel out the nonzero factor


 
  and we are left with


 
  This is the desired result, because by Euler's criterion the left hand side is just an alternative expression for the Legendre symbol (a/p).
Applications
Gauss's lemma is used in many,45 but by no means all, of the known proofs of quadratic reciprocity.
For example, Eisenstein6 used Gauss's lemma to prove that if p is an odd prime then



and used this formula to prove quadratic reciprocity, (and, by using elliptic rather than circular functions, to prove the cubic and quartic reciprocity laws.7)
Kronecker8 used the lemma to show that



Switching p and q immediately gives quadratic reciprocity.
It is also used in what are probably the simplest proofs of the "second supplementary law"



Higher powers
Generalizations of Gauss's lemma can be used to compute higher power residue symbols. In his second monograph on biquadratic reciprocity,9 Gauss used a fourth-power lemma to derive the formula for the biquadratic character of 1 + i in Z[i], the ring of Gaussian integers. Subsequently,10 Eisenstein used third- and fourth-power versions to prove cubic and quartic reciprocity.
nth power residue symbol
Let k be an algebraic number field with ring of integers   
 
 
 
    and let   
 
 
 
    be a prime ideal. The ideal norm of  
 
 
 
 
   is defined as the cardinality of the residue class ring (since 
 
 
 
  is prime this is a finite field)   
 
 

Assume that a primitive nth root of unity   
 
 
 
    and that n and 
 
 
 
  are coprime (i.e. 
 
 
 
 
 )   Then
'''No two distinct nth roots of unity can be congruent '''
 
 

The proof is by contradiction: assume otherwise, that   
 
 
 
    and  
 
 
 
  From the definition of roots of unity,


 
    and dividing by x − 1 gives



Letting x = 1 and taking residues 
 
 




Since n and 
 
 
 
   are coprime, 
 
 
 
    but under the assumption, one of the factors on the right must be zero. Therefore the assumption that two distinct roots are congruent is false.
Thus the residue classes of   
 
 
 
 
    containing the powers of ζn are a subgroup of order n of its (multiplicative) group of units,   
 
 
 
    Therefore the order of   
 
 
 
    is a multiple of n, and



There is an analogue of Fermat's theorem in   
 
 
 
   If   
 
 
 
    then11


 
    and since   
 
 



 
    is well-defined and congruent to a unique nth root of unity ζns.
This root of unity is called the nth-power residue symbol for   
 
 
   and is denoted by



It can be proven that12



1/n systems
Let   
 
 
 
    be the multiplicative group of the nth roots of unity, and let   
 
 
 
    be representatives of the cosets of   
 
 
 
    Then A is called a '1/n'' system ''' 
 
 
13
In other words, there are  
 
 
 
   numbers in the set   
 
 
 
    and this set constitutes a representative set for   
 
 

The numbers 1, 2, ..., (p − 1)/2, used in the original version of the lemma, are a 1/2 system (mod p).
Constructing a 1/n system is straightforward: let M be a representative set for   
 
 
 
    Pick any 
 
 
 
 
    and remove the numbers congruent to  
 
 
 
    from M. Pick a2 from M and remove the numbers congruent to   
 
 
 
    Repeat until M is exhausted. Then {a1, a2, ... am} is a 1/n system 
 
 

The lemma for nth powers
Gauss's lemma for the nth power residue symbol is14
Let   
 
 
 
    be a primitive nth root of unity,   
 
 
 
 
    a prime ideal,   
 
 
 
  (i.e. 
 
 
 
  is coprime to both γ and n) and let A = {a1, a2,..., am} be a 1/n system 
 
 

Then for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ m, there are integers π(i), unique (mod m), and b(i), unique (mod n), such that



and the nth-power residue symbol is given by the formula



The classical lemma for the quadratic Legendre symbol is the special case n = 2, ζ2 = −1, A = {1, 2, ..., (p − 1)/2}, b(k) = 1 if ak > p/2, b(k) = 0 if ak \gamma a_i \equiv \zeta_n^r a_p \pmod{\mathfrak{p}}   and   
 
 
 
  Then


 
  Because γ and 
 
 
 
  are coprime both sides can be divided by γ, giving


 
 
  which, since A is a 1/n system, implies s = r and i = j, showing that π is a permutation of the set {1, 2, ..., m}.
Then on the one hand, by the definition of the power residue symbol,


 
 
  and on the other hand, since π is a permutation,


 
  so



and since for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m, ai and  
 
 
 
    are coprime, a1a2...am can be cancelled from both sides of the congruence,


 
  and the theorem follows from the fact that no two distinct nth roots of unity can be congruent (mod 
 
 
 
 ).
Relation to the transfer in group theory
Let G be the multiplicative group of nonzero residue classes in Z/pZ, and let H be the subgroup {+1, −1}. Consider the following coset representatives of H in G,



Applying the machinery of the transfer to this collection of coset representatives, we obtain the transfer homomorphism
$$\phi : G \to H,$$ which turns out to be the map that sends a to (−1)n, where a and n are as in the statement of the lemma. Gauss's lemma may then be viewed as a computation that explicitly identifies this homomorphism as being the quadratic residue character.
See also
Two other characterizations of squares modulo a prime are Euler's criterion and Zolotarev's lemma.
Notes
References
The two monographs Gauss published on biquadratic reciprocity have consecutively numbered sections: the first contains §§ 1–23 and the second §§ 24–76. Footnotes referencing these are of the form "Gauss, BQ, § n".




These are in Gauss's Werke, Vol II, pp. 65–92 and 93–148
German translations of the above are in the following, which also has the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae and Gauss's other papers on number theory, including the six proofs of quadratic reciprocity.




"
Category:Modular arithmetic Category:Lemmas Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Quadratic residue



"Neuer Beweis eines arithmetischen Satzes"; pp 458-462 of Untersuchungen uber hohere Arithmetik↩
"Neue Beweise und Erweiterungen des Fundalmentalsatzes in der Lehre von den quadratischen Reste"; pp 496-501 of Untersuchungen uber hohere Arithmetik↩
Any textbook on elementary number theory will have a proof. The one here is basically Gauss's from "Neuer Beweis eines arithnetischen Satzes"; pp 458-462 of Untersuchungen uber hohere Arithmetik↩
Lemmermeyer, ch. 1↩
Lemmermeyer, p. 9, "like most of the simplest proofs [ of QR], [Gauss's] 3 and 5 rest on what we now call Gauss's Lemma↩
Lemmermeyer, p. 236, Prop 8.1 (1845)↩
Lemmermeyer, ch. 8↩
Lemmermeyer, ex. 1.34 (The year isn't clear because K. published 8 proofs, several based on Gauss's lemma, between 1875 and 1889)↩
Gauss, BQ, §§ 69–71↩
Lemmermeyer, Ch. 8↩
Lemmermeyer, Ch. 4.1↩
Lemmermeyer, Prop 4.1↩
Lemmermeyer, Ch. 4.2↩
Lemmermeyer, Prop. 4.3↩




