   Substructure      Substructure   In mathematical logic , an (induced) substructure or (induced) subalgebra is a structure whose domain is a subset of that of a bigger structure, and whose functions and relations are the traces of the functions and relations of the bigger structure. Some examples of subalgebras are subgroups , submonoids , subrings , subfields , subalgebras of algebras over a field , or induced subgraphs . Shifting the point of view, the larger structure is called an extension or a superstructure of its substructure. In model theory , the term "submodel" is often used as a synonym for substructure, especially when the context suggests a theory of which both structures are models.  In the presence of relations (i.e. for structures such as ordered groups or graphs , whose signature is not functional) it may make sense to relax the conditions on a subalgebra so that the relations on a weak substructure (or weak subalgebra ) are at most those induced from the bigger structure. Subgraphs are an example where the distinction matters, and the term "subgraph" does indeed refer to weak substructures. Ordered groups , on the other hand, have the special property that every substructure of an ordered group which is itself an ordered group, is an induced substructure.  Definition  Given two structures  A and B of the same signature σ, A is said to be a weak substructure of B , or a weak subalgebra of B , if   the domain of A is a subset of the domain of B ,  f A = f B | A n for every n -ary function symbol f in σ, and  R A    ⊆     \subseteq    R B    ∩     \cap    A n for every n -ary relation symbol R in σ.   A is said to be a ' substructure ' of B , or a ' subalgebra ' of B , if A is a weak subalgebra of B and, moreover,   R A = R B    ∩     \cap    A n for every n -ary relation symbol R in σ.   If A is a substructure of B , then B is called a superstructure of A or, especially if A is an induced substructure, an extension of A .  Example  In the language consisting of the binary functions + and ×, binary relation −1, 1) of groups, the substructures of a group are its subgroups . In the language (×, 1) of monoids, however, the substructures of a group are its submonoids . They need not be groups; and even if they are groups, they need not be subgroups.  In the case of graphs (in the signature consisting of one binary relation), subgraphs , and its weak substructures are precisely its subgraphs.  Substructures as subobjects  For every signature σ, induced substructures of σ-structures are the subobjects in the concrete category of σ-structures and strong homomorphisms (and also in the concrete category of σ-structures and σ- embeddings ). Weak substructures of σ-structures are the subobjects in the concrete category of σ-structures and homomorphisms in the ordinary sense.  Submodel  In model theory, given a structure M which is a model of a theory T , a submodel of M in a narrower sense is a substructure of M which is also a model of T . For example if T is the theory of abelian groups in the signature (+, 0), then the submodels of the group of integers ( Z , +, 0) are the substructures which are also groups. Thus the natural numbers ( N , +, 0) form a substructure of ( Z , +, 0) which is not a submodel, while the even numbers (2 Z , +, 0) form a submodel which is (a group but) not a subgroup.  Other examples:   The algebraic numbers form a submodel of the complex numbers in the theory of algebraically closed fields .  The rational numbers form a submodel of the real numbers in the theory of fields .  Every elementary substructure of a model of a theory T also satisfies T ; hence it is a submodel.   In the category of models of a theory and embeddings between them, the submodels of a model are its subobjects .  See also   Elementary substructure  End extension  Löwenheim-Skolem theorem  Prime model   References       "  Category:Model theory  Category:Universal algebra   