


Rogers–Ramanujan identities




Rogers–Ramanujan identities

In mathematics, the Rogers–Ramanujan identities are two identities related to basic hypergeometric series, first discovered and proved by . They were subsequently rediscovered (without a proof) by Srinivasa Ramanujan some time before 193. Ramanujan had no proof, but rediscovered Rogers's paper in 1917, and they then published a joint new proof .  independently rediscovered and proved the identities.
Definition
The Rogers–Ramanujan identities are


 
   and


 
  .
Here, 
 
 
 
  denotes the q-Pochhammer symbol.
Integer Partitions
Consider the following:



 
  is the generating function for partitions with exactly 
 
 
 
  parts such that adjacent parts have diffference at least 2.


 
  is the generating function for partitions such that each part is congruent to either 1 or 4 modulo 5.


 
  is the generating function for partitions with exactly 
 
 
 
  parts such that adjacent parts have difference at least 2 and such that the smallest part is at least 2.


 
  is the generating function for partitions such that each part is congruent to either 2 or 3 modulo 5.

The Rogers-Ramanujan identities could be now interpreted in the following way. Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-negative integer.

The number of partitions of 
 
 
 
  such that the adjacent parts differ by at least 2 is the same as the number of partitions of 
 
 
 
  such that each part is congruent to either 1 or 4 modulo 5.
The number of partitions of 
 
 
 
  such that the adjacent parts differ by at least 2 and such that the smallest part is at least 2 is the same as the number of partitions of 
 
 
 
  such that each part is congruent to either 2 or 3 modulo 5.

Modular functions
If q = e2πiτ, then q−1/60G(q) and q11/60H(q) are modular functions of τ.
Applications
The Rogers–Ramanujan identities appeared in Baxter's solution of the hard hexagon model in statistical mechanics.
Ramanujan's continued fraction is



See also

Rogers polynomials

References







Issai Schur, Ein Beitrag zur additiven Zahlentheorie und zur Theorie der Kettenbrüche, (1917) Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Akademie, pp. 302–321.
W.N. Bailey, Generalized Hypergeometric Series, (1935) Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, No.32, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
George Gasper and Mizan Rahman, Basic Hypergeometric Series, 2nd Edition, (2004), Encyclopedia of Mathematics and Its Applications, 96, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-83357-4.
Bruce C. Berndt, Heng Huat Chan, Sen-Shan Huang, Soon-Yi Kang, Jaebum Sohn, Seung Hwan Son, The Rogers-Ramanujan Continued Fraction, J. Comput. Appl. Math. 105 (1999), pp. 9–24.
Cilanne Boulet, Igor Pak, A Combinatorial Proof of the Rogers-Ramanujan and Schur Identities, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Ser. A, vol. 113 (2006), 1019–1030.


External links




"
Category:Hypergeometric functions Category:Mathematical identities Category:Q-analogs Category:Modular forms Category:Srinivasa Ramanujan


