


Geodesic deviation




Geodesic deviation

In general relativity, geodesic deviation describes the tendency of objects to approach or recede from one another while moving under the influence of a spatially varying gravitational field. Put another way, if two objects are set in motion along two initially parallel trajectories, the presence of a tidal gravitational force will cause the trajectories to bend towards or away from each other, producing a relative acceleration between the objects.1
Mathematically, the tidal force in general relativity is described by the Riemann curvature tensor,2 and the trajectory of an object solely under the influence of gravity is called a geodesic. The geodesic deviation equation relates the Riemann curvature tensor to the relative acceleration of two neighboring geodesics. In differential geometry, the geodesic deviation equation is more commonly known as the Jacobi equation.
Geodesic deviation equation
To quantify geodesic deviation, one begins by setting up a family of closely spaced geodesics indexed by a continuous variable s and parametrized by an affine parameter t. That is, for each fixed s, the curve swept out by γs(t) as t varies is a geodesic with affine parameter. If xμ(s, t) are the coordinates of the geodesic γs(t), then the tangent vector of this geodesic is



One can also define a deviation vector, which is the displacement of two objects travelling along two infinitesimally separated geodesics:



The relative acceleration Aμ of the two objects is defined, roughly, as the second derivative of the separation vector Xμ as the objects advance along their respective geodesics. Specifically, Aμ is found by taking the directional covariant derivative of X along T twice:



The geodesic deviation equation relates Aμ, Tμ, Xμ, and the Riemann tensor Rμνρσ:3



An alternate notation for the directional covariant derivative 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , so the geodesic deviation equation may also be written as



The geodesic deviation equation can be derived from the second variation of the point particle Lagrangian along geodesics, or from the first variation of a combined Lagrangian. The Lagrangian approach has two advantages. First it allows various formal approaches of quantization to be applied to the geodesic deviation system. Second it allows deviation to be formulated for much more general objects than geodesics (any dynamical system which has a one spacetime indexed momentum appears to have a corresponding generalization of geodesic deviation).
See also

Bernhard Riemann
Curvature
Glossary of Riemannian and metric geometry

References


.

.

External links

General Relativity and Quantum Cosmology
Tensors and Relativity: Geodesic deviation

"
Category:Geodesic (mathematics) Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Equations










