


Rational normal curve




Rational normal curve

In mathematics, the rational normal curve is a smooth, rational curve

 
  of degree

 
  in projective n-space . It is a simple example of a projective variety; formally, it is the Veronese variety when the domain is the projective line. For 
 
 
 
  it is the flat conic  Z,}} and for 
 
 
 
  it is the twisted cubic. The term "normal" is an old term meaning that the linear system defining the embedding is complete (and has nothing to do with normal schemes). The intersection of the rational normal curve with an affine space is called the moment curve.
Definition
The rational normal curve may be given parametrically as the image of the map



which assigns to the homogeneous coordinates

 
  the value



In the affine coordinates of the chart  the map is simply



That is, the rational normal curve is the closure by a single point at infinity of the affine curve



Equivalently, rational normal curve may be understood to be a projective variety, defined as the common zero locus of the homogeneous polynomials



where 
 
 
 
  are the homogeneous coordinates on . The full set of these polynomials is not needed; it is sufficient to pick 
 
 
 
  of these to specify the curve.
Alternate parameterization
Let 
 
 
 
  be 
 
 
 
  distinct points in . Then the polynomial



is a homogeneous polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  with distinct roots. The polynomials



are then a basis for the space of homogeneous polynomials of degree 
 
 
 
 . The map



or, equivalently, dividing by 
 
 




is a rational normal curve. That this is a rational normal curve may be understood by noting that the monomials



are just one possible basis for the space of degree 
 
 
 
  homogeneous polynomials. In fact, any basis will do. This is just an application of the statement that any two projective varieties are projectively equivalent if they are congruent modulo the projective linear group  (with 
 
 
 
  the field over which the projective space is defined).
This rational curve sends the zeros of 
 
 
 
  to each of the coordinate points of ; that is, all but one of the  vanish for a zero of 
 
 
 
 . Conversely, any rational normal curve passing through the 
 
 
 
  coordinate points may be written parametrically in this way.
Properties
The rational normal curve has an assortment of nice properties:

Any 
 
 
 
  points on 
 
 
 
  are linearly independent, and span . This property distinguishes the rational normal curve from all other curves.
Given 
 
 
 
  points in  in linear general position (that is, with no 
 
 
 
  lying in a hyperplane), there is a unique rational normal curve passing through them. The curve may be explicitly specified using the parametric representation, by arranging 
 
 
 
  of the points to lie on the coordinate axes, and then mapping the other two points to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The tangent and secant lines of a rational normal curve are pairwise disjoint, except at points of the curve itself. This is a property shared by sufficiently positive embeddings of any projective variety.

There are


 
  independent quadrics that generate the ideal of the curve.
The curve is not a complete intersection, for 
 
 
 
 . This means it is not defined by the number of equations equal to its codimension

 
 .
The canonical mapping for a hyperelliptic curve has image a rational normal curve, and is 2-to-1.
Every irreducible non-degenerate curve  of degree 
 
 
 
  is a rational normal curve.
See also

Rational normal surface

References

Joe Harris, Algebraic Geometry, A First Course, (1992) Springer-Verlag, New York. ISBN 0-387-97716-3

"
Category:Algebraic curves Category:Birational geometry


