


Neo-Hookean solid




Neo-Hookean solid

A neo-Hookean solid12 is a hyperelastic material model, similar to Hooke's law, that can be used for predicting the nonlinear stress-strain behavior of materials undergoing large deformations. The model was proposed by Ronald Rivlin in 1948. In contrast to linear elastic materials, the stress-strain curve of a neo-Hookean material is not linear. Instead, the relationship between applied stress and strain is initially linear, but at a certain point the stress-strain curve will plateau. The neo-Hookean model does not account for the dissipative release of energy as heat while straining the material and perfect elasticity is assumed at all stages of deformation.
The neo-Hookean model is based on the statistical thermodynamics of cross-linked polymer chains and is usable for plastics and rubber-like substances. Cross-linked polymers will act in a neo-Hookean manner because initially the polymer chains can move relative to each other when a stress is applied. However, at a certain point the polymer chains will be stretched to the maximum point that the covalent cross links will allow, and this will cause a dramatic increase in the elastic modulus of the material. The neo-Hookean material model does not predict that increase in modulus at large strains and is typically accurate only for strains less than 20%.3 The model is also inadequate for biaxial states of stress and has been superseded by the Mooney-Rivlin model.
The strain energy density function for an incompressible neo-Hookean material is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a material constant, and 
 
 
 
  is the first invariant of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, i.e.,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the principal stretches. For three-dimensional problems the compressible neo-Hookean material the strain energy density function is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a material constant, 
 
 
 
  is the first invariant of the isochoric part of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, and 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient. It can be shown that in 2D, the strain energy density function is


 
  where, in this case, 
 
 
 
 .
Several alternative formulations exist for compressible neo-Hookean materials, for example 4


 
  For consistency with linear elasticity,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the shear modulus and 
 
 
 
  is the bulk modulus.
Cauchy stress in terms of deformation tensors
Compressible neo-Hookean material
For a compressible Rivlin neo-Hookean material the Cauchy stress is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, and


 
  For infinitesimal strains (
 
 
 
 )


 
  and the Cauchy stress can be expressed as


 
  Comparison with Hooke's law shows that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .






Proof:





The Cauchy stress in a compressible hyperelastic material is given by


 
  For a compressible Rivlin neo-Hookean material,


 
  while, for a compressible Ogden neo-Hookean material,


 
  Therefore, the Cauchy stress in a compressible Rivlin neo-Hookean material is given by


 
  while that for the corresponding Ogden material is


 
  If the isochoric part of the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor is defined as 
 
 
 
 , then we can write the Rivlin neo-Heooken stress as


 
  and the Ogden neo-Hookean stress as


 
  The quantities


 
  have the form of pressures and are usually treated as such. The Rivlin neo-Hookean stress can then be expressed in the form


 
  while the Ogden neo-Hookean stress has the form








Incompressible neo-Hookean material
For an incompressible neo-Hookean material with 
 
 



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an undetermined pressure.
Cauchy stress in terms of principal stretches
Compressible neo-Hookean material
For a compressible neo-Hookean hyperelastic material, the principal components of the Cauchy stress are given by


 
  Therefore, the differences between the principal stresses are









Proof:





For a compressible hyperelastic material, the principal components of the Cauchy stress are given by


 
  The strain energy density function for a compressible neo Hookean material is


 
  Therefore,


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  Hence,


 
 
  The principal Cauchy stresses are therefore given by








Incompressible neo-Hookean material
In terms of the principal stretches, the Cauchy stress differences for an incompressible hyperelastic material are given by


 
  For an incompressible neo-Hookean material,


 
  Therefore,


 
  which gives



Uniaxial extension
Compressible neo-Hookean material
 For a compressible material undergoing uniaxial extension, the principal stretches are


 
  Hence, the true (Cauchy) stresses for a compressible neo-Hookean material are given by


 
 
  The stress differences are given by


 
  If the material is unconstrained we have 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  Equating the two expressions for 
 
 
 
  gives a relation for 
 
 
 
 
  as a function of 
 
 
 
 , i.e.,


 
  or


 
  The above equation can be solved numerically using a Newton-Raphson iterative root finding procedure.
Incompressible neo-Hookean material
(Figure)
Comparison of experimental results (dots) and predictions for Hooke's law(1), neo-Hookean solid(2) and Mooney-Rivlin solid models(3)

Under uniaxial extension, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . Therefore,



Assuming no traction on the sides, 
 
 
 
 , so we can write


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the engineering strain. This equation is often written in alternative notation as



The equation above is for the true stress (ratio of the elongation force to deformed cross-section). For the engineering stress the equation is:



For small deformations 
 
 
 
  we will have:



Thus, the equivalent Young's modulus of a neo-Hookean solid in uniaxial extension is 
 
 
 
 , which is in concordance with linear elasticity (
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  for incompressibility).
Equibiaxial extension
Compressible neo-Hookean material
 In the case of equibiaxial extension


 
  Therefore,


 
 
  The stress differences are


 
  If the material is in a state of plane stress then 
 
 
 
  and we have


 
  We also have a relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :


 
  or,


 
  This equation can be solved for 
 
 
 
  using Newton's method.
Incompressible neo-Hookean material
For an incompressible material 
 
 
 
  and the differences between the principal Cauchy stresses take the form


 
  Under plane stress conditions we have



Pure dilation
For the case of pure dilation


 
  Therefore, the principal Cauchy stresses for a compressible neo-Hookean material are given by


 
  If the material is incompressible then 
 
 
 
  and the principal stresses can be arbitrary.
The figures below show that extremely high stresses are needed to achieve large triaxial extensions or compressions. Equivalently, relatively small triaxial stretch states can cause very high stresses to develop in a rubber-like material. Note also that the magnitude of the stress is quite sensitive to the bulk modulus but not to the shear modulus.




(Figure)
The true stress as a function of equi-triaxial stretch predicted by a compressible neo-Hookean material for various values of 
 
 
 
 . The material properties are representative of natural rubber.


(Figure)
The true stress as a function of J predicted by a compressible neo-Hookean material for various values of 
 
 
 
 . The material properties are representative of natural rubber.






Simple shear
For the case of simple shear the deformation gradient in terms of components with respect to a reference basis is of the form 5


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the shear deformation. Therefore the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor is



Compressible neo-Hookean material
In this case 
 
 
 
 . Hence, 
 
 
 
 . Now,


 
  Hence the Cauchy stress is given by



Incompressible neo-Hookean material
Using the relation for the Cauchy stress for an incompressible neo-Hookean material we get


 
  Thus neo-Hookean solid shows linear dependence of shear stresses upon shear deformation and quadratic dependence of the normal stress difference on the shear deformation. Note that the expressions for the Cauchy stress for a compressible and an incompressible neo-Hookean material in simple shear represent the same quantity and provide a means of determining the unknown pressure 
 
 
 
 
 .
References


See also

Hyperelastic material
Strain energy density function
Mooney-Rivlin solid
Finite strain theory
Stress measures

"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Elasticity (physics) Category:Non-Newtonian fluids Category:Rubber properties Category:Solid mechanics



Ogden, R. W. , 1998, Nonlinear Elastic Deformations, Dover.↩
C. W. Macosko, 1994, Rheology: principles, measurement and applications, VCH Publishers, ISBN 1-56081-579-5.↩
Gent, A. N., ed., 2001, Engineering with rubber, Carl Hanser Verlag, Munich.↩

Ogden, R. W., 1984, Nonlinear elastic deformations, Dover↩




