


Glossary of category theory




Glossary of category theory

This is a glossary of properties and concepts in category theory in mathematics.
Categories
A category A is said to be:

small if the class of all morphisms is a set (i.e., not a proper class); otherwise large.
locally small if the morphisms between every pair of objects A and B form a set.
Some authors assume a foundation in which the collection of all classes forms a "conglomerate", in which case a quasicategory is a category whose objects and morphisms merely form a conglomerate.1 (NB other authors use the term "quasicategory" with a different meaning.2)
isomorphic to a category B if there is an isomorphism between them.
equivalent to a category B if there is an equivalence between them.
concrete if there is a faithful functor from A to Set; e.g., Vec, Grp and Top.
discrete if each morphism is an identity morphism (of some object).
thin category if there is at most one morphism between any pair of objects.
a subcategory of a category B if there is an inclusion functor given from A to B.
a full subcategory of a category B if the inclusion functor is full.
wellpowered if for each object A there is only a set of pairwise non-isomorphic subobjects.
complete if all small limits exist.
cartesian closed if it has a terminal object and that any two objects have a product and exponential.
abelian if it has a zero object, it has all pullbacks and pushouts, and all monomorphisms and epimorphisms are normal.
normal if every monic is normal.3
balanced if every bimorphism is an isomorphism.
preadditive if it is enriched over the monoidal category of abelian groups. More generally, it is R-linear if it is enriched over the monoidal category of R-modules, for R a commutative ring.
additive if it is preadditive and admits all finitary biproducts.
skeletal if isomorphic objects are necessarily identical.

Morphisms
A morphism f in a category is called:

an epimorphism if 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
 . In other words, f is the dual of a monomorphism.
an identity if f maps an object A to A and for any morphisms g with domain A and h with codomain A, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
an inverse to a morphism g if 
 
 
 
  is defined and is equal to the identity morphism on the codomain of g, and 
 
 
 
  is defined and equal to the identity morphism on the domain of g. The inverse of g is unique and is denoted by g−1. f is a left inverse to g if 
 
 
 
  is defined and is equal to the identity morphism on the domain of g, and similarly for a right inverse.
an isomorphism if there exists an inverse of f.
a monomorphism (also called monic) if 
 
 
 
  whenever 
 
 
 
 ; e.g., an injection in Set. In other words, f is the dual of an epimorphism.
a bimorphism is a morphism that is both an epimorphism and a monomorphism.
a retraction if it has a right inverse.
a coretraction if it has a left inverse.

Functors
A functor F is said to be:

a constant if F maps every object in a category to the same object A and every morphism to the identity on A.
faithful if F is injective when restricted to each hom-set.
full if F is surjective when restricted to each hom-set.
isomorphism-dense (sometimes called essentially surjective) if for every B there exists A such that F(A) is isomorphic to B.
an equivalence if F is faithful, full and isomorphism-dense.
amnestic provided that if k is an isomorphism and F(k) is an identity, then k is an identity.
reflect identities provided that if F(k) is an identity then k is an identity as well.
reflect isomorphisms provided that if F(k) is an isomorphism then k is an isomorphism as well.

Objects
An object A in a category is said to be:

isomorphic to an object B if there is an isomorphism between A and B.
initial if there is exactly one morphism from A to each object B; e.g., empty set in Set.
terminal if there is exactly one morphism from each object B to A; e.g., singletons in Set.
a zero object if it is both initial and terminal, such as a trivial group in Grp.

An object A in an abelian category is:

simple if it is not isomorphic to the zero object and any subobject of A is isomorphic to zero or to A.
finite length if it has a composition series. The maximum number of proper subobjects in any such composition series is called the length of A.4

Notes
References





"
  Category theory





http://planetmath.org/encyclopedia/NormalCategory.html





