


Mooney–Rivlin solid




Mooney–Rivlin solid

In continuum mechanics, a Mooney–Rivlin solid12 is a hyperelastic material model where the strain energy density function

 
  is a linear combination of two invariants of the left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor

 
 . The model was proposed by Melvin Mooney in 1940 and expressed in terms of invariants by Ronald Rivlin in 1948.
The strain energy density function for an incompressible Mooney–Rivlin material is34



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are empirically determined material constants, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the first and the second invariant of the unimodular component of the left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor:The characteristic polynomial of the linear operator corresponding to the second rank three-dimensional Finger tensor (also called the left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor) is usually written


 
  In this article, the trace

 
  is written 
 
 
 
 , the next coefficient 
 
 
 
  is written 
 
 
 
 , and the determinant 
 
 
 
  would be written 
 
 
 
 .


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient. For an incompressible material, 
 
 
 
 .
Derivation
The Mooney–Rivlin model is a special case of the generalized Rivlin model (also called polynomial hyperelastic model5) which has the form


 
  with 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  are material constants related to the distortional response and 
 
 
 
  are material constants related to the volumetric response. For a compressible Mooney–Rivlin material 
 
 
 
  and we have


 
  If 
 
 
 
  we obtain a neo-Hookean solid, a special case of a Mooney–Rivlin solid.
For consistency with linear elasticity in the limit of small strains, it is necessary that


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the bulk modulus and 
 
 
 
  is the shear modulus.
Cauchy stress in terms of strain invariants and deformation tensors
The Cauchy stress in a compressible hyperelastic material with a stress free reference configuration is given by


 
  For a compressible Mooney–Rivlin material,


 
  Therefore, the Cauchy stress in a compressible Mooney–Rivlin material is given by


 
  It can be shown, after some algebra, that the pressure is given by


 
  The stress can then be expressed in the form


 
  The above equation is often written as


 
  For an incompressible Mooney–Rivlin material with 
 
 



 
  Note that if 
 
 
 
  then


 
  Then, from the Cayley-Hamilton theorem,


 
  Hence, the Cauchy stress can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 

Cauchy stress in terms of principal stretches
In terms of the principal stretches, the Cauchy stress differences for an incompressible hyperelastic material are given by


 
  For an incompressible Mooney-Rivlin material,


 
  Therefore,


 
  Since 
 
 
 
 . we can write


 
 
  Then the expressions for the Cauchy stress differences become



Uniaxial extension
For the case of an incompressible Mooney–Rivlin material under uniaxial elongation, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then the true stress (Cauchy stress) differences can be calculated as:



Simple tension
 In the case of simple tension, 
 
 
 
 . Then we can write


 
  In alternative notation, where the Cauchy stress is written as 
 
 
 
  and the stretch as 
 
 
 
 , we can write


 
  and the engineering stress (force per unit reference area) for an incompressible Mooney–Rivlin material under simple tension can be calculated using 
 
 
 
 . Hence


 
  If we define


 
  then


 
  The slope of the 
 
 
 
  versus 
 
 
 
  line gives the value of 
 
 
 
  while the intercept with the 
 
 
 
  axis gives the value of 
 
 
 
 . The Mooney–Rivlin solid model usually fits experimental data better than Neo-Hookean solid does, but requires an additional empirical constant.
Equibiaxial tension
In the case of equibiaxial tension, the principal stretches are 
 
 
 
 . If, in addition, the material is incompressible then 
 
 
 
 . The Cauchy stress differences may therefore be expressed as


 
  The equations for equibiaxial tension are equivalent to those governing uniaxial compression.
Pure shear
A pure shear deformation can be achieved by applying stretches of the form 6


 
  The Cauchy stress differences for pure shear may therefore be expressed as


 
  Therefore


 
  For a pure shear deformation


 
  Therefore 
 
 
 
 .
Simple shear
The deformation gradient for a simple shear deformation has the form7


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are reference orthonormal basis vectors in the plane of deformation and the shear deformation is given by


 
  In matrix form, the deformation gradient and the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor may then be expressed as


 
  Therefore,


 
  The Cauchy stress is given by


 
  For consistency with linear elasticity, clearly 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the shear modulus.
Rubber
Elastic response of rubber-like materials are often modeled based on the Mooney—Rivlin model. The constants 
 
 
 
  are determined by the fitting predicted stress from the above equations to experimental data. The recommended tests are uniaxial tension, equibiaxial compression, equibiaxial tension, uniaxial compression, and for shear, planar tension and planar compression. The two parameter Mooney–Rivlin model is usually valid for strains less than 100%.
Notes and references


See also

Hyperelastic material
Finite strain theory
Continuum mechanics
Strain energy density function
Application note on experimentally determining Mooney Rivlin constants

"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Non-Newtonian fluids Category:Rubber properties Category:Solid mechanics



Mooney, M., 1940, A theory of large elastic deformation, Journal of Applied Physics, 11(9), pp. 582-592.↩
Rivlin, R. S., 1948, Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials. IV. Further developments of the general theory, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 241(835), pp. 379-397.↩
Boulanger, P. and Hayes, M. A., 2001, '' Finite amplitude waves in Mooney–Rivlin and Hadamard materials'', in Topics in Finite Elasticity, ed. M. A Hayes and G. Soccomandi, International Center for Mechanical Sciences.↩
C. W. Macosko, 1994, Rheology: principles, measurement and applications, VCH Publishers, ISBN 1-56081-579-5.↩
↩
Ogden, R. W., 1984, Nonlinear elastic deformations, Dover↩





