


Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions




Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions
In [[mathematical optimization]], the '''Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions''' (also known as the '''Kuhn
 –Tucker conditions''') are first order necessary conditions for a solution in nonlinear programming to be optimal, provided that some regularity conditions are satisfied. Allowing inequality constraints, the KKT approach to nonlinear programming generalizes the method of Lagrange multipliers, which allows only equality constraints. The system of equations corresponding to the KKT conditions is usually not solved directly, except in the few special cases where a closed-form solution can be derived analytically. In general, many optimization algorithms can be interpreted as methods for numerically solving the KKT system of equations.1
The KKT conditions were originally named after Harold W. Kuhn, and Albert W. Tucker, who first published the conditions in 1951.2 Later scholars discovered that the necessary conditions for this problem had been stated by William Karush in his master's thesis in 1939.34
Nonlinear optimization problem
Consider the following nonlinear optimization problem:

Maximize 
 
 



subject to
 









where x is the optimization variable, 
 
 
 
  is the objective or cost function, 
 
 
 
 
  are the inequality constraint functions, and 
 
 
 
  are the equality constraint functions. The numbers of inequality and equality constraints are denoted m and l, respectively.
Necessary conditions
Suppose that the objective function

 
  and the constraint functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are continuously differentiable at a point 
 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a local minimum that satisfies some regularity conditions (see below), then there exist constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , called KKT multipliers, such that
thumb|upright=2|Inequality constraint diagram for optimization problems

Stationarity
For maximizing f(x)
 
 

For minimizing f(x)
 
 



Primal feasibility








Dual feasibility





Complementary slackness




In the particular case 
 
 
 
 
 , i.e., when there are no inequality constraints, the KKT conditions turn into the Lagrange conditions, and the KKT multipliers are called Lagrange multipliers.
If some of the functions are non-differentiable, subdifferential versions of Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions are available.5
Regularity conditions (or constraint qualifications)
In order for a minimum point 
 
 
 
  to satisfy the above KKT conditions, the problem should satisfy some regularity conditions; the most used ones are listed below:

Linearity constraint qualification: If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are affine functions, then no other condition is needed.
Linear independence constraint qualification (LICQ): the gradients of the active inequality constraints and the gradients of the equality constraints are linearly independent at 
 
 
 
 .
Mangasarian–Fromovitz constraint qualification (MFCQ): the gradients of the active inequality constraints and the gradients of the equality constraints are positive-linearly independent at 
 
 
 
 
 .
Constant rank constraint qualification (CRCQ): for each subset of the gradients of the active inequality constraints and the gradients of the equality constraints the rank at a vicinity of 
 
 
 
  is constant.
Constant positive linear dependence constraint qualification (CPLD): for each subset of the gradients of the active inequality constraints and the gradients of the equality constraints, if it is positive-linear dependent at 
 
 
 
  then it is positive-linear dependent at a vicinity of 
 
 
 
 .
Quasi-normality constraint qualification (QNCQ): if the gradients of the active inequality constraints and the gradients of the equality constraints are positive-linearly dependent at 
 
 
 
  with associated multipliers 
 
 
 
 
  for equalities and 
 
 
 
  for inequalities, then there is no sequence 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Slater condition: for a convex problem, there exists a point 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

(
 
 
 
 ) is positive-linear dependent if there exists 
 
 
 
  not all zero such that 
 
 
 
 
 .
It can be shown that LICQ⇒MFCQ⇒CPLD⇒QNCQ, LICQ⇒CRCQ⇒CPLD⇒QNCQ (and the converses are not true), although MFCQ is not equivalent to CRCQ6 . In practice weaker constraint qualifications are preferred since they provide stronger optimality conditions.
Sufficient conditions
In some cases, the necessary conditions are also sufficient for optimality. In general, the necessary conditions are not sufficient for optimality and additional information is necessary, such as the Second Order Sufficient Conditions (SOSC). For smooth functions, SOSC involve the second derivatives, which explains its name.
The necessary conditions are sufficient for optimality if the objective function 
 
 
 
  is a concave function, the inequality constraints 
 
 
 
  are continuously differentiable convex functions and the equality constraints 
 
 
 
  are affine functions.
It was shown by Martin in 1985 that the broader class of functions in which KKT conditions guarantees global optimality are the so-called Type 1 invex functions.78
Second Order Sufficient Conditions
For smooth, non-linear optimisation problems, a second order sufficient condition is given as follows. Consider 
 
 
 
  that find a local minimum using the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions above. With 
 
 
 
 
  such that strict complementarity is held at 
 
 
 
 (i.e. all 
 
 
), then for all 
 
 
 
  such that



the following equation must hold;



If the above condition is strictly met, the function is a strict constrained local minimum.
Economics
Often in mathematical economics the KKT approach is used in theoretical models in order to obtain qualitative results. For example, consider a firm that maximizes its sales revenue subject to a minimum profit constraint. Letting Q be the quantity of output produced (to be chosen), R(Q) be sales revenue with a positive first derivative and with a zero value at zero output, C(Q) be production costs with a positive first derivative and with a non-negative value at zero output, and 
 
 
 
  be the positive minimal acceptable level of profit, then the problem is a meaningful one if the revenue function levels off so it eventually is less steep than the cost function. The problem expressed in the previously given minimization form is

Minimize 
 
 

subject to
 







and the KKT conditions are


















Since Q=0 would violate the minimum profit constraint, we have Q>0 and hence the third condition implies that the first condition holds with equality. Solving that equality gives



Because it was given that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are strictly positive, this inequality along with the non-negativity condition on 
 
 
 
  guarantees that 
 
 
 
 
  is positive and so the revenue-maximizing firm operates at a level of output at which marginal revenue

 
  is less than marginal cost

 
  — a result that is of interest because it contrasts with the behavior of a profit maximizing firm, which operates at a level at which they are equal.
Value function
If we reconsider the optimization problem as a maximization problem with constant inequality constraints,














The value function is defined as






















(So the domain of V is 
 
 
 
 )
Given this definition, each coefficient, 
 
 
 
 , is the rate at which the value function increases as 
 
 
 
  increases. Thus if each 
 
 
 
 
  is interpreted as a resource constraint, the coefficients tell you how much increasing a resource will increase the optimum value of our function f. This interpretation is especially important in economics and is used, for instance, in utility maximization problems.
Generalizations
With an extra constant multiplier 
 
 
 
 , which may be zero, in front of $\nabla f(x^*)$ the KKT stationarity conditions turn into
$$\mu_0 \nabla f(x^*) + \sum_{i=1}^m \mu_i \nabla g_i(x^*) + \sum_{j=1}^l \lambda_j \nabla h_j(x^*) = 0,$$
which are called the Fritz John conditions.
The KKT conditions belong to a wider class of the First Order Necessary Conditions (FONC), which allow for non-smooth functions using subderivatives.
See also

Farkas' lemma
Big M method - corresponding technique for linear optimization problems

References


Further reading






External links

Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions with derivation and examples
Examples and Tutorials on the KKT Conditions

de:Konvexe Optimierung#Karush-Kuhn-Tucker-Bedingungen"
Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Mathematical and quantitative methods (economics)




 










