


Symplectic integrator




Symplectic integrator

In mathematics, a symplectic integrator (SI) is a numerical integration scheme for a specific group of differential equations related to classical mechanics and symplectic geometry. Symplectic integrators form the subclass of geometric integrators which, by definition, are canonical transformations. They are widely used in molecular dynamics, discrete element methods, accelerator physics, and celestial mechanics.
Introduction
Symplectic integrators are designed for the numerical solution of Hamilton's equations, which read


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the position coordinates, 
 
 
 
  the momentum coordinates, and 
 
 
 
  is the Hamiltonian. The set of position and momentum coordinates 
 
 
 
  are called canonical coordinates. (See Hamiltonian mechanics for more background.)
The time evolution of Hamilton's equations is a symplectomorphism, meaning that it conserves the symplectic two-form

 
 
 . A numerical scheme is a symplectic integrator if it also conserves this two-form.
Symplectic integrators possess, as a conserved quantity, a Hamiltonian which is slightly perturbed from the original one. By virtue of these advantages, the SI scheme has been widely applied to the calculations of long-term evolution of chaotic Hamiltonian systems ranging from the Kepler problem to the classical and semi-classical simulations in molecular dynamics.
Most of the usual numerical methods, like the primitive Euler scheme and the classical Runge-Kutta scheme, are not symplectic integrators.
Splitting methods for separable Hamiltonians
A widely used class of symplectic integrators is formed by the splitting methods.
Assume that the Hamiltonian is separable, meaning that it can be written in the form



This happens frequently in Hamiltonian mechanics, with T being the kinetic energy and V the potential energy.
For the notational simplicity, let us introduce the symbol 
 
 
 
  to denote the canonical coordinates including both the position and momentum coordinates. Then, the set of the Hamiltonian's equations given in the introduction can be expressed in a single expression as



where 
 
 
 
  is a Poisson bracket. Furthermore, by introducing an operator, 
 
 
 
 
 , which returns a Poisson bracket of the operand with the Hamiltonian, the expression of the Hamilton's equation can be further simplified to



The formal solution of this set of equations is given as a matrix exponential:


 
  Note the positivity of 
 
 
 
  in the matrix exponential.
When the Hamiltonian has the form of eq. (1), the solution (3) is equivalent to



The SI scheme approximates the time-evolution operator 
 
 
 
 
  in the formal solution (4) by a product of operators as



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real numbers, 
 
 
 
  is an integer, which is called the order of the integrator, and where 
 
 
 
 . Note that each of the operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  provides a symplectic map, so their product appearing in the right hand side of (5) also constitutes a symplectic map.
Since 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , we can conclude that



By using a Taylor series, 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as



where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary real number. Combining (6) and (7), and by using the same reasoning for 
 
 
 
  as we have used for 
 
 
 
 , we get



In concrete terms, 
 
 
 
  gives the mapping



and 
 
 
 
  gives



Note that both of these maps are practically computable.
Examples
A first-order example
The symplectic Euler method is the first-order integrator with 
 
 
 
  and coefficients



A second-order example
The Verlet method is the second-order integrator with 
 
 
 
  and coefficients



A third-order example
A third order symplectic integrator (with 
 
 
 
 ) was discovered by Ronald Ruth in 1983. 1 One of the many solutions is given by






A fourth-order example
A fourth order integrator (with 
 
 
 
 ) was also discovered by Ruth in 1983 and distributed privately to the accelerator community at that time. This was described in a lively review article by Forest. 2 This fourth order integrator was published in 1990 by Forest and Ruth and also independently discovered by two other groups around that same time.345





 
  To determine these coefficients, the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula can be used. Yoshida, in particular, gives an elegant derivation of coefficients for higher-order integrators. Later on, Blanes and Moan 6 further developed partitioned Runge-Kutta methods for the integration of systems with separable Hamiltonians with very small error constants.
See also

Energy drift
Multisymplectic integrator
Variational integrator
Verlet integration

References






"
Category:Numerical differential equations Category:Hamiltonian mechanics













