


Peres–Horodecki criterion




Peres–Horodecki criterion

The Peres–Horodecki criterion is a necessary condition, for the joint density matrix

 
  of two quantum mechanical systems 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , to be separable. It is also called the PPT criterion, for positive partial transpose. In the 2x2 and 2x3 dimensional cases the condition is also sufficient. It is used to decide the separability of mixed states, where the Schmidt decomposition does not apply.
In higher dimensions, the test is inconclusive, and one should supplement it with more advanced tests, such as those based on entanglement witnesses.
Definition
If we have a general state 
 
 
 
 
  which acts on 
 
 




Its partial transpose (with respect to the B party) is defined as



Note that the partial in the name implies that only part of the state is transposed. More precisely, 
 
 
 
  is the identity map applied to the A party and the transposition map applied to the B party.
This definition can be seen more clearly if we write the state as a block matrix:



Where 
 
 
 
 , and each block is a square matrix of dimension 
 
 
 
 . Then the partial transpose is



The criterion states that if 
 
 
 
  is separable, 
 
 
 
 
  has non-negative eigenvalues. In other words, if 
 
 
 
  has a negative eigenvalue, 
 
 
 
  is guaranteed to be entangled. If the eigenvalues are non-negative, and the dimension is larger than 6, the test is inconclusive.
The result is independent of the party that was transposed, because 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Consider this 2-qubit family of Werner states:



It can be regarded as the convex combination of 
 
 
 
 
 , a maximally entangled state, and identity, the maximally mixed state.
Its density matrix is



and the partial transpose



Its least eigenvalue is 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, the state is entangled for 
 
 
 
 .
Demonstration
If ρ is separable, it can be written as



In this case, the effect of the partial transposition is trivial:



As the transposition map preserves eigenvalues, the spectrum of 
 
 
 
  is the same as the spectrum of 
 
 
 
 , and in particular 
 
 
 
  must still be positive semidefinite. This proves the necessity of the PPT criterion.
Showing that being PPT is also sufficient for the 2 X 2 and 3 X 2 (equivalently 2 X 3) cases is more involved. It was shown by the Horodeckis that for every entangled state there exists an entanglement witness. This is a result of geometric nature and invokes the Hahn–Banach theorem (see reference below).
From the existence of entanglement witnesses, one can show that 
 
 
 
  being positive for all positive maps Λ is a necessary and sufficient condition for the separability of ρ, where Λ maps 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 

Furthermore, every positive map from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  can be decomposed into a sum of completely positive and completely copositive maps, when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . In other words, every such map Λ can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are completely positive and T is the transposition map. This follows from the Størmer-Woronowicz theorem.
Loosely speaking, the transposition map is therefore the only one that can generate negative eigenvalues in these dimensions. So if 
 
 
 
  is positive, 
 
 
 
  is positive for any Λ. Thus we conclude that the Peres–Horodecki criterion is also sufficient for separability when 
 
 
 
 .
In higher dimensions, however, there exist maps that can't be decomposed in this fashion, and the criterion is no longer sufficient. Consequently, there are entangled states which have a positive partial transpose. Such states have the interesting property that they are bound entangled, i.e. they can not be distilled for quantum communication purposes.
Continuous variable systems
The Peres–Horodecki criterion has been extended to continuous variable systems. Simon 1 formulated a particular version of the PPT criterion in terms of the second-order moments of canonical operators and showed that it is necessary and sufficient for 
 
 
 
 -mode Gaussian states (see Ref.2 for a seemingly different but essentially equivalent approach). It was later found 3 that Simon's condition is also necessary and sufficient for 
 
 
 
 -mode Gaussian states, but no longer sufficient for 
 
 
 
 -mode Gaussian states. Simon's condition can be generalized by taking into account the higher order moments of canonical operators 4 or by using entropic measures.5
References

Asher Peres, Separability Criterion for Density Matrices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1413–1415 (1996)
Michał Horodecki, Paweł Horodecki, Ryszard Horodecki, Separability of Mixed States: Necessary and Sufficient Conditions, Physics Letters A 223, 1-8 (1996)
Karol Życzkowski and Ingemar Bengtsson, Geometry of Quantum States, Cambridge University Press, 2006
S. L. Woronowicz, Positive maps of low dimensional matrix algebras, Rep. Math. Phys. 10 (1976), 165–183.

"
Category:Quantum information theory



↩
↩
↩
 ↩
 ↩




