   Simplicial manifold      Simplicial manifold   In mathematics , the term simplicial manifold commonly refers to either of two different types of objects, which combine attributes of a simplex with those of a manifold . Briefly; a simplex is a generalization of the concept of a triangle into forms with more, or fewer, than two dimensions. Accordingly, a 3-simplex is the figure known as a tetrahedron . A manifold is simply a space which appears to be Euclidean (following the laws of ordinary geometry, or more generally a flat Pseudo-Riemannian space) in a given local neighborhood , though it can be greatly more complicated overall. The combination of these concepts gives us two useful definitions.  A manifold made out of simplices  A simplicial manifold is a simplicial complex for which the geometric realization is homeomorphic to a topological manifold . This can mean simply that a neighborhood of each vertex (i.e. the set of simplices that contain that point as a vertex) is homeomorphic to a n -dimensional ball .  A manifold made from simplices can be locally flat, or can approximate a smooth curve, just as a large geodesic dome appears relatively flat over small areas, and approximates a hemisphere over its full extent. One can generalize this concept to more dimensions and other kinds of curved surfaces which makes it useful in various kinds of simulations .  This notion of simplicial manifold is important in Regge calculus and Causal dynamical triangulations as a way to discretize spacetime by triangulating it. A simplicial manifold with a metric is called a piecewise linear space .  A simplicial object built from manifolds  A simplicial manifold is also a simplicial object in the category of manifolds . This is a special case of a simplicial space in which, for each n , the space of n -simplices is a manifold.  For example, if G is a Lie group , then the simplicial nerve of G has the manifold $G^n$ as its space of n -simplices. More generally, G can be a Lie groupoid .  "  Category:Structures on manifolds  Category:Simplicial sets   