


Simple set




Simple set

In recursion theory a subset of the natural numbers is called a simple set if it is co-infinite and recursively enumerable, but every infinite subset of its complement fails to be enumerated recursively. Simple sets are examples of recursively enumerable sets that are not recursive.
Relation to Post's problem
Simple sets were devised by Emil Leon Post in the search for a non-Turing-complete recursively enumerable set. Whether such sets exist is known as Post's problem. Post had to prove two things in order to obtain his result, one is that the simple set, say A, does not Turing-reduce to the empty set, and that the K, the halting problem, does not Turing-reduce to A. He succeeded in the first part (which is obvious by definition), but for the other part, he managed only to prove a many-one reduction.
It was affirmed by Friedberg and Muchnik in the 1950s using a novel technique called the priority method. They give a construction for a set that is simple (and thus non-recursive), but fails to compute the halting problem.1
Formal definitions and some properties

A set 
 
 
 
  is called immune if 
 
 
 
  is infinite, but for every index 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
 . Or equivalently: there is no infinite subset of 
 
 
 
  that is recursively enumerable.
A set 
 
 
 
  is called ''' simple ''' if it is recursively enumerable and its complement is immune.
A set 
 
 
 
  is called effectively immune if 
 
 
 
  is infinite, but there exists a recursive function 
 
 
 
  such that for every index 
 
 
 
 , we have that 
 
 
 
 .
A set 
 
 
 
  is called effectively simple if it is recursively enumerable and its complement is effectively immune. Every effectively simple set, is simple and Turing-complete.
A set 
 
 
 
  is called hyperimmune if 
 
 
 
  is infinite, but 
 
 
 
  is not computably dominated, where 
 
 
 
  is the list of members of 
 
 
 
  in order.2
A set 
 
 
 
  is called hypersimple if it is simple and its complement is hyperimmune.3

Notes
References





"
Category:Computability theory



Nies (2009) p.35
Nies (2009) p.27
Nies (2009) p.37




