


Generalized Appell polynomials




Generalized Appell polynomials

In mathematics, a polynomial sequence

 
  has a generalized Appell representation if the generating function for the polynomials takes on a certain form:


 
  where the generating function or kernel

 
  is composed of the series


 
  with 
 
 

and


 
  and all 
 
 

and


 
  with 
 
 

Given the above, it is not hard to show that 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial of degree

 
 .
Boas–Buck polynomials are a slightly more general class of polynomials.
Special cases

The choice of 
 
 
 
  gives the class of Brenke polynomials.
The choice of 
 
 
 
  results in the Sheffer sequence of polynomials, which include the general difference polynomials, such as the Newton polynomials.
The combined choice of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  gives the Appell sequence of polynomials.

Explicit representation
The generalized Appell polynomials have the explicit representation



The constant is



where this sum extends over all partitions of 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  parts; that is, the sum extends over all 
 
 
 
  such that



For the Appell polynomials, this becomes the formula



Recursion relation
Equivalently, a necessary and sufficient condition that the kernel 
 
 
 
  can be written as 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  is that



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the power series



and



Substituting



immediately gives the recursion relation



For the special case of the Brenke polynomials, one has 
 
 
 
  and thus all of the 
 
 
 
 , simplifying the recursion relation significantly.
See also

q-difference polynomials

References

Ralph P. Boas, Jr. and R. Creighton Buck, Polynomial Expansions of Analytic Functions (Second Printing Corrected), (1964) Academic Press Inc., Publishers New York, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Library of Congress Card Number 63-23263.
William C. Brenke, On generating functions of polynomial systems, (1945) American Mathematical Monthly, 52 pp. 297–301.
W. N. Huff, The type of the polynomials generated by f(xt) φ(t) (1947) Duke Mathematical Journal, 14 pp. 1091–1104.

"
Category:Polynomials


