


Fundamental lemma of calculus of variations




Fundamental lemma of calculus of variations

In mathematics, specifically in the calculus of variations, a variation 
 
 
 
  of a function 
 
 
 
  can be concentrated on an arbitrarily small interval, but not a single point. Accordingly, the necessary condition of extremum (functional derivative equal zero) appears in a weak formulation (variational form) integrated with an arbitrary function 
 
 
 
 . The fundamental lemma of the calculus of variations is typically used to transform this weak formulation into the strong formulation (differential equation), free of the integration with arbitrary function. The proof usually exploits the possibility to choose 
 
 
 
  concentrated on an interval on which 
 
 
 
  keeps sign (positive or negative). Several versions of the lemma are in use. Basic versions are easy to formulate and prove. More powerful versions are used when needed.
Basic version

If a continuous function f on an open interval (a,b) satisfies the equality
 
 



for all compactly supported smooth functions h on (a,b), then f is identically zero.12


Here "smooth" may be interpreted as "infinitely differentiable",3 but often is interpreted as "twice continuously differentiable" or "continuously differentiable" or even just "continuous",4 since these weaker statements may be strong enough for a given task. "Compactly supported" means "vanishes outside [c,d] for some c,d such that a but often a weaker statement suffices, assuming only that h (or h and a number of its derivatives) vanishes at the endpoints a, b;5 in this case the closed interval [a,b] is used.
Version for two given functions

If a pair of continuous functions f, g on an interval (a,b) satisfies the equality
 
 



for all compactly supported smooth functions h on (a,b), then g is differentiable, and g' = f everywhere.67


The special case for g = 0 is just the basic version.
Here is the special case for f = 0 (often sufficient).

If a continuous function g on an interval (a,b) satisfies the equality
 
 



for all compactly supported smooth functions h on (a,b), then g is constant.8


If, in addition, continuous differentiability of g is assumed, then integration by parts reduces both statements to the basic version; this case is attributed to Joseph-Louis Lagrange, while the proof of differentiability of g is due to Paul du Bois-Reymond.
Versions for discontinuous functions
The given functions (f, g) may be discontinuous, provided that they are locally integrable (on the given interval). In this case, Lebesgue integration is meant, the conclusions hold almost everywhere (thus, in all continuity points), and differentiability of g is interpreted as local absolute continuity (rather than continuous differentiability).9 Sometimes the given functions are assumed to be piecewise continuous, in which case Riemann integration suffices, and the conclusions are stated everywhere except the finite set of discontinuity points.10
Higher derivatives

If a tuple of continuous functions 
 
 
 
  on an interval (a,b) satisfies the equality
 
 



for all compactly supported smooth functions h on (a,b), then there exist continuously differentiable functions 
 
 
 
  on (a,b) such that
 
 



everywhere.11


This necessary condition is also sufficient, since the integrand becomes 
 
 

The case n = 1 is just the version for two given functions, since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  thus, 
 
 

In contrast, the case n=2 does not lead to the relation 
 
 
 
  since the function 
 
 
 
  need not be differentiable twice. The sufficient condition 
 
 
 
  is not necessary. Rather, the necessary and sufficient condition may be written as 
 
 
 
  for n=2, 
 
 
 
  for n=3, and so on; in general, the brackets cannot be opened because of non-differentiability.
Vector-valued functions
Generalization to vector-valued functions

 
  is straightforward; one applies the results for scalar functions to each coordinate separately,12 or treats the vector-valued case from the beginning.13
Multivariable functions

If a continuous multivariable function f on an open set 
 
 
 
  satisfies the equality
 
 



for all compactly supported smooth functions h on Ω, then f is identically zero.
 

Similarly to the basic version, one may consider a continuous function f on the closure of Ω, assuming that h vanishes on the boundary of Ω (rather than compactly supported).14
Here is a version for discontinuous multivariable functions.

Let 
 
 
 
  be an open set, and 
 
 
 
  satisfy the equality
 
 



for all compactly supported smooth functions h on Ω. Then f=0 (in L2, that is, almost everywhere).15


Applications
This lemma is used to prove that extrema of the functional


 
  are weak solutions

 
  (for an appropriate vector space 
 
 
 
 ) of the Euler–Lagrange equation


 
  The Euler–Lagrange equation plays a prominent role in classical mechanics and differential geometry.
Notes


References



(transl. from Russian).


"
Category:Classical mechanics Category:Calculus of variations Category:Smooth functions Category:Lemmas Calculus of variations
















; the proof applies in both situations.





