


Routh–Hurwitz theorem




Routh–Hurwitz theorem

In mathematics, the Routh–Hurwitz theorem gives a test to determine whether all roots of a given polynomial lie in the left half-plane. Polynomials with this property are called Hurwitz-stable. The Routh–Hurwitz theorem was proved in 1895, and it was named after Edward John Routh and Adolf Hurwitz. It is used in the Routh–Hurwitz stability criterion.
Notations
Let f(z) be a polynomial (with complex coefficients) of degree n with no roots on the imaginary line (i.e. the line Z = ic where i is the imaginary unit and c is a real number). Let us define 
 
 
 
  (a polynomial of degree n) and 
 
 
 
  (a nonzero polynomial of degree strictly less than n) by 
 
 
 
 , respectively the real and imaginary parts of f on the imaginary line.
Furthermore, let us denote by:

p the number of roots of f in the left half-plane (taking into account multiplicities);
q the number of roots of f in the right half-plane (taking into account multiplicities);


 
  the variation of the argument of f(iy) when y runs from −∞ to +∞;
(x) is the number of variations of the generalized Sturm chain obtained from 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  by applying the Euclidean algorithm;


 
  is the Cauchy index of the rational function r over the real line.

Statement
With the notations introduced above, the Routh–Hurwitz theorem states that:



From the first equality we can for instance conclude that when the variation of the argument of f(iy) is positive, then f(z) will have more roots to the left of the imaginary axis than to its right. The equality p − q = w(+∞) − w(−∞) can be viewed as the complex counterpart of Sturm's theorem. Note the differences: in Sturm's theorem, the left member is p + q and the w from the right member is the number of variations of a Sturm chain (while w refers to a generalized Sturm chain in the present theorem).
Routh–Hurwitz stability criterion
We can easily determine a stability criterion using this theorem as it is trivial that f(z) is Hurwitz-stable iff p − q = n. We thus obtain conditions on the coefficients of f(z) by imposing w(+∞) = n and w(−∞) = 0.
References






External links

Mathworld entry

"
Category:Polynomials Category:Theorems in complex analysis Category:Theorems in real analysis


