   Portal:Gravitation/Mass      Portal:Gravitation/Mass   We can distinguish several meanings for mass in physics :   Inertial mass is a measure of an object's inertia : its resistance to changing its state of motion when a force is applied. An object with small inertial mass changes its motion more readily, and an object with large inertial mass does so less readily. Now we know that this mass is actually a measure of the total energy of the object and is equal    E  /   c  2       E   superscript  c  2     E/c^{2}   , where E is total energy of the object and c is speed of light in a vacuum. Not only inertial but also all gravitational effects regarding this object are proportional to the object's inertial mass and that's why it is exactly the same as "gravitational mass", "passive" and "active". Before discovery of Einstein's theory of gravitation the "gravitational masses" were considered separate physical entities.  Passive gravitational mass is a measure of the strength of an object's interaction with the gravitational field . Within the same gravitational field, an object with a smaller passive gravitational mass experiences a smaller gravitational force than an object with a larger passive gravitational mass. This force is called the weight of the object. In informal usage, the word "weight" is often used synonymously with "mass", because the strength of the gravitational field is roughly constant everywhere on the surface of the Earth . In physics, the two terms are distinct: an object will have a larger weight if it is placed in a stronger gravitational field, but its passive "gravitational mass" (inertial mass) remains unchanged.  Active gravitational mass is a measure of the strength of the gravitational field due to a particular object. For example, the gravitational field that one experiences on the Moon is weaker than that of the Earth because the Moon has less "active gravitational mass" than the Earth.  Note that Einstein wrote, in his paper on General Relativity that inertial mass and gravitational mass must be equivalent. "We see that our extension of the principle of relativity implies the necessity of the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass."-Einstein (1916)   The amount of matter in an object.  A side-effect of the interaction between Higgs' Bosons ."    