


MV-algebra




MV-algebra

In abstract algebra, a branch of pure mathematics, an MV-algebra is an algebraic structure with a binary operation

 
 , a unary operation

 
 , and the constant 
 
 
 
 , satisfying certain axioms. MV-algebras are the algebraic semantics of Łukasiewicz logic; the letters MV refer to the many-valued logic of Łukasiewicz. MV-algebras coincide with the class of bounded commutative BCK algebras.
Definitions
An MV-algebra is an algebraic structure

 
  consisting of

a non-empty set


a binary operation

 
  on 
 
 

a unary operation

 
  on 
 
 
 
  and
a constant 
 
 
 
  denoting a fixed element of 
 
 


which satisfies the following identities:















 
  and




By virtue of the first three axioms, 
 
 
 
  is a commutative monoid. Being defined by identities, MV-algebras form a variety of algebras. The variety of MV-algebras is a subvariety of the variety of BL-algebras and contains all Boolean algebras.
An MV-algebra can equivalently be defined (Hájek 1998) as a prelinear commutative bounded integral residuated lattice

 
  satisfying the additional identity 
 
 

Examples of MV-algebras
A simple numerical example is 
 
 
 
  with operations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  In mathematical fuzzy logic, this MV-algebra is called the standard MV-algebra, as it forms the standard real-valued semantics of Łukasiewicz logic.
The trivial MV-algebra has the only element 0 and the operations defined in the only possible way, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

The two-element MV-algebra is actually the two-element Boolean algebra

 
  with 
 
 
 
  coinciding with Boolean disjunction and 
 
 
 
  with Boolean negation. In fact adding the axiom 
 
 
 
  to the axioms defining an MV-algebra results in an axiomantization of Boolean algebras.
If instead the axiom added is 
 
 
 
 , then the axioms define the MV3 algebra corresponding to the three-valued Łukasiewicz logic Ł3. Other finite linearly ordered MV-algebras are obtained by restricting the universe and operations of the standard MV-algebra to the set of 
 
 
 
  equidistant real numbers between 0 and 1 (both included), that is, the set 
 
 
 
  which is closed under the operations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the standard MV-algebra; these algebras are usually denoted MVn.
Another important example is Chang's MV-algebra, consisting just of infinitesimals (with the order type ω) and their co-infinitesimals.
Chang also constructed an MV-algebra from an arbitrary totally ordered abelian group G by fixing a positive element u and defining the segment [0, u] as { x ∈ G | 0 ≤ x ≤ u }, which becomes an MV-algebra with x ⊕ y = min(u, x+y) and ¬x = u−x. Furthermore, Chang showed that every linearly ordered MV-algebra is isomorphic to an MV-algebra constructed from a group in this way.
D. Mundici extended the above construction to abelian lattice-ordered groups. If G is such a group with strong (order) unit u, then the "unit interval" { x ∈ G | 0 ≤ x ≤ u } can be equipped with ¬x = u−x, x ⊕ y = u∧G (x+y), x ⊗ y = 0∨G(x+y−u). This construction establishes a categorical equivalence between lattice-ordered abelian groups with strong unit and MV-algebras.
Relation to Łukasiewicz logic
C. C. Chang devised MV-algebras to study many-valued logics, introduced by Jan Łukasiewicz in 1920. In particular, MV-algebras form the algebraic semantics of Łukasiewicz logic, as described below.
Given an MV-algebra A, an A-valuation is a homomorphism from the algebra of propositional formulas (in the language consisting of 
 
 
 
  and 0) into A. Formulas mapped to 1 (or 
 
 
 
 0) for all A-valuations are called A-tautologies. If the standard MV-algebra over [0,1] is employed, the set of all [0,1]-tautologies determines so-called infinite-valued Łukasiewicz logic.
Chang's (1958, 1959) completeness theorem states that any MV-algebra equation holding in the standard MV-algebra over the interval [0,1] will hold in every MV-algebra. Algebraically, this means that the standard MV-algebra generates the variety of all MV-algebras. Equivalently, Chang's completeness theorem says that MV-algebras characterize infinite-valued Łukasiewicz logic, defined as the set of [0,1]-tautologies.
The way the [0,1] MV-algebra characterizes all possible MV-algebras parallels the well-known fact that identities holding in the two-element Boolean algebra hold in all possible Boolean algebras. Moreover, MV-algebras characterize infinite-valued Łukasiewicz logic in a manner analogous to the way that Boolean algebras characterize classical bivalent logic (see Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra).
In 1984, Font, Rodriguez and Torrens introduced the Wajsberg algebra as an alternative model for the infinite-valued Łukasiewicz logic. Wajsberg algebras and MV-algebras are isomorphic.1
MVn-algebras
In the 1940s Grigore Moisil introduced his Łukasiewicz–Moisil algebras (LMn-algebras) in the hope of giving algebraic semantics for the (finitely) n-valued Łukasiewicz logic. However, in 1956 Alan Rose discovered that for n ≥ 5, the Łukasiewicz–Moisil algebra does not model the Łukasiewicz n-valued logic. Although C. C. Chang published his MV-algebra in 1958, it is faithful model only for the ℵ0-valued (infinitely-many-valued) Łukasiewicz–Tarski logic. For the axiomatically more complicated (finitely) n-valued Łukasiewicz logics, suitable algebras were published in 1977 by Revaz Grigolia and called MVn-algebras.2 MVn-algebras are a subclass of LMn-algebras; the inclusion is strict for n ≥ 5.3
The MVn-algebras are MV-algebras which satisfy some additional axioms, just like the n-valued Łukasiewicz logics have additional axioms added to the ℵ0-valued logic.
In 1982 Roberto Cignoli published some additional constraints that added to LMn-algebras are proper models for n-valued Łukasiewicz logic; Cignoli called his discovery ''proper n-valued Łukasiewicz algebras''.4 The LMn-algebras that are also MVn-algebras are precisely Cignoli’s proper n-valued Łukasiewicz algebras.5
Relation to functional analysis
MV-algebras were related by Daniele Mundici to approximately finite-dimensional C*-algebras by establishing a bijective correspondence between all isomorphism classes of AF C*-algebras with lattice-ordered dimension group and all isomorphism classes of countable MV algebras. Some instances of this correspondence include:




Countable MV algebra

AF C*-algebra





{0, 1}

ℂ



{0, 1/n, ..., 1 }

Mn(ℂ), i.e. n×n complex matrices



finite

finite-dimensional



boolean

commutative



In software
There are multiple frameworks implementing fuzzy logic (type II), and most of them implement what has been called a multi-adjoint logic. This is no more than the implementation of a MV-algebra.
References

Chang, C. C. (1958) "Algebraic analysis of many-valued logics," Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 88: 476–490.
------ (1959) "A new proof of the completeness of the Lukasiewicz axioms," Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 88: 74–80.
Cignoli, R. L. O., D'Ottaviano, I. M. L., Mundici, D. (2000) Algebraic Foundations of Many-valued Reasoning. Kluwer.
Di Nola A., Lettieri A. (1993) "Equational characterization of all varieties of MV-algebras," Journal of Algebra 221: 123–131.
Hájek, Petr (1998) Metamathematics of Fuzzy Logic. Kluwer.
Mundici, D.: Interpretation of AF C*-algebras in Łukasiewicz sentential calculus. J. Funct. Anal. 65, 15–63 (1986) 

Further reading

Daniele Mundici, MV-ALGEBRAS. A short tutorial

Mundici, D. The C*-Algebras of Three-Valued Logic. Logic Colloquium ’88, Proceedings of the Colloquium held in Padova 61–77 (1989). 
Cabrer, L. M. & Mundici, D. A Stone-Weierstrass theorem for MV-algebras and unital ℓ-groups. Journal of Logic and Computation (2014). 
Olivia Caramello, Anna Carla Russo (2014) The Morita-equivalence between MV-algebras and abelian ℓ-groups with strong unit

External links

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Many-valued logic"—by Siegfried Gottwald.

"
Category:Algebraic logic Category:Algebraic structures Category:Fuzzy logic Category:Many-valued logic



http://journal.univagora.ro/download/pdf/28.pdf citing J. M. Font, A. J. Rodriguez, A. Torrens, Wajsberg Algebras, Stochastica, VIII, 1, 5-31, 1984

Iorgulescu, A.: Connections between MVn-algebras and n-valued Łukasiewicz–Moisil algebras—I. Discrete Math. 181, 155–177 (1998) 
R. Cignoli, Proper n-Valued Łukasiewicz Algebras as S-Algebras of Łukasiewicz n-Valued Propositional Calculi, Studia Logica, 41, 1982, 3-16, 
http://journal.univagora.ro/download/pdf/28.pdf




