


Plurisubharmonic function




Plurisubharmonic function

In mathematics, plurisubharmonic functions (sometimes abbreviated as psh, plsh, or plush functions) form an important class of functions used in complex analysis. On a Kähler manifold, plurisubharmonic functions form a subset of the subharmonic functions. However, unlike subharmonic functions (which are defined on a Riemannian manifold) plurisubharmonic functions can be defined in full generality on complex analytic spaces.
Formal definition
A function


 
  with domain

 
  is called plurisubharmonic if it is upper semi-continuous, and for every complex line


 
  with 
 
 

the function 
 
 
 
  is a subharmonic function on the set



In full generality, the notion can be defined on an arbitrary complex manifold or even a Complex analytic space

 
  as follows. An upper semi-continuous function


 
  is said to be plurisubharmonic if and only if for any holomorphic map

 
  the function


 
  is subharmonic, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the unit disk.
Differentiable plurisubharmonic functions
If 
 
 
 
  is of (differentiability) class 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic if and only if the hermitian matrix 
 
 
 
 , called Levi matrix, with entries



is positive semidefinite.
Equivalently, a 
 
 
 
 -function f is plurisubharmonic if and only if 
 
 
 
  is a positive (1,1)-form.
Examples
Relation to Kähler manifold: On n-dimensional complex Euclidean space 
 
 
 
  , 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic. In fact, 
 
 
 
  is equal to the standard Kähler form on 
 
 
 
 　 up to constant multiplies. More generally, if 
 
 
 
  satisfies








for some Kähler form 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic, which is called Kähler potential.
Relation to Dirac Delta: On 1-dimensional complex Euclidean space 
 
 
 
  , 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic. If 
 
 
 
  is a C∞-class function with compact support, then Cauchy integral formula says








which can be modified to




 
 .
 



It is nothing but Dirac measure at the origin 0 .
History
Plurisubharmonic functions were defined in 1942 by Kiyoshi Oka 1 and Pierre Lelong. 2
Properties

The set of plurisubharmonic functions form a convex cone in the vector space of semicontinuous functions, i.e.

:* if 
 
 
 
  is a plurisubharmonic function and 
 
 
 
  a positive real number, then the function 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic,
:* if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are plurisubharmonic functions, then the sum 
 
 
 
  is a plurisubharmonic function.

Plurisubharmonicity is a local property, i.e. a function is plurisubharmonic if and only if it is plurisubharmonic in a neighborhood of each point.
If 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic and 
 
 
 
  a monotonically increasing, convex function then 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic.
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are plurisubharmonic functions, then the function 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic.
If 
 
 
 
  is a monotonically decreasing sequence of plurisubharmonic functions

then 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic.

Every continuous plurisubharmonic function can be obtained as the limit of a monotonically decreasing sequence of smooth plurisubharmonic functions. Moreover, this sequence can be chosen uniformly convergent.3
The inequality in the usual semi-continuity condition holds as equality, i.e. if 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic then




(see limit superior and limit inferior for the definition of lim sup).

Plurisubharmonic functions are subharmonic, for any Kähler metric.


Therefore, plurisubharmonic functions satisfy the maximum principle, i.e. if 
 
 
 
  is plurisubharmonic on the connected open domain 
 
 
 
  and




for some point 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is constant.
Applications
In complex analysis, plurisubharmonic functions are used to describe pseudoconvex domains, domains of holomorphy and Stein manifolds.
Oka theorem
The main geometric application of the theory of plurisubharmonic functions is the famous theorem proven by Kiyoshi Oka in 1942. 4
A continuous function 
 
 
 
  is called exhaustive if the preimage 
 
 
 
  is compact for all 
 
 
 
 . A plurisubharmonic function f is called strongly plurisubharmonic if the form 
 
 
 
  is positive, for some Kähler form

 
  on M.
Theorem of Oka: Let M be a complex manifold, admitting a smooth, exhaustive, strongly plurisubharmonic function. Then M is Stein. Conversely, any Stein manifold admits such a function.
References

Steven G. Krantz. Function Theory of Several Complex Variables, AMS Chelsea Publishing, Providence, Rhode Island, 1992.
Robert C. Gunning. Introduction to Holomorphic Functions in Several Variables, Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole.

External links



Notes


"
Category:Subharmonic functions Category:Several complex variables



K. Oka, Domaines pseudoconvexes, Tohoku Math. J. 49 (1942), 15–52.↩
P. Lelong, Definition des fonctions plurisousharmoniques, C. R. Acd. Sci. Paris 215 (1942), 398–400.↩
R. E. Greene and H. Wu, 

 
 -approximations of convex, subharmonic, and plurisubharmonic functions, Ann. Scient. Ec. Norm. Sup. 12 (1979), 47–84.↩
K. Oka, Domaines pseudoconvexes, Tohoku Math. J. 49 (1942), 15-52.↩




