


Popular mathematics




Popular mathematics

Popular mathematics is mathematical presentation aimed at a general audience. Sometimes this is in the form of books which require no mathematical background and in other cases it is in the form of expository articles written by professional mathematicians to reach out to others working in different areas.
Books
Some of the most prolific popularisers of mathematics include Keith Devlin, Martin Gardner and Ian Stewart. Titles by these three authors can be found on their respective pages.
On zero




On infinity




On constants






On complex numbers




On the Riemann hypothesis






On recently solved problems







On classification of finite simple groups




Biographies





Magazines and journals

Popular science magazines such as New Scientist and Scientific American sometimes carry articles on mathematics.
Plus Magazine is a free online magazine run under the Millennium Mathematics Project at the University of Cambridge.

The journals listed below can be found in many university libraries.

American Mathematical Monthly is designed to be accessible to a wide audience.
The Mathematical Gazette contains letters, book reviews and expositions of attractive areas of mathematics.
Mathematics Magazine offers lively, readable, and appealing exposition on a wide range of mathematical topics.
The Mathematical Intelligencer is a mathematical journal that aims at a conversational and scholarly tone.
Notices of the AMS - Each issue contains one or two expository articles that describe current developments in mathematical research, written by professional mathematicians. The Notices also carries articles on the history of mathematics, mathematics education, and professional issues facing mathematicians, as well as reviews of books, plays, movies, and other artistic and cultural works involving mathematics.

Audio and video

Simon Singh's Fermat's Last Theorem is available in audio and there is also a Horizon television program.

Museums
Several museums aim at enhancing public understanding of mathematics:
In the United States:

Museum of Mathematics, New York, and its predecessor, the Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science,

In Austria:


, Wien

In Germany:

Arithmeum, Bonn

, Dresden
Mathematikum, Gießen

, Frankfurt on Main

, Freiberg

, Oberwolfach

"
Category:Mathematics and culture Category:Mathematics literature Category:Recreational mathematics Mathematics


