


Dynkin system




Dynkin system

A Dynkin system, named after Eugene Dynkin, is a collection of subsets of another universal set

 
  satisfying a set of axioms weaker than those of σ-algebra. Dynkin systems are sometimes referred to as λ-systems (Dynkin himself used this term) or d-system.1 These set families have applications in measure theory and probability.
The primary relevance of λ-systems are their use in applications of the π-λ theorem.
Definitions
Let Ω be a nonempty set, and let 
 
 
 
  be a collection of subsets of Ω (i.e., 
 
 
 
  is a subset of the power set of Ω). Then 
 
 
 
  is a Dynkin system if

Ω ∈ 
 
 
 
 ,
if A, B ∈ 
 
 
 
  and A ⊆ B, then B \ A ∈ 
 
 
 
 ,
if A1, A2, A3, ... is a sequence of subsets in 
 
 
 
  and An ⊆ An+1 for all n ≥ 1, then 
 
 
 
 .

Equivalently, 
 
 
 
  is a Dynkin system if

Ω ∈ 
 
 
 
 ,
if A ∈ D, then Ac ∈ D,
if A1, A2, A3, ... is a sequence of subsets in 
 
 
 
  such that Ai ∩ Aj = Ø for all i ≠ j, then 
 
 
 
 .

The second definition is generally preferred as it usually is easier to check.
An important fact is that a Dynkin system which is also a π-system (i.e., closed under finite intersection) is a σ-algebra. This can be verified by noting that condition 3 and closure under finite intersection implies closure under countable unions.
Given any collection 
 
 
 
  of subsets of 
 
 
 
 , there exists a unique Dynkin system denoted 
 
 
 
  which is minimal with respect to containing 
 
 
 
 . That is, if 
 
 
 
  is any Dynkin system containing 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is called the Dynkin system generated by 
 
 
 
 . Note 
 
 
 
 . For another example, let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ; then 
 
 
 
 .
Dynkin's π-λ theorem
If 
 
 
 
  is a π-system and 
 
 
 
  is a Dynkin system with 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . In other words, the σ-algebra generated by 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
 .
One application of Dynkin's π-λ theorem is the uniqueness of a measure that evaluates the length of an interval (known as the Lebesgue measure):
Let (Ω, B, λ) be the unit interval [0,1] with the Lebesgue measure on Borel sets. Let μ be another measure on Ω satisfying μ[(a,b)] = b − a, and let D be the family of sets S such that μ[S] = λ[S]. Let I = { (a,b),[a,b),(a,b],[a,b] : 0 
References





"
Category:Set families Category:Probability theory Category:Lemmas








