


Sherman–Morrison formula




Sherman–Morrison formula

In mathematics, in particular linear algebra, the Sherman–Morrison formula,123 named after Jack Sherman and Winifred J. Morrison, computes the inverse of the sum of an invertible matrix

 
  and the outer product, 
 
 
 
 , of vectors

 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . The Sherman–Morrison formula is a special case of the Woodbury formula. Though named after Sherman and Morrison, it appeared already in earlier publications.4
Statement
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is an invertible square matrix and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are column vectors. Suppose furthermore that 
 
 
 
 . Then the Sherman–Morrison formula states that



Here, 
 
 
 
  is the outer product of two vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The general form shown here is the one published by Bartlett.5
Application
If the inverse of 
 
 
 
  is already known, the formula provides a numerically cheap way to compute the inverse of 
 
 
 
 
  corrected by the matrix 
 
 
 
  (depending on the point of view, the correction may be seen as a perturbation or as a rank-1 update). The computation is relatively cheap because the inverse of 
 
 
 
  does not have to be computed from scratch (which in general is expensive), but can be computed by correcting (or perturbing) 
 
 
 
 .
Using unit columns (columns from the identity matrix) for 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 
 , individual columns or rows of 
 
 
 
  may be manipulated and a correspondingly updated inverse computed relatively cheaply in this way.6 In the general case, where 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  times 
 
 
 
  matrix and 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are arbitrary vectors of dimension 
 
 
 
 , the whole matrix is updated7 and the computation takes 
 
 
 
  scalar multiplications.8 If 
 
 
 
  is a unit column, the computation takes only 
 
 
 
 
  scalar multiplications. The same goes if 
 
 
 
  is a unit column. If both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are unit columns, the computation takes only 
 
 
 
  scalar multiplications.
Verification
We verify the properties of the inverse. A matrix 
 
 
 
 
  (in this case the right-hand side of the Sherman–Morrison formula) is the inverse of a matrix 
 
 
 
  (in this case 
 
 
 
 ) if and only if 
 
 
 
 .
We first verify that the right hand side (
 
 
 
 ) satisfies 
 
 
 
 
 .



























Note that 
 
 
 
 
  is a scalar, so 
 
 
 
  can be factored out, leading to:



In the same way, it is verified that



Following is an alternate verification of the Sherman–Morrison formula using the easily verifiable identity



Let 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then



Substituting 
 
 
 
  gives



See also

The matrix determinant lemma performs a rank-1 update to a determinant.
Woodbury matrix identity
Quasi-Newton method
Binomial inverse theorem
Bunch–Nielsen–Sorensen formula

References
External links



"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Matrix theory








Langville, Amy N.; and Meyer, Carl D.; "Google's PageRank and Beyond: The Science of Search Engine Rankings", Princeton University Press, 2006, p. 156

Update of the inverse matrix by the Sherman–Morrison formula




