


Leibniz integral rule




Leibniz integral rule

In calculus, Leibniz's rule for differentiation under the integral sign, named after Gottfried Leibniz, tells us that if we have an integral of the form



then for x in (x0, x1) the derivative of this integral is thus expressible



provided that f and its partial derivative'' fx'' are both continuous over a region in the form [x0, x1] × [y0, y1].
Thus under certain conditions, one may interchange the integral and partial differential operators. This important result is particularly useful in the differentiation of integral transforms. An example of such is the moment generating function in probability theory, a variation of the Laplace transform, which can be differentiated to generate the moments of a random variable. Whether Leibniz's integral rule applies is essentially a question about the interchange of limits.
Formal statement
Let f(x, θ) be a function such that fθ(x, θ) exists, and is continuous. Then,



where the partial derivative of f indicates that inside the integral only the variation of f(x, ) with θ is considered in taking the derivative.
Three-dimensional, time-dependent case
 A Leibniz integral rule for three dimensions is:1



where:


F(r, t) is a vector field at the spatial position r at time t

Σ is a moving surface in three-space bounded by the closed curve ∂Σ
 
dA is a vector element of the surface Σ
 
ds is a vector element of the curve ∂Σ
 
v is the velocity of movement of the region Σ
 
∇⋅ is the vector divergence

× is the vector cross product

The double integrals are surface integrals over the surface Σ, and the line integral is over the bounding curve ∂Σ.
 



Measure theory statement
Let 
 
 
 
  be an open subset of 
 
 
 
  , and 
 
 
 
  be a measure space. Suppose 
 
 
 
  satisfies the following conditions:


(1) 
 
 
 
  is a Lebesgue-integrable function of 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 






(2) For almost all 
 
 
 
  , the derivative 
 
 
 
  exists for all 
 
 






(3) There is an integrable function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and almost every 
 
 




Then for all 
 
 









Proofs
Proof of basic form
Let:
So that, using difference quotients ——— Substitute equation (1) into equation (2), combine the integrals (since the difference of two integrals equals the integral of the difference) and use the fact that 1/h is a constant:



Provided that the limit can be passed under the integral sign, we obtain



We claim that the passage of the limit under the integral sign is valid. Indeed, the bounded convergence theorem (a corollary of the dominated convergence theorem) of real analysis states that if a sequence of functions on a set of finite measure is uniformly bounded and converges pointwise, then passage of the limit under the integral is valid. To complete the proof, we show that these hypotheses are satisfied by the family of difference quotients



Continuity of fx(x, y) and compactness implies that fx(x, y) is uniformly bounded. Uniform boundedness of the difference quotients follows from uniform boundedness of fx(x, y) and the mean value theorem, since for all y and n, there exists z in the interval [x, x + 1/n] such that



The difference quotients converge pointwise to fx(x, y) since fx(x, y) exists. This completes the proof.
For a simpler proof using Fubini's theorem, see the references.
Variable limits form
For a monovariant function g:



This follows from the chain rule.
General form with variable limits
Now, set



where a and b are functions of α that exhibit increments Δa and Δb, respectively, when α is increased by Δα. Then,



A form of the mean value theorem, 
 
 
 
 , where a \Delta\varphi = -\Delta a f(\xi_1, \alpha + \Delta\alpha) + \int_a^b [f(x, \alpha + \Delta\alpha) - f(x,\alpha)]\,\mathrm{d}x + \Delta b f(\xi_2, \alpha + \Delta\alpha)
Dividing by Δα, and letting Δα → 0, and noticing ξ1 → a and ξ2 → b and using the result



yields the general form of the Leibniz integral rule below:



Three-dimensional, time-dependent form
At time t the surface Σ in Figure 1 contains a set of points arranged about a centroid C(t) and function F(r, t) can be written as F(C(t) + r − C(t), t) = F(C(t) + I, t), with I independent of time. Variables are shifted to a new frame of reference attached to the moving surface, with origin at C(t). For a rigidly translating surface, the limits of integration are then independent of time, so:



where the limits of integration confining the integral to the region Σ no longer are time dependent so differentiation passes through the integration to act on the integrand only:



with the velocity of motion of the surface defined by:



This equation expresses the material derivative of the field, that is, the derivative with respect to a coordinate system attached to the moving surface. Having found the derivative, variables can be switched back to the original frame of reference. We notice that (see article on ''' curl '''):



and that Stokes theorem allows the surface integral of the curl over Σ to be made a line integral over ∂Σ:



The sign of the line integral is based on the right-hand rule for the choice of direction of line element ds. To establish this sign, for example, suppose the field F points in the positive z-direction, and the surface Σ is a portion of the xy-plane with perimeter ∂Σ. We adopt the normal to Σ to be in the positive z-direction. Positive traversal of ∂Σ is then counterclockwise (right-hand rule with thumb along z-axis). Then the integral on the left-hand side determines a positive flux of F through Σ. Suppose Σ translates in the positive x-direction at velocity v. An element of the boundary of Σ parallel to the y-axis, say ds, sweeps out an area vt × ds in time t. If we integrate around the boundary ∂Σ in a counterclockwise sense, vt × ds points in the negative z-direction on the left side of ∂Σ (where ds points downward), and in the positive z-direction on the right side of ∂Σ (where ds points upward), which makes sense because Σ is moving to the right, adding area on the right and losing it on the left. On that basis, the flux of F is increasing on the right of ∂Σ and decreasing on the left. However, the dot-product v × F • ds = −F × v • ds = −F • v × ds. Consequently, the sign of the line integral is taken as negative.
If v is a constant,



which is the quoted result. This proof does not consider the possibility of the surface deforming as it moves.
See also

Chain rule
Leibniz rule (generalized product rule)
Differentiation under the integral sign
Reynolds transport theorem a generalization of Leibniz rule

References and notes
External links

"The Leibniz Rule" by Rob Harron

"
Category:Gottfried Leibniz Category:Multivariable calculus Category:Integral calculus Category:Articles containing proofs








