


Bernoulli scheme




Bernoulli scheme
In [[mathematics]], the '''Bernoulli scheme''' or '''Bernoulli shift''' is a generalization of the [[Bernoulli process]] to more than two possible outcomes.P. Shields, ''The theory of Bernoulli shifts'', Univ. Chicago Press  (1973)Michael S. Keane, "Ergodic theory and subshifts of finite type", (19
 91), appearing as Chapter 2 in Ergodic Theory, Symbolic Dynamics and Hyperbolic Spaces, Tim Bedford, Michael Keane and Caroline Series, Eds. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1991). ISBN 0-19-853390-X Bernoulli schemes are important in the study of dynamical systems, as most such systems (such as Axiom A systems) exhibit a repellor that is the product of the Cantor set and a smooth manifold, and the dynamics on the Cantor set are isomorphic to that of the Bernoulli shift.1 This is essentially the Markov partition. The term shift is in reference to the shift operator, which may be used to study Bernoulli schemes. The Ornstein isomorphism theorem2 shows that Bernoulli shifts are isomorphic when their entropy is equal.
Definition
A Bernoulli scheme is a discrete-time stochastic process where each independent random variable may take on one of N distinct possible values, with the outcome i occurring with probability 
 
 
 
 , with i = 1, ..., N, and



The sample space is usually denoted as



as a shorthand for



The associated measure is called the Bernoulli measure3



The σ-algebra

 
  on X is the product sigma algebra; that is, it is the (countable) direct product of the σ-algebras of the finite set {1, ..., N}. Thus, the triplet



is a measure space. A basis of 
 
 
 
  is the cylinder sets. Given a cylinder set 
 
 
 
 , its measure is


 
  The equivalent expression, using the notation of probability theory, is


 
  for the random variables 
 
 

The Bernoulli scheme, as any stochastic process, may be viewed as a dynamical system by endowing it with the shift operator T where



Since the outcomes are independent, the shift preserves the measure, and thus T is a measure-preserving transformation. The quadruplet



is a measure-preserving dynamical system, and is called a Bernoulli scheme or a Bernoulli shift. It is often denoted by



The N = 2 Bernoulli scheme is called a Bernoulli process. The Bernoulli shift can be understood as a special case of the Markov shift, where all entries in the adjacency matrix are one, the corresponding graph thus being a clique.
Generalizations
Most of the properties of the Bernoulli scheme follow from the countable direct product, rather than from the finite base space. Thus, one may take the base space to be any standard probability space

 
 , and define the Bernoulli scheme as


 
  This works because the countable direct product of a standard probability space is again a standard probability space.
As a further generalization, one may replace the in integers 
 
 
 
  by a countable discrete group

 
 , so that


 
  For this last case, the shift operator is replaced by the group action


 
  for group elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  understood as a function 
 
 
 
  (any direct product 
 
 
 
  can be understood to be the set of functions 
 
 
 
 , as this is the exponential object). The measure 
 
 
 
  is taken as the Haar measure, which is invariant under the group action:


 
  These generalizations are also commonly called Bernoulli schemes, as they still share most properties with the finite case.
Properties
Ya. Sinai demonstrated that the Kolmogorov entropy of a Bernoulli scheme is given by45



This may be seen as resulting from the general definition of the entropy of a Cartesian product of probability spaces, which follows from the asymptotic equipartition property. For the case of a general base space 
 
 
 
  (i.e. a base space which is not countable), one typically considers the relative entropy. So, for example, if one has a countable partition

 
  of the base Y, such that 
 
 
 
 , one may define the entropy as



In general, this entropy will depend on the partition; however, for many dynamical systems, it is the case that the symbolic dynamics is independent of the partition (or rather, there are isomorphisms connecting the symbolic dynamics of different partitions, leaving the measure invariant), and so such systems can have a well-defined entropy independent of the partition.
The Ornstein isomorphism theorem states that two Bernoulli schemes with the same entropy are isomorphic.6 The result is sharp,7 in that very similar, non-scheme systems, such as Kolmogorov automorphisms, do not have this property.
The Ornstein isomorphism theorem is in fact considerably deeper: it provides a simple criterion by which many different measure-preserving dynamical systems can be judged to be isomorphic to Bernoulli schemes. The result was surprising, as many systems previously believed to be unrelated proved to be isomorphic. These include all finite stationary stochastic processes, subshifts of finite type, finite Markov chains, Anosov flows, and Sinai's billiards: these are all isomorphic to Bernoulli schemes.
For the generalized case, the Ornstein isomorphism theorem still holds if the group G is a countably infinite amenable group. 89
Bernoulli automorphism
An invertible, measure-preserving transformation of a standard probability space (Lebesgue space) is called a Bernoulli automorphism if it isomorphic to a Bernoulli shift.10
See also

Shift of finite type
Markov chain
Hidden Bernoulli model

References


"
Category:Markov models Category:Ergodic theory Category:Stochastic processes Category:Symbolic dynamics



Pierre Gaspard, Chaos, scattering and statistical mechanics(1998), Cambridge University press↩
↩
↩
Ya.G. Sinai, (1959) "On the Notion of Entropy of a Dynamical System", Doklady of Russian Academy of Sciences 124, pp. 768–771.↩
Ya. G. Sinai, (2007) "Metric Entropy of Dynamical System"↩
Donald Ornstein, "Bernoulli shifts with the same entropy are isomorphic", Advances in Math. 4 (1970), pp.337–352↩
Christopher Hoffman, "A K counterexample machine", Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 351 (1999), pp 4263–4280↩
D. Ornstein and B. Weiss. "Entropy and isomorphism theorems for actions of amenable groups." J. Analyse Math. 48 (1987), pp. 1–141.↩
Lewis Bowen (2011), "Every countably infinite group is almost Ornstein", ArXiv abs/1103.4424↩
Peter Walters (1982) An Introduction to Ergodic Theory, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-90599-5↩




