


Banach limit




Banach limit

In mathematical analysis, a Banach limit is a continuous linear functional

 
  defined on the Banach space

 
  of all bounded complex-valued sequences such that for all sequences 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , and complex numbers 
 
 
 
 :



 
  (linearity);
if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  (positivity);


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the shift operator defined by 
 
 
 
  (shift-invariance);
if 
 
 
 
  is a convergent sequence, then 
 
 
 
 .

Hence, 
 
 
 
  is an extension of the continuous functional 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the complex vector space of all sequences with converge to a (usual) limit in 
 
 
 
 .
In other words, a Banach limit extends the usual limits, is linear, shift-invariant and positive. However, there exist sequences for which the values of two Banach limits do not agree. We say that the Banach limit is not uniquely determined in this case.
As a consequence of the above properties, a Banach limit also satisfies:



The existence of Banach limits is usually proved using the Hahn–Banach theorem (analyst's approach), or using ultrafilters (this approach is more frequent in set-theoretical expositions). These proofs necessarily use the Axiom of choice (so called non-effective proof).
Almost convergence
There are non-convergent sequences which have a uniquely determined Banach limit. For example, if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a constant sequence, and



holds. Thus, for any Banach limit, this sequence has limit 
 
 
 
 .
A bounded sequence 
 
 
 
  with the property, that for every Banach limit 
 
 
 
  the value 
 
 
 
  is the same, is called almost convergent.
Ba spaces
Given a convergent sequence 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the ordinary limit of 
 
 
 
  does not arise from an element of 
 
 
 
 , if the duality 
 
 
 
  is considered. The latter means 
 
 
 
  is the continuous dual space (dual Banach space) of 
 
 
 
 , and consequently, 
 
 
 
  induces continuous linear functionals on 
 
 
 
 , but not all. Any Banach limit on 
 
 
 
  is an example of an element of the dual Banach space of 
 
 
 
  which is not in 
 
 
 
 . The dual of 
 
 
 
  is known as the ba space, and consists of all (signed) finitely additive measures on the sigma-algebra of all subsets of the natural numbers, or equivalently, all (signed) Borel measures on the Stone–Čech compactification of the natural numbers.
External links



"
Category:Functional analysis


