


Interval exchange transformation




Interval exchange transformation

 In mathematics, an interval exchange transformation1 is a kind of dynamical system that generalises circle rotation. The phase space consists of the unit interval, and the transformation acts by cutting the interval into several subintervals, and then permuting these subintervals.
Formal definition
Let 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be a permutation on 
 
 
 
 . Consider a vector

 
  of positive real numbers (the widths of the subintervals), satisfying



Define a map 
 
 
 
  called the interval exchange transformation associated to the pair 
 
 
 as follows. For 
 
 
 
  let



Then for 
 
 
 
 , define



if 
 
 
 
  lies in the subinterval 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  acts on each subinterval of the form 
 
 
 
  by a translation, and it rearranges these subintervals so that the subinterval at position 
 
 
 
  is moved to position 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
Any interval exchange transformation 
 
 
 
  is a bijection of 
 
 
 
  to itself preserves the Lebesgue measure. It is continuous except at a finite number of points.
The inverse of the interval exchange transformation 
 
 
 
  is again an interval exchange transformation. In fact, it is the transformation 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (in cycle notation), and if we join up the ends of the interval to make a circle, then 
 
 
 
  is just a circle rotation. The Weyl equidistribution theorem then asserts that if the length 
 
 
 
  is irrational, then 
 
 
 
  is uniquely ergodic. Roughly speaking, this means that the orbits of points of 
 
 
 
  are uniformly evenly distributed. On the other hand, if 
 
 
 
  is rational then each point of the interval is periodic, and the period is the denominator of 
 
 
 
  (written in lowest terms).
If 
 
 
 
 , and provided 
 
 
 
  satisfies certain non-degeneracy conditions (namely there is no integer 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 ), a deep theorem which was a conjecture of M.Keane and due independently to William A. Veech2 and to Howard Masur 3 asserts that for almost all choices of 
 
 
 
  in the unit simplex 
 
 
 
  the interval exchange transformation 
 
 
 
  is again uniquely ergodic. However, for 
 
 
 
  there also exist choices of 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  is ergodic but not uniquely ergodic. Even in these cases, the number of ergodic invariant measures of 
 
 
 
  is finite, and is at most 
 
 
 
 .
Generalizations
Two and higher-dimensional generalizations include polygon exchanges, polyhedral exchanges and piecewise isometries.4
Notes
References

Artur Avila and Giovanni Forni, Weak mixing for interval exchange transformations and translation flows, arXiv:math/0406326v1, http://arxiv.org/abs/math.DS/0406326

"
Category:Chaotic maps



.
.
.
Piecewise isometries – an emerging area of dynamical systems, Arek Goetz




