


Noncentral chi-squared distribution




Noncentral chi-squared distribution

\left( \sqrt{\lambda}, \sqrt{x} \right) with Marcum Q-function

 
  |
 mean       =

|
 median     =|
 mode       =|
 variance   =

|
 skewness   =

|
 kurtosis   =

|
 entropy    =|
 mgf        =

|
 char       =


}}
In probability theory and statistics, the noncentral chi-squared or noncentral 
 
 
 distribution is a generalization of the chi-squared distribution. This distribution often arises in the power analysis of statistical tests in which the null distribution is (perhaps asymptotically) a chi-squared distribution; important examples of such tests are the likelihood ratio tests.
Background
Let (
 
 
 
 , 
 
 


 
 ) be k independent, normally distributed random variables with means 
 
 
 
  and unit variances. Then the random variable



is distributed according to the noncentral chi-squared distribution. It has two parameters
 
 
 
  which specifies the number of degrees of freedom (i.e. the number of 
 
 
 
 ), and 
 
 
 
  which is related to the mean of the random variables 
 
 
 
  by:



 
  is sometimes called the noncentrality parameter. Note that some references define 
 
 
 
  in other ways, such as half of the above sum, or its square root.
This distribution arises in multivariate statistics as a derivative of the multivariate normal distribution. While the central chi-squared distribution is the squared norm of a random vector with 
 
 
 
  distribution (i.e., the squared distance from the origin of a point taken at random from that distribution), the non-central 
 
 
 
  is the squared norm of a random vector with 
 
 
 
  distribution. Here 
 
 
 
  is a zero vector of length k, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix of size k.
Definition
The probability density function (pdf) is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is distributed as chi-squared with 
 
 
 
  degrees of freedom.
From this representation, the noncentral chi-squared distribution is seen to be a Poisson-weighted mixture of central chi-squared distributions. Suppose that a random variable J has a Poisson distribution with mean 
 
 
 
 , and the conditional distribution of Z given 
 
 
 
  is chi-squared with k+2i degrees of freedom. Then the unconditional distribution of Z is non-central chi-squared with k degrees of freedom, and non-centrality parameter 
 
 
 
 .
Alternatively, the pdf can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is a modified Bessel function of the first kind given by



Using the relation between Bessel functions and hypergeometric functions, the pdf can also be written as:1



Siegel (1979) discusses the case k = 0 specifically (zero degrees of freedom), in which case the distribution has a discrete component at zero.
Properties
Moment generating function
The moment generating function is given by



Moments
The first few raw moments are:












The first few central moments are:









The nth cumulant is



Hence



Cumulative distribution function
Again using the relation between the central and noncentral chi-squared distributions, the cumulative distribution function (cdf) can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is the cumulative distribution function of the central chi-squared distribution with k degrees of freedom which is given by




and where 
 
 
 
  is the lower incomplete Gamma function.
 

The Marcum Q-function

 
  can also be used to represent the cdf.2



Approximation
Sankaran 3 discusses a number of closed form approximations for the cumulative distribution function. In an earlier paper,4 he derived and states the following approximation:



where


 
  denotes the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution;









This and other approximations are discussed in a later text book.5
To approximate the chi-squared distribution, the non-centrality parameter, 
 
 
 
 , is set to zero, yielding


 
  essentially approximating the normalized chi-squared distribution X / k as the cube of a Gaussian.
For a given probability, the formula is easily inverted to provide the corresponding approximation for 
 
 
 
 .
Differential equation
The pdf of the noncentral chi-squared distribution is a solution of the following differential equation:



Derivation of the pdf
The derivation of the probability density function is most easily done by performing the following steps:

First, assume without loss of generality that 
 
 
 
 . Then the joint distribution of 
 
 
 
  is spherically symmetric, up to a location shift.
The spherical symmetry then implies that the distribution of 
 
 
 
  depends on the means only through the squared length, 
 
 
 
 . Without loss of generality, we can therefore take 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Now derive the density of 
 
 
 
  (i.e. the k = 1 case). Simple transformation of random variables shows that









where 
 
 
 
  is the standard normal density.
 




Expand the cosh term in a Taylor series. This gives the Poisson-weighted mixture representation of the density, still for k = 1. The indices on the chi-squared random variables in the series above are 1 + 2i in this case.
Finally, for the general case. We've assumed, without loss of generality, that 
 
 
 
  are standard normal, and so 
 
 
 
  has a central chi-squared distribution with (k − 1) degrees of freedom, independent of 
 
 
 
 . Using the poisson-weighted mixture representation for 
 
 
 
 , and the fact that the sum of chi-squared random variables is also chi-squared, completes the result. The indices in the series are (1 + 2i) + (k − 1) = k + 2i as required.

Related distributions

If 
 
 
 
  is chi-squared distributed 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  is also non-central chi-squared distributed
 
 



If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is independent of 
 
 
 
  then a noncentral F-distributed variable is developed as 
 
 



If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 



If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  takes the Rice distribution with parameter 
 
 
 
 .


Normal approximation:6 if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  in distribution as either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .

Transformations
Sankaran (1963) discusses the transformations of the form 
 
 
 
 . He analyzes the expansions of the cumulants of 
 
 
 
  up to the term 
 
 
 
  and shows that the following choices of 
 
 
 
  produce reasonable results:



 
  makes the second cumulant of 
 
 
 
  approximately independent of 
 
 





 
  makes the third cumulant of 
 
 
 
  approximately independent of 
 
 





 
  makes the fourth cumulant of 
 
 
 
  approximately independent of 
 
 


Also, a simpler transformation 
 
 
 
  can be used as a variance stabilizing transformation that produces a random variable with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
 
 .
Usability of these transformations may be hampered by the need to take the square roots of negative numbers.





Various chi and chi-squared distributions



Name



chi-squared distribution



noncentral chi-squared distribution



chi distribution



noncentral chi distribution




Occurrences
Use in tolerance intervals
Two-sided normal regression tolerance intervals can be obtained based on the noncentral chi-squared distribution.7 This enables the calculation of a statistical interval within which, with some confidence level, a specified proportion of a sampled population falls.
Notes


References

Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I.A. (1972), Handbook of Mathematical Functions, Dover. Section 26.4.25.
Johnson, N. L., Kotz, S., Balakrishnan, N. (1970), Continuous Univariate Distributions, Volume 2, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-58494-0
Muirhead, R. (2005) Aspects of Multivariate Statistical Theory (2nd Edition). Wiley. ISBN 0-471-76985-1
Siegel, A.F. (1979), "The noncentral chi-squared distribution with zero degrees of freedom and testing for uniformity", Biometrika, 66, 381–386


External Links

Non central chi squared distribution – from itfeature.com

"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions



Muirhead (2005) Theorem 1.3.4↩
Nuttall, Albert H. (1975): Some Integrals Involving the QM Function, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 21(1), 95–96, ↩
Sankaran , M. (1963). Approximations to the non-central chi-squared distribution Biometrika, 50(1-2), 199–204↩
Sankaran , M. (1959). "On the non-central chi-squared distribution", Biometrika 46, 235–237↩
Johnson et al. (1995) Section 29.8↩
Muirhead (2005) pages 22–24 and problem 1.18.↩
, p.32↩




