   Aerial (album)      Aerial (album)   Aerial is the eighth studio album by the English singer-songwriter and musician Kate Bush , released in 2005, twelve years after her 1993 album The Red Shoes . It is her only double album .  Overview  Aerial is Bush's first double album, and was released after a twelve-year absence from the music industry during which Bush devoted her time to family and the raising of her son, Bertie. The anticipation leading up to the album's release was immense, with press articles devoted to Bush being printed months, even years before. 1 Like Bush's previous album, The Red Shoes,  Aerial does not feature a cover photograph of Bush, but rather one that is emblematic of the album's celebration of sky, sea, and birdsong. The cover image, which seems to show a mountain range at sunset reflected on the sea is in fact a waveform of a blackbird song superimposed over a glowing photograph.  Aerial is one of Bush's most critically acclaimed albums. 2 Musically, the album is a multi-layered work, incorporating elements of folk , Renaissance , classical , reggae , flamenco , and rock . As with 1985's Hounds of Love , the album is divided into two thematically distinct collections. The first disc, subtitled A Sea of Honey , features a set of unrelated songs including the hit single " King of the Mountain ", a Renaissance-style ode to her son "Bertie", performed with period instruments, and "Joanni", based on the story of Joan of Arc . In the song "   π   π   \pi   ", Bush sings the number to its 78th decimal place, then from its 101st to its 137th decimal place. 3 The piano and vocal piece "A Coral Room", dealing with the loss of Bush's mother and the passage of time, was hailed by critics as "stunning" in its simplicity, 4 "profoundly moving" 5 and as "one of the most beautiful" pieces Bush has ever recorded. 6  The second disc, subtitled A Sky of Honey , consists of a single piece of music reveling in the experience of outdoor adventures on a single summer day, beginning in the morning and ending twenty-four hours later with the next sunrise. 7 The songs are saturated with the presence of birdsong , and all refer to the sky and sunlight, with the sea also featuring as an important element. Beginning with solo piano, doves cooing, and Bush's son saying, "Mummy, Daddy, the day is full of birds," the piece begins with an early morning awakening to a beautiful day of sun shining "like the light from Italy"; it proceeds through a visit with a painter who is working on a new piece of sidewalk art ('An Architect's Dream and 'The Painter's Link') and then passes on to a crimson 'Sunset.' The interlude 'Aerial Tal,' consists of Bush imitating various samples of birdsong, while 'Somewhere in Between' celebrates the ambiguous nature of dusk. 'Nocturne,' features a pair of lovers bathing in the sea after dark under a star-studded "diamond sky." The song cycle ends with 'Aerial' and its euphoric welcome of the following morning's sunrise with the refrain "I need to get up on the roof...in the sun."  A Sky of Honey features Rolf Harris playing the didgeridoo and providing vocals on 'An Architect's Dream' and 'The Painter's Link.' Other guest artists include Peter Erskine , Eberhard Weber , Lol Creme and Procol Harum 's Gary Brooker . In one of his final projects before his death in 2003, long-time Bush collaborator Michael Kamen arranged the string sections, performed by the London Metropolitan Orchestra . 8  In the 2014 series of concerts in London, Before the Dawn , Bush performed live for the first time King of the Mountain and Joanni , and the whole Sky of Honey song cycle.  Album reception  On 13 November 2005, Aerial entered the UK Albums Chart at number three, selling more than 90,000 copies in its first week on release. In Canada, the album was certified Platinum (100,000 copies sold). On 10 January 2006, Bush was nominated for two BRIT Awards for Best British Female Solo Artist and Best British Album for Aerial . 9 On 27 January 2006, the album went up against Demon Days by Gorillaz and Coles Corner by Richard Hawley in the pop category of the South Bank Show 's Annual Arts Awards, but was beaten by Hawley. UK music magazine Mojo named it their third best album of 2005, behind I Am a Bird Now by Antony and the Johnsons and Funeral by Arcade Fire . Rob Chapman, writing in The Times stated that "...its closing triptych, Somewhere In Between, Nocturne, and Aerial, represents the most joyous and euphoric finale to an album that you will hear all year." 10  Single  The only single from the album was " King of the Mountain ". The song makes references to Elvis Presley and the film Citizen Kane . The track was played for the first time on BBC Radio 2 on 21 September 2005, and was made available for download on 27 September. The B-side (or second track) of the single was a Marvin Gaye cover, " Sexual Healing ", recorded in 1994, and is not available on any of her albums. The single entered (and peaked in) the UK singles chart at no.4, and gave Bush her first top five hit for twenty years and her third highest singles chart placing. The song also peaked at no.6 on the UK download chart.  iTunes release, and re-release  As of mid-May 2010, Aerial was released for the first time on iTunes. The second disc, An Endless Sky Of Honey , now runs as one continual track. In August 2010, the CD version was reissued by Sony Legacy in the United States. 11  In popular culture  On May 17, 2015, a sequence from the song "π" was featured on The Simpsons twenty-sixth season finale entitled " Mathlete's Feat ". 12  Track listing  Charts  Peak positions      Chart (2005)   Position       Australian ARIA Albums Chart 13   25     Austrian Albums Chart 14   23     Belgian Albums Chart (Flanders) 15   11     Belgian Albums Chart (Wallonia) 16   20     Danish Albums Chart 17   8     Dutch Mega Albums Chart 18   7     Finnish Albums Chart {{cite web|title=finnishcharts.com Kate Bush - Aerial|url= http://finnishcharts.com/showitem.asp?interpret=Kate+Bush&titel; ;=Aerial&cat;=a   accessdate=12 May 2013}}     French SNEP Albums Chart  19   12     German  Media Control Albums Chart {{cite web   url= http://www.officialcharts.de/album.asp?artist=Kate+Bush&title; ;=Aerial&cat;=a&country;=de| title=Album Search: Kate Bush – Aerial| language=German| publisher=Media Control|format=ASP|accessdate=10 July 2013}}     Irish Albums Chart 20   6     Italian Albums Chart 21   9     Japanese Oricon Albums Chart 22   53     New Zealand Albums Chart  23   22     Norwegian VG-lista Albums Chart 24   4     Polish Albums Chart 25   3     Swedish Albums Chart 26   7     Swiss Albums Chart 27   12     UK Albums Chart  28   3     United States  Billboard 200 29   48     Year-end charts      Chart (2005)   Position       Belgian Albums Chart (Flanders) 30   95     Dutch Albums Chart 31   67     Italian Albums Chart 32   167     UK Albums Chart 33   63     Certifications     Personnel   Kate Bush – vocals, piano and keyboards  Peter Erskine , Stuart Elliott , Steve Sanger – drums  Eberhard Weber , John Giblin , Del Palmer – bass  Bosco D'Oliveira – percussion  Dan McIntosh – electric and acoustic guitars  Gary Brooker – hammond organ  Rolf Harris – didgeridoo  Lol Creme , Gary Brooker , Paddy Bush – backing vocals  Michael Wood – male vocal on "A Coral Room"  Chris Hall – accordion  Richard Campbell, Susan Pell – viols  Eligio Quinteiro – renaissance guitar  Robin Jeffrey – renaissance percussion  Rolf Harris – as The Painter (a character in "A Sky of Honey")  Albert McIntosh (Bertie - Kate Bush's son) – as The Sun (a character in "A Sky of Honey")  Del Palmer – recording and mixing engineer  James Guthrie – mastering  Bill Dunne – "Bertie" string arrangement  Michael Kamen – orchestral arrangements; London Metropolitan Orchestra conducted by Michael Kamen at Abbey Road Studios  Simon Rhodes – engineer  Chris Bolster – assistant engineer  Josephine Bartolinni – Italian  translation   See also   Kate Bush discography  Kate Bush's Awards and Nominations   References  External links   Official website  'I'm not some weirdo recluse' ( The Guardian 28 October 2005)  [ http://www.canada.com/nationalpost/artslife/story.html?id=dfad5a0f-0d32-4852-aab6-c6f3f7d74ac6&k; ;=83898 This Bush's mission finally gets accomplished]  Aerial by Kate Bush: Music review ( National Post 22 December 2005)   "  Category:Kate Bush albums  Category:2005 albums  Category:Concept albums  Category:EMI Records albums     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩   J. Cowley notes A Sky of Honey covers a single day through to next morning. ↩  ↩   ↩  Gaffaweb reprint of Chapman review ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  [ Allmusic - Aerial > Charts & Awards > Billboard Albums] ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     