


Flow (mathematics)




Flow (mathematics)

In mathematics, a flow formalizes the idea of the motion of particles in a fluid. Flows are ubiquitous in science, including engineering and physics. The notion of flow is basic to the study of ordinary differential equations. Informally, a flow may be viewed as a continuous motion of points over time. More formally, a flow is a group action of the real numbers on a set.
The idea of a vector flow, that is, the flow determined by a vector field, occurs in the areas of differential topology, Riemannian geometry and Lie groups. Specific examples of vector flows include the geodesic flow, the Hamiltonian flow, the Ricci flow, the mean curvature flow, and the Anosov flow. Flows may also be defined for systems of random variables and stochastic processes, and occur in the study of ergodic dynamical systems. The most celebrated of these is perhaps the Bernoulli flow.
Formal definition
A flow on a set 
 
 
 
  is a group action of the additive group of real numbers on 
 
 
 
 . More explicitly, a flow is a mapping


 
  such that, for all 
 
 
 
 
  ∈ 
 
 
 
  and all real numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,






It is customary to write  instead of 
 
 
 
 , so that the equations above can be expressed as  (identity function) and  (group law). Then, for all , the mapping  is a bijection with inverse . This follows from the above definition, and the real parameter 
 
 
 
  may be taken as a generalized functional power, as in function iteration.
Flows are usually required to be compatible with structures furnished on the set 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if 
 
 
 
  is equipped with a topology, then 
 
 
 
 
  is usually required to be continuous. If 
 
 
 
  is equipped with a differentiable structure, then 
 
 
 
  is usually required to be differentiable. In these cases the flow forms a one parameter subgroup of homeomorphisms and diffeomorphisms, respectively.
In certain situations one might also consider local flows, which are defined only in some subset



Orbits
Given 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the set 
 
 
 
 : 
 
 
 
  ∈ ℝ is called the orbit of 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 
 . Informally, it may be regarded as the trajectory of a particle that was initially positioned at 
 
 
 
 . If the flow is generated by a vector field, then its orbits are the images of its integral curves.
Examples
Autonomous systems of ordinary differential equations
Let  be a (time-independent) vector field and  the solution of the initial value problem



Then  x(t)}} is the flow of the vector field F. It is a well-defined local flow provided that the vector field  is Lipschitz-continuous. Then  is also Lipschitz-continuous wherever defined. In general it may be hard to show that the flow 
 
 
 
  is globally defined, but one simple criterion is that the vector field F is compactly supported.
Time-dependent ordinary differential equations
In the case of time-dependent vector fields , one denotes  x(t)}}, where  is the solution of


 
  Then  is the time-dependent flow of F. It is not a "flow" by the definition above, but it can easily be seen as one by rearranging its arguments. Namely, the mapping


 
  indeed satisfies the group law for the last variable:


 
  One can see time-dependent flows of vector fields as special cases of time-independent ones by the following trick. Define


 
  Then y(t) is the solution of the "time-independent" initial value problem


 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is the solution of the original time-dependent initial value problem. Furthermore, then the mapping 
 
 
 
  is exactly the flow of the "time-independent" vector field G.
Flows of vector fields on manifolds
The flows of time-independent and time-dependent vector fields are defined on smooth manifolds exactly as they are defined on the Euclidean space  and their local behavior is the same. However, the global topological structure of a smooth manifold is strongly manifest in what kind of global vector fields it can support, and flows of vector fields on smooth manifolds are indeed an important tool in differential topology. The bulk of studies in dynamical systems are conducted on smooth manifolds, which are thought of as "parameter spaces" in applications.
Solutions of heat equation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a subdomain (bounded or not) of ℝn (with 
 
 
 
  an integer). Denote by 
 
 
 
  its boundary (assumed smooth). Consider the following Heat Equation on 
 
 
 
  × (0,
 
 
 
 ), for 
 
 
 
  > 0,


 
  with the following initial boundary condition  u0}} in 
 
 
 
  .
The equation 
 
 
 
 
  = 0 on 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the Homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition. The mathematical setting for this problem can be the semigroup approach. To use this tool, we introduce the unbounded operator  defined on 
 
 
 
  by its domain


 
  (see the classical Sobolev spaces with 
 
 
 
  and


 
 
  is the closure of the infinitely differentiable functions with compact support in 
 
 
 
  for the 
 
 
 
 norm).
For any 
 
 
 
 , we have



With this operator, the heat equation becomes 
 
 
 
  and  u0}}. Thus, the flow corresponding to this equation is (see notations above)


 
  where  is the (analytic) semigroup generated by .
Solutions of wave equation
Again, let 
 
 
 
  be a subdomain (bounded or not) of ℝn (with 
 
 
 
  an integer). We denote by 
 
 
 
  its boundary (assumed smooth). Consider the following Wave Equation on 
 
 
 
 
  (for 
 
 
 
  > 0),


 
  with the following initial condition  u1,0}} in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Using the same semigroup approach as in the case of the Heat Equation above. We write the wave equation as a first order in time partial differential equation by introducing the following unbounded operator,


 
  with domain 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  (the operator 
 
 
 
  is defined in the previous example).
We introduce the column vectors


 
  (where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ) and


 
 .
With these notions, the Wave Equation becomes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Thus, the flow corresponding to this equation is 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the (unitary) semigroup generated by 
 
 
 
 .
Bernoulli flow
Ergodic dynamical systems, that is, systems exhibiting randomness, exhibit flows as well. The most celebrated of these is perhaps the Bernoulli flow. The Ornstein isomorphism theorem states that, for any given entropy

 
 , there exists a flow 
 
 
 
 , called the Bernoulli flow, such that the flow at time 
 
 
 
 =1, i.e.

 
 , is a Bernoulli shift.
Furthermore, this flow is unique, up to a constant rescaling of time. That is, if 
 
 
 
 , is another flow with the same entropy, then 
 
 
 
 , for some constant $c$. The notion of uniqueness and isomorphism here is that of the isomorphism of dynamical systems. Many dynamical systems, including Sinai's billiards and Anosov flows are isomorphic to Bernoulli shifts.
See also

Abel equation
Iterated function
Schröder's equation
Infinite compositions of analytic functions

References






"
Category:Dynamical systems Category:Group actions


