


Translation plane




Translation plane

In mathematics, a translation plane is a particular kind of projective plane. Almost all non-Desarguesian planes are either translation planes or are related to this type of incidence structure.1
In a projective plane, let 
 
 
 
  represent a point, and 
 
 
 
  represent a line. A central collineation with center 
 
 
 
  and axis 
 
 
 
  is a collineation fixing every point on 
 
 
 
  and every line through 
 
 
 
 . It is called an elation if 
 
 
 
  is on 
 
 
 
 , otherwise it is called a homology. The central collineations with centre 
 
 
 
  and axis 
 
 
 
  form a group.2
A line 
 
 
 
  in a projective plane 
 
 
 
  is a translation line if the group of elations with axis 
 
 
acts transitively on the points of the affine plane obtained by removing 
 
 
 
  from the plane 
 
 
 
 ,  (the affine derivative of 
 
 
 
 ). A projective plane with a translation line is called a translation plane and the affine plane obtained by removing the translation line is called an affine translation plane.
While in general it is often easier to work with projective planes, in this context the affine planes are preferred and several authors simply use the term translation plane to mean affine translation plane.34
Moufang planes
A (projective) translation plane having at least three nonconcurrent translation lines is a Moufang plane.5 All the lines of a Moufang plane are translation lines. Every finite Moufang plane is desarguesian and every desarguesian plane is a Moufang plane, but there are infinite Moufang planes that are not desarguesian (such as the Cayley plane). Moufang planes are coordinatized by alternative division rings.
Relationship to (geometric) spreads
Translation planes are related to spreads in finite projective spaces by the André/Bruck-Bose construction.6 A spread of 
 
 
 
  is a set of  lines, with no two intersecting. Equivalently, it is a partition of the points of 
 
 
 
  into lines.
Given a spread 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the André/Bruck-Bose construction produces a translation plane 
 
 
 
  of order  as follows: Embed 
 
 
 
  as a hyperplane of 
 
 
 
 . Define an incidence structure 
 
 
 
  with "points," the points of 
 
 
 
  not on 
 
 
 
  and "lines" the planes of 
 
 
 
  meeting 
 
 
 
  in a line of 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is a translation affine plane of order . Let 
 
 
 
  be the projective completion of 
 
 
 
 .7 8
Reguli and regular spreads
In 
 
 
 
  a set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  mutually skew lines with the property that any line intersecting three lines of 
 
 
 
  must intersect all the lines of 
 
 
 
  is called a regulus. The lines intersecting all the lines of 
 
 
 
  are called transversals of 
 
 
 
 . Any three mutually skew lines of 
 
 
 
  lie in precisely one regulus.
A spread 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is regular if for any three distinct lines of 
 
 
 
  all the lines of the unique regulus determined by them are contained in 
 
 
 
 .

For 
 
 
 
 , a spread 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is regular if and only if the translation plane defined by that spread is desarguesian.

All spreads of 
 
 
 
  are regular. If the geometry is defined over an infinite field, the same result holds but "desarguesian" must be replaced by "pappian".9
Algebraic representation
An algebraic representation of (affine) translation planes can be obtained as follows: Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space over a field

 
 . A spread of 
 
 
 
  is a set 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 -dimensional subspaces of 
 
 
 
  that partition the non-zero vectors of 
 
 
 
 . The members of 
 
 
 
  are called the components of the spread and if  and  are distinct components then . Let 
 
 
 
  be the incidence structure whose points are the vectors of 
 
 
 
  and whose lines are the cosets of components, that is, sets of the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a vector of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a component of the spread 
 
 
 
 . Then:10



 
  is an affine plane and the group of translations

 
  for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is an automorphism group acting regularly on the points of this plane.
 

Finite construction
Let , the finite field of order 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space over 
 
 
 
  represented as:


 
  Let  be 
 
 
 
  matrices over 
 
 
 
  with the property that  is nonsingular whenever 
 
 
 
 . For  define,


 
  usually referred to as the subspaces "". Also define:


 
  the subspace "
 
 
 
 ".

The set } is a spread of 
 
 
 
 .
 

The matrices  used in this construction are called spread matrices or slope matrices.
Examples of regular spreads
A regular spread may be constructed in the following way. Let 
 
 
 
  be a field and 
 
 
 
  an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional extension field of 
 
 
 
 . Let  considered as a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space over 
 
 
 
 . The set of all 1-dimensional subspaces of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
  (and hence, 
 
 
 
 -dimensional over 
 
 
 
 ) is a regular spread of 
 
 
 
 .
In the finite case, the field  can be represented as a subring of the 
 
 
 
  matrices over 
 
 
 
 . With respect to a fixed basis of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 , the multiplication maps, 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , are 
 
 
 
 -linear transformations and can be represented by 
 
 
 
  matrices over 
 
 
 
 . These matrices are the spread matrices of a regular spread.11
As a specific example, the following nine matrices represent 
 
 
 
  as 2 × 2 matrices over 
 
 
 
  and so provide a spread set of 
 
 
 
 .



Modifying spread sets
The set of transversals of a regulus 
 
 
 
  also form a regulus, called the opposite regulus of 
 
 
 
 . If a spread 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  contains a regulus 
 
 
 
 , the removal of 
 
 
 
  and replacing it by its opposite regulus produces a new spread . This process is a special case of a more general process called derivation or net replacement.12
Starting with a regular spread of 
 
 
 
  and deriving with respect to any regulus produces a Hall plane. In more generality, the process can be applied independently to any collection of reguli in a regular spread, resulting in André planes.
Notes
References







Further reading

Mauro Biliotti, Vikram Jha, Norman L. Johnson (2001) Foundations of Translation Planes, Marcel Dekker ISBN 0-8247-0609-9 .

External links

Lecture Notes on Projective Geometry
Publications of Keith Mellinger

"
Category:Projective geometry



Projective Planes On projective planes↩
Geometry Translation Plane Retrieved on June 13, 2007↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
, see especially footnote 1).↩
↩
↩
↩




