


Hagen–Poiseuille flow from the Navier–Stokes equations




Hagen–Poiseuille flow from the Navier–Stokes equations

In fluid dynamics, the derivation of the Hagen–Poiseuille flow from the Navier–Stokes equations shows how this flow is an exact solution to the Navier–Stokes equations.12
Derivation
The laminar flow through a pipe of uniform (circular) cross-section is known as Hagen–Poiseuille flow. The equations governing the Hagen–Poiseuille flow can be derived directly from the Navier–Stokes momentum equations in 3D cylidrical coordinated by making the following set of assumptions:

The flow is steady ( 
 
 
 
  ).
The radial and swirl components of the fluid velocity are zero ( 
 
 
 
  ).
The flow is axisymmetric ( 
 
 
 
  ) and fully developed (
 
 
 
  ).

Then the angular equation in the momentum equations and the continuity equation are identically satisfied. The first momentum equation reduces to 
 
 
 
 , i.e., the pressure

 
  is a function of the axial coordinate 
 
 
 
  only. The third momentum equation reduces to:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid.

The solution is
 




Since 
 
 
 
  needs to be finite at 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . The no slip boundary condition at the pipe wall requires that 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  (radius of the pipe), which yields



Thus we have finally the following parabolic velocity profile:



The maximum velocity occurs at the pipe centerline (
 
 
 
 ):



The average velocity can be obtained by integrating over the pipe cross section:



The Hagen–Poiseuille equation relates the pressure drop 
 
 
 
  across a circular pipe of length 
 
 
 
  to the average flow velocity in the pipe 
 
 
 
  and other parameters. Assuming that the pressure decreases linearly across the length of the pipe, we have 
 
 
 
  (constant). Substituting this and the expression for 
 
 
 
  into the expression for 
 
 
 
 , and noting that the pipe diameter 
 
 
 
 , we get:


 
  Rearrangement of this gives the Hagen–Poiseuille equation:



References
See also

Poiseuille's Law
Couette flow
Pipe flow

"
Category:Fluid dynamics Category:Fluid mechanics



↩
↩




