


Krasovskii–LaSalle principle




Krasovskii–LaSalle principle

The Krasovskii–LaSalle principle (also known as the invariance principle1) is a criterion for the asymptotic stability of an autonomous (possibly nonlinear) dynamical system.
The global Krasovskii–LaSalle principle
Given a representation of the system



where 
 
 
 
  is the vector of variables, with



If a 
 
 
function

 
  can be found such that


 
 , for all 
 
 
 
  (positive definite)


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 
  (negative semidefinite)


 
 , if 
 
 
 
  and


 
  (Such functions can be thought of as "energy-like".)
Let 
 
 
 
  be the union of complete trajectories contained entirely in the set 
 
 
 
 
 . Then the set of accumulation points of any trajectory is contained in 
 
 
 
 .
In particular, if 
 
 
 
  contains no trajectory of the system except the trivial trajectory 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , then the origin is globally asymptotically stable.
Local version of the Krasovskii–LaSalle principle
If


 
 , when 
 
 




hold only for 
 
 
 
  in some neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of the origin, and the set



does not contain any trajectories of the system besides the trajectory 
 
 
 
 , then the local version of the Krasovskii–LaSalle principle states that the origin is locally asymptotically stable.
Relation to Lyapunov theory
If 
 
 
 
  is negative definite, the global asymptotic stability of the origin is a consequence of Lyapunov's second theorem. The Krasovskii–LaSalle principle gives a criterion for asymptotic stability in the case when 
 
 
 
  is only negative semidefinite.
Example: the pendulum with friction
This section will apply the Krasovskii–LaSalle principle to establish the local asymptotic stability of a simple system, the pendulum with friction. This system can be modeled with the differential equation 



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the angle the pendulum makes with the vertical normal, 
 
 
 
  is the mass of the pendulum, 
 
 
 
  is the length of the pendulum, 
 
 
 
  is the friction coefficient, and g is acceleration due to gravity.
This, in turn, can be written as the system of equations






Using the Krasovskii–LaSalle principle, it can be shown that all trajectories which begin in a ball of certain size around the origin 
 
 
 
  asymptotically converge to the origin. We define 
 
 
 
  as



This 
 
 
 
  is simply the scaled energy of the system  Clearly, 
 
 
 
 
  is positive definite in an open ball of radius 
 
 
 
  around the origin. Computing the derivative,



Observe that 
 
 
 
 . If it were true that 
 
 
 
 , we could conclude that every trajectory approaches the origin by Lyapunov's second theorem. Unfortunately, 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is only negative semidefinite. However, the set



which is simply the set



does not contain any trajectory of the system, except the trivial trajectory x = 0. Indeed, if at some time 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 , then because 
 
 
 
  must be less than 
 
 
 
  away from the origin, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . As a result, the trajectory will not stay in the set 
 
 
 
 
 .
All the conditions of the local Krasovskii–LaSalle principle are satisfied, and we can conclude that every trajectory that begins in some neighborhood of the origin will converge to the origin as 
 
 
 
  .
History
While LaSalle was the first author in the West to publish this theorem in 1960, its first publication was in 1952 by Barbashin and Krasovskii in a special case, and in 1959 by Krasovskii in the general case .
See also

Lyapunov stability

Original papers


Krasovskii, N. N. Problems of the Theory of Stability of Motion, (Russian), 1959. English translation: Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, 1963.
LaSalle, J.P. Some extensions of Liapunov's second method, IRE Transactions on Circuit Theory, CT-7, pp. 520–527, 1960.

Text books




References


Lecture notes on nonlinear control, University of Notre Dame, Instructor: Michael Lemmon, lecture 4.

ibid.

Lecture notes on nonlinear analysis, National Taiwan University, Instructor: Feng-Li Lian, lecture 4-2.

Vidyasagar, M. Nonlinear Systems Analysis, SIAM Classics in Applied Mathematics, SIAM Press, 2002.

"
Category:Stability theory Category:Dynamical systems Category:Principles








