   Petite size      Petite size   In fashion and clothing , a petite size is a standard clothing size designed to fit women of shorter height, typically  or less.  Changes in pattern measurements and design  Regular female sized clothing is designed for a woman at least  tall (without shoes) and will not fit a woman of significantly shorter height well. Even if the bust, waist and hip circumferences are appropriate, the sleeve lengths, leg inseam lengths and vertical torso measurements (such as the back length and bust-waist length) must be altered significantly to fit well. Non-petite size dresses cannot be easily altered to produce the equivalent petite size, since, in general, these lengths (particularly the critical torso measurements) cannot be altered without introducing an unsightly seam. Significant errors in the torso measurements will make a well-fitted look impossible, e.g., if the bust-point darts are off by three inches.  In addition to its measurements, a petite-size garment may have a different design from those intended for taller women. For example, style elements may be added to give a longer, slimmer look, e.g., vertical stripes, princess seams, short skirts, large patterns or patterns arranged helically around the whole body. Unfortunately, many modern "petite" sizes are actually renamed half sizes intended for large women and, as a result, tend to be boxy and unfashionable for small-framed women. Designs for taller women may also have style lines that appear to shorten the figure, such as horizontal lines (e.g., clamdigger pants or midcalf skirts); hence, even if the measurements are adjusted correctly, a petite-size version of a regular-size garment may be unflattering.  Frequency  The average height of an American woman is roughly  (5'4"), with a standard deviation of roughly . Thus, 40% of all American women are  or shorter (    z  ≤   -  0.25       z    0.25     z<=-0.25   ) and roughly one-quarter (25%) are  or shorter (    z  ≤   -  0.75       z    0.75     z<=-0.75   ).  In the UK and throughout much of Europe and Australasia, the average height varies from  to . The old clothes sizes tended to correspond to the UK's 1951 size survey, which took  as average height, and also took a slim, hour glass figure as standard. In the 1990s the Size UK project examined 16,000 people and changed the measurements for the 'average' size. This was widely reported, but stores responded to the headline (people getting bigger) rather than the facts (height rising only slightly but many individuals fatter). The fashion industry provides most of its merchandise in "standard sizes", which encompasses women sizes 4-14, 5'4" to 5'8" in height (European sizes 34-44 and 1.6256-1.7272 m), because this is the most profitable ready-to-wear market. 1  See also   Clothing sizes  US standard clothing size  EN 13402   References   NHANES survey  1 CDC Anthropometric Reference Data for Children and   Adults: U.S. Population, 1999–2002 - Page 20, Table 19.  "  Category:Sizes in clothing  Category:Fashion design     Petite, Plus, or Tall Size'” ↩     