


Near-field (mathematics)




Near-field (mathematics)

In mathematics, a near-field is an algebraic structure similar to a division ring, except that it has only one of the two distributive laws. Alternatively, a near-field is a near-ring in which there is a multiplicative identity, and every non-zero element has a multiplicative inverse.
Definition
A near-field is a set 
 
 
 
 , together with two binary operations, 
 
 
 
  (addition) and 
 
 
 
  (multiplication), satisfying the following axioms:

A1
 
 
 
  is an Abelian group.
 
A2
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
  for all elements 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  (The associative law for multiplication).
 
A3
 
 
 
  for all elements 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  (The right distributive law).
 
A4
 
 
 
  contains an element 1 such that 
 
 
 
  for every element 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 
  (Multiplicative identity).
 
A5: For every non-zero element a of 
 
 
 
  there exists an element 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  (Multiplicative inverse).
 

Notes on the definition

The above is strictly a definition of a right near-field. By replacing A3 by the left distributive law 
 
 
 
  we get a left near-field instead. Most commonly, "near-field" is taken as meaning "right near-field", but this is not a universal convention.
A near-field can be equivalently defined as a right quasifield with associative multiplication.
It is not necessary to specify that the additive group is Abelian, as this follows from the other axioms, as proved by B.H. Neumann and J.L. Zemmer.123 However, the proof is quite difficult, and it is more convenient to include this in the axioms so that progress with establishing the properties of near-fields can start more rapidly.
Sometimes a list of axioms is given in which A4 and A5 are replaced by the following single statement:
 
A4*: The non-zero elements form a group under multiplication.
 
However, this alternative definition includes one exceptional structure of order 2 which fails to satisfy various basic theorems (such as 
 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 ). Thus it is much more convenient, and more usual, to use the axioms in the form given above. The difference is that A4 requires 1 to be an identity for all elements, A4* only for non-zero elements.
 
The exceptional structure can be defined by taking an additive group of order 2, and defining multiplication by 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
 


Examples

Any division ring (including any field) is a near-field.
The following defines a (right) near-field of order 9. It is the smallest near-field which is not a field.
 
Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the Galois field of order 9. Denote multiplication in 
 
 
 
  by ' 
 
 
 
  '. Define a new binary operation ' · ' by:
 
If 
 
 
 
  is any element of 
 
 
 
  which is a square and 
 
 
 
 
  is any element of 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 .
 
If 
 
 
 
  is any element of 
 
 
 
  which is not a square and 
 
 
 
 
  is any element of 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 .
 


Then 
 
 
 
  is a near-field with this new multiplication and the same addition as before.4



History and Applications
The concept of a near-field was first introduced by Leonard Dickson in 1905. He took division rings and modified their multiplication, while leaving addition as it was, and thus produced the first known examples of near-fields that were not division rings. The near-fields produced by this method are known as Dickson near-fields; the near-field of order 9 given above is a Dickson near-field. Hans Zassenhaus proved that all but 7 finite near-fields are either fields or Dickson near-fields.5
The earliest application of the concept of near-field was in the study of geometries, such as projective geometries.67 Many projective geometries can be defined in terms of a coordinate system over a division ring, but others can't. It was found that by allowing coordinates from any near-ring the range of geometries which could be coordinatized was extended. For example, Marshall Hall used the near-field of order 9 given above to produce a Hall plane, the first of a sequence of such planes based on Dickson near-fields of order the square of a prime. In 1971 T. G. Room and P.B. Kirkpatrick provided an alternative development.8
There are numerous other applications, mostly to geometry.9 A more recent application of near-fields is in the construction of ciphers for data-encryption, such as Hill ciphers.10
Description in terms of Frobenius groups and group automorphisms
Let 
 
 
 
  be a near field. Let 
 
 
 
 
  be its multiplicative group and let 
 
 
 
  be its additive group. Let 
 
 
 
  act on 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 . The axioms of a near field show that this is a right group action by group automorphisms of 
 
 
 
 
 , and the nonzero elements of 
 
 
 
  form a single orbit with trivial stabilizer.
Conversely, if 
 
 
 
  is an abelian group and 
 
 
 
  is a subgroup of 
 
 
 
  which acts freely and transitively on the nonzero elements of 
 
 
 
 
 , then we can define a near field with additive group 
 
 
 
  and multiplicative group 
 
 
 
 . Choose an element in 
 
 
 
  to call 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
 
  be the bijection 
 
 
 
 . Then we define addition on 
 
 
 
  by the additive group structure on 
 
 
 
  and define multiplication by 
 
 
 
 .
A Frobenius group can be defined as a finite group of the form 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  acts without stabilizer on the nonzero elements of 
 
 
 
 . Thus, near fields are in bijection with Frobenius groups where 
 
 
 
 .
Classification
As described above, Zassenhaus proved that all finite near fields either arise from a construction of Dickson or are one of seven exceptional examples. We will describe this classification by giving pairs 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is an abelian group and 
 
 
 
  is a group of automorphisms of 
 
 
 
  which acts freely and transitively on the nonzero elements of 
 
 
 
 .
The construction of Dickson proceeds as follows.11 Let 
 
 
 
  be a prime power and choose a positive integer 
 
 
 
 
  such that all prime factors of 
 
 
 
  divide 
 
 
 
  and, if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is not divisible by 
 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the finite field of order 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the additive group of 
 
 
 
 . The multiplicative group of 
 
 
 
 
 , together with the Frobenius automorphism

 
  generate a group of automorphisms of 
 
 
 
  of the form 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the cyclic group of order 
 
 
 
 
 . The divisibility conditions on 
 
 
 
  allow us to find a subgroup of 
 
 
 
  of order 
 
 
 
  which acts freely and transitively on 
 
 
 
 . The case 
 
 
 
 
  is the case of commutative finite fields; the nine element example above is 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
In the seven exceptional examples, 
 
 
 
  is of the form 
 
 
 
 . This table, including the numbering by Roman numerals, is taken from Zassenhaus's paper.12









Generators for 
 
 


Description(s) of 
 
 






I












 
 , the binary tetrahedral group.



II

















III












 
 
 , the binary octahedral group.



IV

















V












 
 , the binary icosahedral group.



VI

















VII

















The binary tetrahedral, octahedral and icosahedral groups are central extensions of the rotational symmetry groups of the platonic solids; these rotational symmetry groups are 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can also be described as 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Near-ring
Planar ternary ring
Quasifield

References
External links

Nearfields by Hauke Klein.

"
Category:Algebraic structures Category:Projective geometry



J.L. Zemmer, "The additive group of an infinite near-field is abelian" in J. London Math. Soc. 44 (1969), 65-67.↩
H Zassenhaus, Abh. Math. Sem. Hans. Univ. 11, pp 187-220.↩
B.H. Neumann, "On the commutativity of addition" in J. London Math. Soc. 15 (1940), 203-208.↩
G. Pilz, Near-Rings, page 257.↩

O. Veblen and J. H. Wedderburn "Non-desarguesian and non-pascalian geometrie" in Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 8 (1907), 379-388.↩
P. Dembrowski "Finite geometries" Springer, Berlin, (1968).↩
T. G. Room & P.B. Kirkpatrick (1971) Miniquaternion geometry, §1.3 The Miniquaternion system 
 
 
 
 pp 8–20, Cambridge University Press ISBN 0-521-07926-8↩
H. Wähling "Theorie der Fastkörper", Thales Verlag, Essen, (1987).↩
M. Farag, "Hill Ciphers over Near-Fields" in Mathematics and Computer Education v41 n1 (2007) 46-54.↩
M. Hall, 20.7.2, The Theory of Groups, Macmillian, 1959↩





