


Zero-product property




Zero-product property

In algebra, the zero-product property states that the product of two nonzero elements is nonzero. In other words, it is the following assertion:

If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .

The zero-product property is also known as the rule of zero product, the null factor law or the nonexistence of nontrivial zero divisors. All of the number systems studied in elementary mathematics — the integers

 
 , the rational numbers

 
 , the real numbers

 
 , and the complex numbers

 
  — satisfy the zero-product property. In general, a ring which satisfies the zero-product property is called a domain.
Algebraic context
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is an algebraic structure. We might ask, does 
 
 
 
  have the zero-product property? In order for this question to have meaning, 
 
 
 
  must have both additive structure and multiplicative structure.1 Usually one assumes that 
 
 
 
  is a ring, though it could be something else, e.g., the nonnegative integers 
 
 
 
 .
Note that if 
 
 
 
  satisfies the zero-product property, and if 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  also satisfies the zero product property: if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are elements of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , then either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  because 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can also be considered as elements of 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

A ring in which the zero-product property holds is called a domain. A commutative domain with a multiplicative identity element is called an integral domain. Any field is an integral domain; in fact, any subring of a field is an integral domain (as long as it contains 1). Similarly, any subring of a skew field is a domain. Thus, the zero-product property holds for any subring of a skew field.


If 
 
 
 
  is a prime number, then the ring of integers modulo 
 
 
 has the zero-product property (in fact, it is a field).


The Gaussian integers are an integral domain because they are a subring of the complex numbers.


In the strictly skew field of quaternions, the zero-product property holds. This ring is not an integral domain, because the multiplication is not commutative.


The set of nonnegative integers 
 
 
 
  is not a ring, but it does satisfy the zero-product property.

Non-examples

Let 
 
 
 
  denote the ring of integers modulo 
 
 
. Then 
 
 
 
  does not satisfy the zero product property: 2 and 3 are nonzero elements, yet 
 
 
 
 .


In general, if 
 
 
 
  is a composite number, then 
 
 
 
  does not satisfy the zero-product property. Namely, if 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are nonzero modulo 
 
 
 
 , yet 
 
 
 
 .


The ring 
 
 
 
  of 2 by 2 matrices with integer entries does not satisfy the zero-product property: if





 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,
 




then
 





 
 ,
 




yet neither 
 
 
 
  nor 
 
 
 
  is zero.
 


The ring of all functions

 
 , from the unit interval to the real numbers, has nontrivial zero divisors: there are pairs of functions which are not identically equal to zero yet whose product is the zero function. In fact, it is not hard to construct, for any n ≥ 2, functions 
 
 
 
 , none of which is identically zero, such that 
 
 
 
  is identically zero whenever 
 
 
 
 .


The same is true even if we consider only continuous functions, or only even infinitely smooth functions.

Application to finding roots of polynomials
Suppose 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are univariate polynomials with real coefficients, and 
 
 
 
  is a real number such that 
 
 
 
 . (Actually, we may allow the coefficients and 
 
 
 
  to come from any integral domain.) By the zero-product property, it follows that either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . In other words, the roots of 
 
 
 
  are precisely the roots of 
 
 
 
  together with the roots of 
 
 
 
 .
Thus, one can use factorization to find the roots of a polynomial. For example, the polynomial 
 
 
 
  factorizes as 
 
 
 
 ; hence, its roots are precisely 3, 1, and -2.
In general, suppose 
 
 
 
  is an integral domain and 
 
 
 
  is a monic univariate polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 . Suppose also that 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  distinct roots 
 
 
 
 . It follows (but we do not prove here) that 
 
 
 
  factorizes as 
 
 
 
 . By the zero-product property, it follows that 
 
 
 
  are the only roots of 
 
 
 
 : any root of 
 
 
 
  must be a root of 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . In particular, 
 
 
 
  has at most 
 
 
 
  distinct roots.
If however 
 
 
 
  is not an integral domain, then the conclusion need not hold. For example, the cubic polynomial 
 
 
 
  has six roots in 
 
 
 
  (though it has only three roots in 
 
 
 
 ).
See also

Fundamental theorem of algebra
Integral domain and domain
Prime ideal
Zero divisor

Notes
References

David S. Dummit and Richard M. Foote, Abstract Algebra (3d ed.), Wiley, 2003, ISBN 0-471-43334-9.

External links

PlanetMath: Zero rule of product

"
Category:Abstract algebra Category:Elementary algebra Category:Real analysis Category:Ring theory Category:0 (number)



There must be a notion of zero (the additive identity) and a notion of products, i.e., multiplication.




