


W state




W state

The W state is an entangled quantum state of three qubits which has the following shape


 
  and which is remarkable for representing a specific type of multipartite entanglement and for occurring in several applications in quantum information theory.
Properties
The W state is the representative of one of the two non-biseparable1 classes of three-qubit states (the other being the GHZ state) which cannot be transformed (not even probabilistically) into each other by local quantum operations.2 Thus 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent two very different kinds of tripartite entanglement.
This difference is, for example, illustrated by the following interesting property of the W state: if one of the three qubits is lost, the state of the remaining 2-qubit system is still entangled. This robustness of W-type entanglement contrasts strongly with the Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger state which is fully separable after loss of one qubit.
The states in the W class can be distinguished from all other three-qubit states by means of multipartite entanglement measures. In particular, W states have non-zero entanglement across any bipartition3 while the 3-tangle vanishes, which is also non-zero for GHZ-type states.4
Generalization
The notion of W state has been generalized for 
 
 
 
  qubits5 and then refers to the quantum superpostion with equal expansion coefficients of all possible pure states in which exactly one of the qubits in an "excited state" 
 
 
 
 , while all other ones are in the "ground state" 
 
 



 
  Both the robustness against particle loss and the LOCC-inequivalence with the (generalized) GHZ state also hold for the 
 
 
 
 -qubit W state.
Applications
In systems in which a single qubit is stored in an ensemble of many two level systems the logical "1" is often represented by the W state while the logical "0" is represented by the state 
 
 
 
 . Here the W state's robustness against particle loss is a very beneficial property ensuring good storage properties of these ensemble based quantum memories.6
References


"
Category:Quantum information theory



A pure state 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  parties is called biseparable, if one can find a partition of the parties in two disjoint subsets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
  is a product state with respect to he partition 
 
 
 
 .

A bipartition of the three qubits 
 
 
 
  is any grouping 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in which two qubits are considered to belong to the same party. The three qubit state can then be considered as a state on 
 
 
 
  and studied with bipartite entanglement measures.







