


Darboux's theorem (analysis)




Darboux's theorem (analysis)

Darboux's theorem is a theorem in real analysis, named after Jean Gaston Darboux. It states that all functions that result from the differentiation of other functions have the intermediate value property: the image of an interval is also an interval.
When f is continuously differentiable (f in C1([a,b])), this is a consequence of the intermediate value theorem. But even when f′ is not continuous, Darboux's theorem places a severe restriction on what it can be.
Darboux's theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be an open interval, 
 
 
 
  a real-valued differentiable function. Then 
 
 
 
  has the intermediate value property: If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are points in 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , there exists an 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .1
Proof
If 
 
 
 
  equals 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , then setting 
 
 
 
  equal to 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , respectively, works. Therefore, without loss of generality, we may assume that 
 
 
 
  is strictly between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and in particular that 
 
 
 
 . Define a new function 
 
 
 
  by


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is continuous on the closed interval 
 
 
 
 , its maximum value on that interval is attained, according to the extreme value theorem, at a point 
 
 
 
  in that interval, i.e. at some 
 
 
 
 . Because 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  nor 
 
 
 
  can be a point, such as 
 
 
 
 , at which 
 
 
 
  attains a local maximum. Therefore, 
 
 
 
 . Hence, again by Fermat's theorem, 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 .2
Another proof based solely on the mean value theorem and the intermediate value theorem is due to Lars Olsen.3
Darboux function
A Darboux function is a real-valued function f which has the "intermediate value property": for any two values a and b in the domain of f, and any y between f(a) and f(b), there is some c between a and b with f(c) = y.4 By the intermediate value theorem, every continuous function is a Darboux function. Darboux's contribution was to show that there are discontinuous Darboux functions.
Every discontinuity of a Darboux function is essential, that is, at any point of discontinuity, at least one of the left hand and right hand limits does not exist.
An example of a Darboux function that is discontinuous at one point, is the function $x \mapsto \sin(1/x)$.
By Darboux's theorem, the derivative of any differentiable function is a Darboux function. In particular, the derivative of the function $x \mapsto x^2\sin(1/x)$ is a Darboux function that is not continuous.
An example of a Darboux function that is nowhere continuous is the Conway base 13 function.
Darboux functions are a quite general class of functions. It turns out that any real-valued function f on the real line can be written as the sum of two Darboux functions.5 This implies in particular that the class of Darboux functions is not closed under addition.
A strongly Darboux function is one for which the image of every (non-empty) open interval is the whole real line. Such functions exist and are Darboux but nowhere continuous.6
Notes


External links




"
Category:Theorems in calculus Category:Continuous mappings Category:Theorems in real analysis Category:Articles containing proofs




Olsen, Lars: A New Proof of Darboux's Theorem, Vol. 111, No. 8 (Oct., 2004) (pp. 713–715), The American Mathematical Monthly


Bruckner, Andrew M: Differentiation of real functions, 2 ed, page 6, American Mathematical Society, 1994





