


Great icosidodecahedron




Great icosidodecahedron

In geometry, the great icosidodecahedron is a nonconvex uniform polyhedron, indexed as U54. It is given a Schläfli symbol r{3,5/2}.
Related polyhedra
It shares the same vertex arrangement with the icosidodecahedron, its convex hull. Unlike the great icosahedron and great dodecahedron, the great icosidodecahedron is not a stellation of the icosidodecahedron.
It also shares its edge arrangement with the great icosihemidodecahedron (having the triangular faces in common), and with the great dodecahemidodecahedron (having the pentagrammic faces in common).





 Great icosidodecahedron


Great dodecahemidodecahedron


Great icosihemidodecahedron




Icosidodecahedron (convex hull)



This polyhedron can be considered a rectified great icosahedron:
The truncated great stellated dodecahedron is a degenerate polyhedron, with 20 triangular faces from the truncated vertices, and 12 (hidden) pentagonal faces as truncations of the original pentagram faces, the latter forming a great dodecahedron inscribed within and sharing the edges of the icosahedron.




Name

Great
 stellated
 dodecahedron

Truncated great stellated dodecahedron

Great
 icosidodecahedron

Truncated
 great
 icosahedron

Great
 icosahedron





Coxeter
 diagram








Picture
(Figure)
Great stellated dodecahedron.png

(Figure)
Icosahedron.png

(Figure)
Great icosidodecahedron.png

(Figure)
Great truncated icosahedron.png

(Figure)
Great icosahedron.png




{{-}}
Great rhombic triacontahedron
In geometry, the great rhombic triacontahedron is a nonconvex isohedral, isotoxal polyhedron. It is the dual of the great icosidodecahedron (U54). It has 30 intersecting rhombic faces.
The great rhombic triacontahedron can be constructed by expanding the size of the faces of a rhombic triacontahedron by a factor of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the golden ratio.
See also

List of uniform polyhedra
Rhombic hexecontahedron

References



External links



Uniform polyhedra and duals

"
Category:Polyhedra


