   Dehn plane      Dehn plane   In geometry , Dehn introduced two examples of planes, a semi-Euclidean geometry and a non-Legendrian geometry , that have infinitely many lines parallel to a given one that pass through a given point, but where the sum of the angles of a triangle is at least π. A similar phenomenon occurs in hyperbolic geometry , except that the sum of the angles of a triangle is less than π. Dehn's examples use a non-Archimedean field, so that the Archimedean axiom is violated. They were introduced by  and discussed by .  Dehn's non-archimedean field Ω( t )  To construct his geometries, Dehn used a non-Archimedean ordered Pythagorean field Ω( t ), a Pythagorean closure of the field of rational functions R ( t ), consisting of the smallest field of real-valued functions on the real line containing the real constants, the identity function t (taking any real number to itself) and closed under the operation ω → √(1+ω 2 ). The field Ω( t ) is ordered by putting x > y if the function x is larger than y for sufficiently large reals. An element x of Ω( t ) is called finite if m | |(x,y)| | = \sqrt{x^2+y^2}, \,  which takes values in Ω( t ), gives a model of Euclidean geometry . The parallel postulate is true in this model, but if the deviation from the perpendicular is infinitesimal (meaning smaller than any positive rational number), the intersecting lines intersect at a point that is not in the finite part of the plane. Hence, if the model is restricted to the finite part of the plane (points ( x , y ) with x and y finite), a geometry is obtained in which the parallel postulate fails but the sum of the angles of a triangle is π. This is Dehn's semi-Euclidean geometry. It is discussed in .  Dehn's non-Legendrian geometry  In the same paper, Dehn also constructed an example of a non-Legendrian geometry where there are infinitely many lines through a point not meeting another line, but the sum of the angles in a triangle exceeds π. Riemann's elliptic geometry over Ω( t ) consists of the projective plane over Ω( t ), which can be identified with the affine plane of points ( x : y :1) together with the "line at infinity", and has the property that the sum of the angles of any triangle is greater than π The non-Legendrian geometry consists of the points ( x : y :1) of this affine subspace such that tx and ty are finite (where as above t is the element of Ω( t ) represented by the identity function). Legendre's theorem states that the sum of the angles of a triangle is at most π, but assumes Archimedes's axiom, and Dehn's example shows that Legendre's theorem need not hold if Archimedes' axiom is dropped.  References       "  Category:Geometry  Category:Non-Euclidean geometry   