


Wiener's tauberian theorem




Wiener's tauberian theorem

In mathematical analysis, Wiener's tauberian theorem is any of several related results proved by Norbert Wiener in 1932.1 They provide a necessary and sufficient condition under which any function in  or  can be approximated by linear combinations of translations of a given function.2
Informally, if the Fourier transform of a function 
 
 
 
  vanishes on a certain set 
 
 
 
 , the Fourier transform of any linear combination of translations of 
 
 
 
  also vanishes on 
 
 
 
 . Therefore the linear combinations of translations of 
 
 
 
  can not approximate a function whose Fourier transform does not vanish on 
 
 
 
 .
Wiener's theorems make this precise, stating that linear combinations of translations of 
 
 
 
  are dense if and only the zero set of the Fourier transform of 
 
 
 
  is empty (in the case of ) or of Lebesgue measure zero (in the case of ).
Gelfand reformulated Wiener's theorem in terms of commutative C*-algebras, when it states that the spectrum of the L1 group ring L1(R) of the group R of real numbers is the dual group of R. A similar result is true when R is replaced by any locally compact abelian group.
The condition in 
Let  be an integrable function. The span of translations  = 
 
 
 
  is dense in  if and only if the Fourier transform of 
 
 
 
  has no real zeros.
Tauberian reformulation
The following statement is equivalent to the previous result, and explains why Wiener's result is a Tauberian theorem:
Suppose the Fourier transform of  has no real zeros, and suppose the convolution 
 
 
 
  tends to zero at infinity for some . Then the convolution 
 
 
 
  tends to zero at infinity for any .
More generally, if



for some  the Fourier transform of which has no real zeros, then also



for any .
Discrete version
Wiener's theorem has a counterpart in : the span of the translations of  is dense if and only if the Fourier transform



has no real zeros. The following statements are equivalent version of this result:

Suppose the Fourier transform of  has no real zeros, and the convolution 
 
 
 
  tends to zero at infinity for some bounded sequence 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  for any .


Let 
 
 
 
  be a function on the unit circle with absolutely convergent Fourier series. Then 
 
 
 
  has absolutely convergent Fourier series if and only if 
 
 
 
  has no zeros.

showed that this is equivalent to the following property of the Wiener algebra

 
 , which he proved using the theory of Banach algebras, thereby giving a new proof of Wiener's result:

The maximal ideals of 
 
 
 
  are all of the form









The condition in 
Let  be a square-integrable function. The span of translations  = 
 
 
 
  is dense in  if and only if the real zeros of the Fourier transform of 
 
 
 
  form a set of zero Lebesgue measure.
The parallel statement in  is as follows: the span of translations of a sequence  is dense if and only if the zero set of the Fourier transform



has zero Lebesgue measure.
Notes
References






External links



"
Category:Real analysis Category:Harmonic analysis Category:Tauberian theorems



See .↩
see .↩




