


Lie bialgebra




Lie bialgebra

In mathematics, a Lie bialgebra is the Lie-theoretic case of a bialgebra: it's a set with a Lie algebra and a Lie coalgebra structure which are compatible.
It is a bialgebra where the comultiplication is skew-symmetric and satisfies a dual Jacobi identity, so that the dual vector space is a Lie algebra, whereas the comultiplication is a 1-cocycle, so that the multiplication and comultiplication are compatible. The cocycle condition implies that, in practice, one studies only classes of bialgebras that are cohomologous to a Lie bialgebra on a coboundary.
They are also called Poisson-Hopf algebras, and are the Lie algebra of a Poisson-Lie group.
Lie bialgebras occur naturally in the study of the Yang-Baxter equations.
Definition
A vector space 
 
 
 
  is a Lie bialgebra if it is a Lie algebra, and there is the structure of Lie algebra also on the dual vector space 
 
 
 
  which is compatible. More precisely the Lie algebra structure on 
 
 
 
  is given by a Lie bracket 
 
 
 
 
  and the Lie algebra structure on 
 
 
 
  is given by a Lie bracket 
 
 
 
 . Then the map dual to 
 
 
 
  is called the cocommutator, 
 
 
 
  and the compatibility condition is the following cocyle relation:



where 
 
 
 
  is the adjoint. Note that this definition is symmetric and 
 
 
 
  is also a Lie bialgebra, the dual Lie bialgebra.
Example
Let 
 
 
 
  be any semisimple Lie algebra. To specify a Lie bialgebra structure we thus need to specify a compatible Lie algebra structure on the dual vector space. Choose a Cartan subalgebra 
 
 
 
  and a choice of positive roots. Let 
 
 
 
  be the corresponding opposite Borel subalgebras, so that 
 
 
 
  and there is a natural projection 
 
 
 
 . Then define a Lie algebra


 
  which is a subalgebra of the product 
 
 
 
 , and has the same dimension as 
 
 
 
 . Now identify 
 
 
 
  with dual of 
 
 
 
  via the pairing


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the Killing form. This defines a Lie bialgebra structure on 
 
 
 
 , and is the "standard" example: it underlies the Drinfeld-Jimbo quantum group. Note that 
 
 
 
  is solvable, whereas 
 
 
 
  is semisimple.
Relation to Poisson-Lie groups
The Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of a Poisson-Lie group G has a natural structure of Lie bialgebra. In brief the Lie group structure gives the Lie bracket on 
 
 
 
  as usual, and the linearisation of the Poisson structure on G gives the Lie bracket on 
 
 
 
  (recalling that a linear Poisson structure on a vector space is the same thing as a Lie bracket on the dual vector space). In more detail, let G be a Poisson-Lie group, with 
 
 
 
  being two smooth functions on the group manifold. Let 
 
 
 
  be the differential at the identity element. Clearly, 
 
 
 
 . The Poisson structure on the group then induces a bracket on 
 
 
 
 , as



where 
 
 
 
  is the Poisson bracket. Given 
 
 
 
  be the Poisson bivector on the manifold, define 
 
 
 
  to be the right-translate of the bivector to the identity element in G. Then one has that



The cocommutator is then the tangent map:



so that



is the dual of the cocommutator.
See also

Lie coalgebra
Manin triple

References

H.-D. Doebner, J.-D. Hennig, eds, Quantum groups, Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Mathematical Physics, Arnold Sommerfeld Institute, Claausthal, FRG, 1989, Springer-Verlag Berlin, ISBN 3-540-53503-9.
Vyjayanthi Chari and Andrew Pressley, A Guide to Quantum Groups, (1994), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge ISBN 0-521-55884-0.

"
Category:Lie algebras Category:Coalgebras Category:Symplectic geometry


