


Total ring of fractions




Total ring of fractions

In abstract algebra, the total quotient ring,1 or total ring of fractions,2 is a construction that generalizes the notion of the field of fractions of an integral domain to commutative rings R that may have zero divisors. The construction embeds R in a larger ring, giving every non-zero-divisor of R an inverse in the larger ring. Nothing more in A can be given an inverse, if one wants the homomorphism from A to the new ring to be injective.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a commutative ring and let 
 
 
 
  be the set of elements which are not zero divisors in 
 
 
 
 ; then 
 
 
 
  is a multiplicatively closed set. Hence we may localize the ring 
 
 
 
  at the set 
 
 
 
  to obtain the total quotient ring 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is a domain, then 
 
 
 
  and the total quotient ring is the same as the field of fractions. This justifies the notation 
 
 
 
 , which is sometimes used for the field of fractions as well, since there is no ambiguity in the case of a domain.
Since 
 
 
 
  in the construction contains no zero divisors, the natural map 
 
 
 
  is injective, so the total quotient ring is an extension of 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
The total quotient ring 
 
 
 
  of a product ring is the product of total quotient rings 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if A and B are integral domains, it is the product of quotient fields.
The total quotient ring of the ring of holomorphic functions on an open set D of complex numbers is the ring of meromorphic functions on D, even if D is not connected.
In an Artinian ring, all elements are units or zero divisors. Hence the set of non-zero divisors is the group of units of the ring, 
 
 
 
 , and so 
 
 
 
 . But since all these elements already have inverses, 
 
 
 
 .
The same thing happens in a commutative von Neumann regular ring R. Suppose a in R is not a zero divisor. Then in a von Neumann regular ring a = axa for some x in R, giving the equation a(xa − 1) = 0. Since a is not a zero divisor, xa = 1, showing a is a unit. Here again, 
 
 
 
 .

In algebraic geometry one considers a sheaf of total quotient rings on a scheme, and this may be used to give one possible definition of a Cartier divisor.

The total ring of fractions of a reduced ring
There is an important fact: 
Proof: Apply the Chinese remainder theorem to Q(A) with the maximal ideals 
 
 
 
  (note
 
 
 
  is maximal since if x in A is not in 
 
 
 
 , then it is a nonzerodivisor and so is a unit in Q(A).) 
 
 

Generalization
If 
 
 
 
  is a commutative ring and 
 
 
 
  is any multiplicative subset in 
 
 
 
 , the localization

 
  can still be constructed, but the ring homomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  might fail to be injective. For example, if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is the trivial ring.
Notes


References

Hideyuki Matsumura, Commutative algebra, 1980
Hideyuki Matsumura, Commutative ring theory, 1989

de:Lokalisierung_(Algebra)#Totalquotientenring"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Ring theory



Matsumura (1980), p. 12↩
Matsumura (1989), p. 21↩




