


Ultrarelativistic limit




Ultrarelativistic limit

In physics, a particle is called ultrarelativistic when its speed is very close to the speed of light 
 
 
 
 .
Max Planck showed that the expression for the relativistic energy of a particle with rest mass 
 
 
 
  and momentum 
 
 
 
  is given by



The energy of an ultrarelativistic particle is almost completely due to its momentum (), and thus can be approximated by 
 
 
 
 . This can result from holding the mass fixed and increasing 
 
 
 
  to very large values (the usual case); or by holding the energy 
 
 
 
  fixed and shrinking the mass 
 
 
 
  to negligible values. The latter is used to derive orbits of massless particles such as the photon from those of massive particles (cf. Kepler problem in general relativity).
In general, the ultrarelativistic limit of an expression is the resulting simplified expression when  is assumed. Or, similarly, in the limit where the Lorentz factor is very large (
 
 
 
 ).1
Ultrarelativistic approximations
Below are some ultrarelativistic approximations in units with 
 
 
 
 . The rapidity is denoted 
 
 
 
 :


 E(1 − v) ≈  {{=}} }}



Motion with constant proper acceleration: , where 
 
 
 
  is the distance traveled, 
 
 
 
  is proper acceleration (with 
 
 
 
 ), 
 
 
 
  is proper time, and travel starts at rest and without changing direction of acceleration (see proper acceleration for more details).
Fixed target collision with ultrarelativistic motion of the center of mass: } where  and  are energies of the particle and the target respectively (so ), and  is energy in the center of mass frame.

Accuracy of the approximation
For calculations of the energy of a particle, the relative error of the ultrarelativistic limit for a speed 
 
 
 
  is about 
 
 
 
 %, and for 
 
 
 
  it is just 
 
 
 
 %. For particles such as neutrinos, whose 
 
 
 
  (Lorentz factor) are usually above  (
 
 
 
  very close to 
 
 
 
 ), the approximation is essentially exact.
Other limits
The opposite case is a so-called classical particle, where its speed is much smaller than 
 
 
 
  and so its energy can be approximated by  mc2 + }}.
See also

Classical mechanics
Special relativity
Aichelburg–Sexl ultraboost

Notes
References



"
Category:Special relativity



↩




