


Starred transform




Starred transform

In applied mathematics, the starred transform, or star transform, is a discrete-time variation of the Laplace transform, so-named because of the asterisk or "star" in the customary notation of the sampled signals. The transform is an operator of a continuous-time function 
 
 
 
 , which is transformed to a function  in the following manner:1



where  is a Dirac comb function, with period of time T.
The starred transform is a convenient mathematical abstraction that represents the Laplace transform of an impulse sampled function , which is the output of an ideal sampler, whose input is a continuous function, 
 
 
 
 .
The starred transform is similar to the Z transform, with a simple change of variables, where the starred transform is explicitly declared in terms of the sampling period (T), while the Z transform is performed on a discrete signal and is independent of the sampling period. This makes the starred transform a de-normalized version of the one-sided Z-transform, as it restores the dependence on sampling parameter T.
Relation to Laplace transform
Since , where:



Then per the convolution theorem, the starred transform is equivalent to the complex convolution of  and }}, hence:2



This line integration is equivalent to integration in the positive sense along a closed contour formed by such a line and an infinite semicircle that encloses the poles of X(s) in the left half-plane of p. The result of such an integration (per the residue theorem) would be:


 
  Alternatively, the aforementioned line integration is equivalent to integration in the negative sense along a closed contour formed by such a line and an infinite semicircle that encloses the infinite poles of }} in the right half-plane of p. The result of such an integration would be:



Relation to Z transform
Given a Z-transform, X(z), the corresponding starred transform is a simple substitution:


 
    3
This substitution restores the dependence on T.
Properties of the starred transform
Property 1:  
 
 
 
  is periodic in 
 
 
 
  with period 
 
 




Property 2:  If  has a pole at 
 
 
 
 , then  must have poles at 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 

Citations
References







Phillips and Nagle, "Digital Control System Analysis and Design", 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall, 1995. ISBN 0-13-309832-X

"
Category:Transforms



Jury, Eliahu I. Analysis and Synthesis of Sampled-Data Control Systems., Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers- Part I: Communication and Electronics, 73.4, 1954, p. 332-346.

Bech, p 9




