   Manu propria      Manu propria     Manu propria is a Latin phrase in the ablative case meaning " (signed) with one's own hand ". In its abbreviated form ( m.p. ), it is sometimes used at the end of typewritten or printed documents or official notices right after the name of the person(s) who "signed" the document exactly in those cases when there is no handwritten signature there.  It is also found in several ancient documents in front of or after the writers signation at the end of the document.  Ordinary personal checks frequently include the abbreviation at the end of the signature line.  Richly decorated manu propria was frequently used by medieval dignitaries and literates to verify authenticity of hand written documents.  Later, official documents were routinely accompanied with this abbreviation, for example declaration of war on Serbia by Emperor Franz Joseph from 1914 ends with m.p. .  Countries which still use "Manu propria" are:   Albania in official documents in an Albanian variation: d.v. ( dora vetë )  the Czech Republic in a Czech variation: v. r. (vlastní rukou) 1 or occasionally in Latin variation m.p.  Hungary in official documents in a Hungarian variation s.k. (sajátkezűleg).  the Slovak Republic in a Slovak variation: v. r. (vlastnou rukou)   Usage in the 18th century  mppria was commonly used in the 18th century. However, it was not only used for Latin documents.   Full autograph title-page of Symphony no.97 by Joseph Haydn which reads 'Sinfonia in C/di me giuseppe Haydn mppria.    792  ¯     normal-¯  792    \overline{792}   ' 2  Adelsbrief André Falquets 3   See also   List of Latin phrases  Seal  Tughra  Autopen   References    "  Category:Latin literary phrases  Category:Latin words and phrases  Category:Authentication methods  Category:Personal identification documents  Category:Writing     See e.g. Czech Technical Norm ČSN 01 6910 6910:2007 Úprava písemností zpracovaných textovými editory, c.f. [ http://prirucka.ujc.cas.cz/?id=860&dotaz; ;=vlastn%C3%AD%20rukou Online Language Handbook in Czech] ↩  Early Music, Vol. 10, No. 4 (Oct., 1982), pp. 496 and footnote nr. 5 : 5 The contraction of manu propria and of the date is usual ↩  Diploma Nobilitatis Andrea Falquet ↩     