


Blancmange curve




Blancmange curve

 In mathematics, the blancmange curve is a fractal curve constructible by midpoint subdivision. It is also known as the Takagi curve, after Teiji Takagi who described it in 1901, or as the Takagi–Landsberg curve, a generalization of the curve named after Takagi and Georg Landsberg. The name blancmange comes from its resemblance to a pudding of the same name. It is a special case of the more general de Rham curve.
Definition
The blancmange function is defined on the unit interval by



where 
 
 
 
  is defined by 
 
 
 
 , that is, 
 
 
 
 
  is the distance from x to the nearest integer.
The Takagi–Landsberg curve is a slight generalization, given by



for a parameter w; thus the blancmange curve is the case 
 
 
 
 . The value 
 
 
 
  is known as the Hurst parameter.
The function can be extended to all of the real line: applying the definition given above shows that the function repeats on each unit interval.
Properties
Convergence and continuity
The infinite sum defining 
 
 
converges absolutely for all x: since 
 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , we have:


 
  if 
 
 
 
 .
Therefore, the Takagi curve of parameter w is defined on the unit interval (or 
 
 
 
 ) if 
 
 
 
 
 .
The Takagi function of parameter w is continuous. Indeed, the functions 
 
 
 
  defined by the partial sums 
 
 
 
  are continuous and converge uniformly toward 
 
 
 
 , since:


 
  for all x when 
 
 
 
 
 .
This value can be made as small as we want by selecting a big enough value of n. Therefore, by the uniform limit theorem, 
 
 
 
  is continuous if |w|w=1/4, one obtains the parabola: the construction of the parabola by midpoint subdivision was described by Archimedes.
Differentiability
The Takagi curve is a fractal for parameters 
 
 
 
 , as it is nowhere differentiable.
Fourier series expansion
The Takagi-Landsberg function admits an absolutely convergent Fourier series expansion:


 
  with 
 
 
 
  and, for 
 
 



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the maximum power of 
 
 
 
  that divides 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, the above triangle wave

 
 
  has an absolutely convergent Fourier series expansion


 
  By absolute convergence, one can reorder the corresponding double series for 
 
 
 
 :



putting 
 
 
 
  yields the above Fourier series for 
 
 
 
 
 .
Graphical construction
The blancmange curve can be visually built up out of triangle wave functions if the infinite sum is approximated by finite sums of the first few terms. In the illustration below, progressively finer triangle functions (shown in red) are added to the curve at each stage.



(Figure)
Blancmange-approx1.svg

(Figure)
Blancmange-approx2.svg

(Figure)
Blancmange-approx3.svg

(Figure)
Blancmange-approx4.svg




n = 0

n ≤ 1

n ≤ 2

n ≤ 3



Recursive definition
The periodic version of the Takagi curve can also be defined recursively by:


 
 .
The version restricted to the unit interval can also be defined recursively by:



Proof:


 
 
 .
Other properties
Integrating the Blancmange curve
Given that the integral of 
 
 
 
  from 0 to 1 is 1/2, the identity 
 
 
 
  allows the integral over any interval to be computed by the following relation. The computation is recursive with computing time on the order of log of the accuracy required.



Relation to simplicial complexes
Let



Define the Kruskal–Katona function



The Kruskal–Katona theorem states that this is the minimum number of (t − 1)-simplexes that are faces of a set of N t-simplexes.
As t and N approach infinity, 
 
 
 
  (suitably normalized) approaches the blancmange curve.
See also

Devil's staircase
Minkowski's question mark function

References



Benoit Mandelbrot, "Fractal Landscapes without creases and with rivers", appearing in The Science of Fractal Images, ed. Heinz-Otto Peitgen, Dietmar Saupe; Springer-Verlag (1988) pp 243–260.
Linas Vepstas, Symmetries of Period-Doubling Maps, (2004)
Donald Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, volume 4a. Combinatorial algorithms, part 1. ISBN 0-201-03804-8. See pages 372-375.

Further reading




External links

Takagi Explorer
(Some properties of the Takagi function)

"
Category:Fractal curves Category:Continuous mappings


