


Monoidal functor




Monoidal functor

In category theory, monoidal functors are functors between monoidal categories which preserve the monoidal structure. More specifically, a monoidal functor between two monoidal categories consists of a functor between the categories, along with two coherence maps—a natural transformation and a morphism that preserve monoidal multiplication and unit, respectively. Mathematicians require these coherence maps to satisfy additional properties depending on how strictly they want to preserve the monoidal structure; each of these properties gives rise to a slightly different definition of monoidal functors

The coherence maps of lax monoidal functors satisfy no additional properties; they are not necessarily invertible.
The coherence maps of strong monoidal functors are invertible.
The coherence maps of strict monoidal functors are identity maps.

Although we distinguish between these different definitions here, authors may call any one of these simply monoidal functors.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be monoidal categories. A monoidal functor from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  consists of a functor

 
  together with a natural transformation


 
  and a morphism


 
 , called the coherence maps or structure morphisms, which are such that for every three objects 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  the diagrams

,
 


    and    
 

commute in the category 
 
 
 
 . Above, the various natural transformations denoted using 
 
 
 
  are parts of the monoidal structure on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Variants

The dual of a monoidal functor is a comonoidal functor; it is a monoidal functor whose coherence maps are reversed. Comonoidal functors may also be called opmonoidal, colax monoidal, or oplax monoidal functors.


A strong monoidal functor is a monoidal functor whose coherence maps 
 
 
 
  are invertible.
A strict monoidal functor is a monoidal functor whose coherence maps are identities.
A braided monoidal functor is a monoidal functor between braided monoidal categories such that the following diagram commutes for every pair of objects A, B in 
 
 
 
  :






A symmetric monoidal functor is a braided monoidal functor whose domain and codomain are symmetric monoidal categories.

Examples

The underlying functor 
 
 
 
  from the category of abelian groups to the category of sets. In this case, the map 
 
 
 
  sends (a, b) to 
 
 
 
 ; the map 
 
 
 
  sends * to 1.


An important example of a symmetric monoidal functor is the mathematical model of topological quantum field theory, which has been recently developed. Let 
 
 
 
  be the category of cobordisms of n-1,n-dimensional manifolds with tensor product given by disjoint union, and unit the empty manifold. A topological quantum field theory in dimension n is a symmetric monoidal functor 
 
 


Monoidal functors and adjunctions
Suppose that a functor 
 
 
 
  is left adjoint to a monoidal 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  has a comonoidal structure 
 
 
 
  induced by 
 
 
 
 , defined by


 
  and


 
 .
If the induced structure on 
 
 
 
  is strong, then the unit and counit of the adjunction are monoidal natural transformations, and the adjunction is said to be a monoidal adjunction; conversely, the left adjoint of a monoidal adjunction is always a strong monoidal functor.
Similarly, a right adjoint to a comonoidal functor is monoidal, and the right adjoint of a comonoidal adjunction is a strong monoidal functor.
See also

Monoidal natural transformation

References

Kelly, G. Max (1974), "Doctrinal adjunction", Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 420, 257–280

"
Category:Monoidal categories


