


Long Josephson junction




Long Josephson junction

In superconductivity, a long Josephson junction (LJJ) is a Josephson junction which has one or more dimensions longer than the Josephson penetration depth

 
 . This definition is not strict.
In terms of underlying model a short Josephson junction is characterized by the Josephson phase

 
 , which is only a function of time, but not of coordinates i.e. the Josephson junction is assumed to be point-like in space. In contrast, in a long Josephson junction the Josephson phase can be a function of one or two spatial coordinates, i.e., 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
Simple model: the sine-Gordon equation
The simplest and the most frequently used model which describes the dynamics of the Josephson phase 
 
 
 
  in LJJ is the so-called perturbed sine-Gordon equation. For the case of 1D LJJ it looks like:





where subscripts 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  denote partial derivatives with respect to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the Josephson penetration depth, 
 
 
 
  is the Josephson plasma frequency, 
 
 
 
 
  is the so-called characteristic frequency and 
 
 
 
  is the bias current density 
 
 
 
  normalized to the critical current density 
 
 
 
 . In the above equation, the r.h.s. is considered as perturbation.
Usually for theoretical studies one uses normalized sine-Gordon equation:





where spatial coordinate is normalized to the Josephson penetration depth

 
 
  and time is normalized to the inverse plasma frequency 
 
 
 
 . The parameter 
 
 
 
  is the dimensionless damping parameter (
 
 
 
  is McCumber-Stewart parameter), and, finally, 
 
 
 
  is a normalized bias current.
Important solutions

Small amplitude plasma waves. 
 
 



Soliton (aka fluxon, Josephson vortex):1






Here 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the normalized coordinate, normalized time and normalized velocity. The physical velocity 
 
 
 
 
  is normalized to the so-called Swihart velocity

 
 , which represent a typical unit of velocity and equal to the unit of space 
 
 
 
  divided by unit of time 
 
 
 
 .
References
"
Category:Superconductivity Category:Josephson effect



M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity, 2nd ed., Dover New York (1996).↩




