


Next-to-Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model




Next-to-Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model

In particle physics, NMSSM is an acronym for Next-to-Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model. 12345 It is a supersymmetric extension to the Standard Model that adds an additional singlet chiral superfield to the MSSM and can be used to dynamically generate the 
 
 
 
  term, solving the 

 
 -problem. Articles about the NMSSM are available for review.67
The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model does not explain why the 
 
 
 
  parameter in the superpotential term 
 
 
 
  is at the electroweak scale. The idea behind the Next to Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model is to promote the 
 
 
 
  term to a gauge singlet, chiral superfield

 
 . Note that the scalar superpartner of the singlino 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
  and the spin-1/2 singlino superpartner by 
 
 
 
  in the following. The superpotential for the NMSSM is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  gives the Yukawa couplings for the Standard Model fermions. Since the superpotential has mass dimension three, the couplings 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are dimensionless, hence the 
 
 
 
 -problem of the MSSM is solved in the NMSSM – the superpotential of the NMSSM is scale invariant. The role of the 
 
 
 
  term is to generate an effective 
 
 
 
  term. This is done with the scalar component of the singlet 
 
 
 
  getting a vacuum-expectation value 
 
 
 
 , that is, we have


 
  Without the 
 
 
 
  term the superpotential would have a U(1)' symmetry, so-called Peccei–Quinn symmetry; see Peccei–Quinn theory. This additional symmetry would alter the phenomenology completely. The role of the 
 
 
 
  term is to break this U(1)' symmetry. The 
 
 
 
  term is introduced trilinear such that 
 
 
 
  is dimensionless. However there remains a discrete 
 
 
 
  symmetry, which is moreover broken spontaneously.8 In principle this leads to the domain wall problem. Introducing additional, but suppressed terms, the 
 
 
 
  symmetry can be broken without changing phenomenology at the electroweak scale.9 It is assumed that the domain wall problem is circumvented in this way without any modifications except far beyond the electroweak scale.
Also alternative models have been proposed which solve the 
 
 
 
 -problem of the MSSM. One idea is to keep the 
 
 
 
  term in the superpotential and take the U(1)' symmetry into account. Assuming this symmetry to be local an additional 
 
 
 
  gauge boson is predicted in this model, called UMSSM .
Phenomenology
Due to the additional singlet 
 
 
 
  the NMSSM alters in general the phenomenology of both the Higgs sector and the neutralino sector compared to the MSSM.
Higgs phenomenology
In the Standard Model we have one physical Higgs boson. In the MSSM we encounter five physical Higgs bosons. Due to the additional singlet 
 
 
 
  in the NMSSM we have two more Higgs bosons, that is, in total seven physical Higgs bosons. The Higgs sector is therefore much richer compared to the MSSM. In particular, the Higgs potential is in general no longer invariant under CP transformations; see CP violation. Typically, the Higgs bosons in the NMSSM are denoted in an order with increasing masses, that is, by 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  the lightest Higgs boson. In the special case of a CP conserving Higgs potential we have three CP even Higgs bosons, 
 
 
 
 , two CP odd ones, 
 
 
 
  and a pair of charged Higgs bosons, 
 
 
 
 . In the MSSM, the lightest Higgs boson is always Standard Model-like, and therefore its production and decays are roughly known. In the NMSSM, the lightest Higgs can be very light (even of the order of 1 GeV) and may have escaped detection so far. In addition, in the CP-conserving case, the lightest CP-even Higgs boson turns out to have an enhanced lower bound compared to the MSSM. This is one of the reasons why the NMSSM deserves much attraction in recent years.
Neutralino phenomenology
The spin-1/2 singlino 
 
 
 
  gives a fifth neutralino, compared to the four neutralinos of the MSSM. The singlino does not couple to gauge bosons, gauginos (the superpartners of the gauge bosons), leptons, sleptons (the superpartners of the leptons), quarks or squarks (the superpartners of the quarks). Suppose that a supersymmetric partner particle is produced at a collider, for instance at the LHC, the singlino is omitted in cascade decays and therefore escapes detection. However in case the singlino is the lightest supersymmetric particle (LSP) all supersymmetric partner particles eventually decay into the singlino. Due to R parity conservation this LSP is stable. In this way the singlino could be detected via missing transversal energy in the detector.
References
"
Category:Particle physics Category:Supersymmetry



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
 Translated in ↩
↩




