


Line–plane intersection




Line–plane intersection

 In analytic geometry, the intersection of a line and a plane can be the empty set, a point, or a line. Distinguishing these cases, and determining equations for the point and line in the latter cases, have use in computer graphics, motion planning, and collision detection.
Algebraic form
In vector notation, a plane can be expressed as the set of points 
 
 
 
  for which


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a normal vector to the plane and 
 
 
 
 
  is a point on the plane. (The notation 
 
 
 
  denotes the dot product of the two vector 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .)
The vector equation for a line is


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is a vector in the direction of the line, 
 
 
 
  is a point on the line, and 
 
 
 
  is a scalar in the real number domain. Substitute the equation for the line into the equation for the plane gives


 
  Expanding gives


 
  And solve for 
 
 




If 
 
 
 
  then the line and plane are parallel. There will be two cases: if 
 
 
 
  then the line is contained in the plane, that is, the line intersects the plane at each point of the line. Otherwise, the line and plane have no intersection.
If 
 
 
 
  there is a single point of intersection. The value of 
 
 
 
 
  can be calculated and the point of intersection is given by


 
 .
Parametric form
 A line is described by all points that are a given direction from a point. Thus a general point on a line can be represented as



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two distinct points along the line.
Similarly a general point on a plane can be represented as



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  are three points in the plane which are not co-linear.
The point at which the line intersects the plane is therefore described by setting the point on the line equal to the point on the plane, giving the parametric equation:


 
  This can be rewritten as


 
  which can be expressed in matrix form as:



The point of intersection is then equal to



If the line is parallel to the plane then the vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  will be linearly dependent and the matrix will be singular. This situation will also occur when the line lies in the plane.
If the solution satisfies the condition 
 
 
 
 
 , then the intersection point is on the line between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
If the solution satisfies


 
  then the intersection point is in the plane inside the triangle spanned by the three points 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
This problem is typically solved by expressing it in matrix form, and inverting it:



Uses
In the ray tracing method of computer graphics a surface can be represented as a set of pieces of planes. The intersection of a ray of light with each plane is used to produce an image of the surface. In vision-based 3D reconstruction, a subfield of computer vision, depth values are commonly measured by so-called triangulation method, which finds the intersection between light plane and ray reflected toward camera.
The algorithm can be generalised to cover intersection with other planar figures, in particular, the intersection of a polyhedron with a line.
See also

Plücker coordinates#Plane-line meet calculating the intersection when the line is expressed by Plücker coordinates.

cs:Analytická geometrie#Vzájemná poloha dvou rovin v třírozměrném prostoru"
Category:Euclidean geometry Category:Computational physics Category:Geometric algorithms


