


Jeffrey Lagarias




Jeffrey Lagarias

Jeffrey Clark Lagarias (born November, 1949 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA) is a mathematician and professor at the University of Michigan.
Education
While in high school in 1966, Lagarias studied astronomy at the Summer Science Program.
He completed an S.B. and S.M. in Mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1972.1 The title of his thesis was "Evaluation of certain character sums".2 He was a Putnam Fellow at MIT in 1970.3 He received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from MIT for his thesis "The 4-part of the class group of a quadratic field", in 1974.45 His advisor for both his masters and Ph.D was Harold Stark.6
Career
In 1975 he joined AT&T; Bell Laboratories and eventually became Distinguished Member of Technical Staff. Since 1995, he has been a Technology Consultant at AT&T; Research Laboratories. In 2002, he moved to Michigan to work at the University and settle down with his family.
While his recent work has been in theoretical computer science, his original training was in analytic algebraic number theory. He has since worked in many areas, both pure and applied, and considers himself a mathematical generalist. Lagarias discovered an elementary problem that is equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis, namely whether for all n > 0, we have



with equality only when n = 1. Here Hn is the nth harmonic number, the sum of the reciprocals of the first 
 
 
 
  positive integers, and σ(n) is the divisor function, the sum of the positive divisors of n.7 He disproved Keller's conjecture in dimensions at least 10. Lagarias has also done work on the Collatz conjecture and Li's criterion and has written several highly cited papers in symbolic computation with Dave Bayer.
Awards and honors
He received in 1986 a Lester R. Ford award from the Mathematical Association of America89 and again in 2007.10
In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.11
External links


Jeffrey Clark Lagarias homepage, University of Michigan

References
"
Category:1949 births Category:Living people Category:People from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Category:Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni Category:Scientists at Bell Labs Category:20th-century mathematicians Category:21st-century mathematicians Category:Number theorists Category:American computer scientists Category:Theoretical computer scientists Category:University of Michigan faculty Category:Putnam Fellows Category:Summer Science Program Category:Fellows of the American Mathematical Society Category:Fellows of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics










http://oldweb.cecm.sfu.ca/CMS-95W/lagarias.html


List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society, retrieved 2013-01-27.




