


Logarithmic mean




Logarithmic mean

(Figure)
Three-dimensional plot showing the values of the logarithmic mean.

In mathematics, the logarithmic mean is a function of two non-negative numbers which is equal to their difference divided by the logarithm of their quotient. In symbols:



for the positive numbers 
 
 
 
 . This calculation is applicable in engineering problems involving heat and mass transfer.
Inequalities
The logarithmic mean of two numbers is smaller than the arithmetic mean but larger than the geometric mean (unless the numbers are the same, in which case all three means are equal to the numbers):



Derivation of the mean
Mean value theorem of differential calculus
From the mean value theorem


 
  the logarithmic mean is obtained as the value of 
 
 
 
  by substituting 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 



 
  and solving for 
 
 
 
 .



Integration
The logarithmic mean can also be interpreted as the area under an exponential curve.




The area interpretation allows the easy derivation of some basic properties of the logarithmic mean. Since the exponential function is monotonic, the integral over an interval of length 1 is bounded by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The Homogeneity of the integral operator is transferred to the mean operator, that is 
 
 
 
 .
Generalization
Mean value theorem of differential calculus
You can generalize the mean to 
 
 
 
  variables by considering the mean value theorem for divided differences for the 
 
 
 
 th derivative of the logarithm. You obtain


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes a divided difference of the logarithm.
For 
 
 
 
  this leads to


 
 .
Integral
The integral interpretation can also be generalized to more variables, but it leads to a different result. Given the simplex

 
  with 
 
 
 
  and an appropriate measure 
 
 
 
  which assigns the simplex a volume of 1, we obtain


 
  This can be simplified using divided differences of the exponential function to


 
 .
Example 
 
 



 
 .
Connection to other means



 
  (Arithmetic mean)

See also

A different mean which is related to logarithms is the geometric mean.
The logarithmic mean is a special case of the Stolarsky mean.
Logarithmic mean temperature difference

References

Logarithmic mean @ Everything2.com
Oilfield Glossary: Term 'logarithmic mean'

Stolarsky, Kenneth B.: Generalizations of the logarithmic mean, Mathematics Magazine, Vol. 48, No. 2, Mar., 1975, pp 87–92

"
Category:Means


