


First quantization




First quantization

A first quantization of a physical system is a semi-classical treatment of quantum mechanics, in which particles or physical objects are treated using quantum wave functions but the surrounding environment (for example a potential well or a bulk electromagnetic field or gravitational field) is treated classically. First quantization is appropriate for studying a single quantum-mechanical system being controlled by a laboratory apparatus that is itself large enough that classical mechanics is applicable to most of the apparatus.
Theoretical background
The starting point is the notion of quantum states and the observables of the system under consideration. Quantum theory postulates that all quantum states are represented by state vectors in a Hilbert space, and that all observables are represented by Hermitian operators acting on that space.1 Parallel state vectors represent the same physical state, and therefore one mostly deals with normalized state vectors. Any given Hermitan operator 
 
 
 
  has a number of eigenstates

 
  that are left invariant by the action of the operator up to a real scale factor 
 
 
 
 , i. e., 
 
 
 
 . The scale factors are denoted the eigenvalues of the operator. It is a fundamental theorem of Hilbert space theory that the set of all eigenvectors of any given Hermitian operator forms a complete basis set of the Hilbert space.
In general the eigenstates

 
  and 
 
 
 
  of two different Hermitian operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not the same. By measurement of the type 
 
 
 
  the quantum state can be prepared to be in an eigenstate 
 
 
 
 . This state can also be expressed as a superposition of eigenstates 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . If one measures the dynamical variable associated with the operator 
 
 
 
  in this state, one cannot in general predict the outcome with certainty. It is only described in probabilistic terms. The probability of having any given 
 
 
 
  as the outcome is given as the absolute square 
 
 
 
  of the associated expansion coefficient. This non-causal element of quantum theory is also known as the wave function collapse. However, between collapse events the time evolution of quantum states is perfectly deterministic.
The time evolution of a state vector 
 
 
 
  is governed by the central operator in quantum mechanics, the Hamiltonian

 
  (the operator associated with the total energy of the system), through Schrödinger's equation:



Each state vector 
 
 
 
  is associated with an adjoint state vector 
 
 
 
  and can form inner products, "bra(c)kets" 
 
 
 
  between adjoint "bra" states 
 
 
 
  and "ket" states 
 
 
 
 . The standard geometrical terminology is used; e.g. the norm squared of 
 
 
 
  is given by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are said to be orthogonal if 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is an orthonormal basis of the Hilbert space, the above-mentioned expansion coefficient 
 
 
 
  is found forming inner products
 
 
 
 . A further connection between the direct and the adjoint Hilbert space is given by the relation 
 
 
 
 , which also leads to the definition of adjoint operators. For a given operator 
 
 
 
  the adjoint operator 
 
 
 
  is defined by demanding 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
One-particle systems
In general, the one-particle state could be described by a complete set of quantum numbers denoted by 
 
 
 
 . For example, the three quantum numbers

 
  associated to an electron in a coulomb potential, like the hydrogen atom, form a complete set (ignoring spin). Hence, the state is called 
 
 
 
  and is an eigenvector of the Hamiltonian operator. One can obtain a state function representation of the state using 
 
 
 
 . All eigenvectors of a Hermitian operator form a complete basis, so one can construct any state 
 
 
 
  obtaining the completeness relation:



All the properties of the particle could be known using this vector basis.
Many-particle systems
When turning to N-particle systems, i.e., systems containing N identical particles i.e. particles characterized by the same physical parameters such as mass, charge and spin, is necessary an extension of single-particle state function 
 
 
 
  to the N-particle state function 
 
 
 
 .2 A fundamental difference between classical and quantum mechanics concerns the concept of indistinguishability of identical particles. Only two species of particles are thus possible in quantum physics, the so-called bosons and fermions which obey the rules:


 
  (bosons),


 
  (fermions).
Where we have interchanged two coordinates 
 
 
 
  of the state function. The usual wave function is obtained using the slater determinant and the identical particles theory. Using this basis, it is possible to solve any many-particle problem.
References


See also

Quantization
Canonical quantization
Second quantization

"
Category:Quantum mechanics









