


Hyperelastic material




Hyperelastic material

 A hyperelastic or Green elastic material1 is a type of constitutive model for ideally elastic material for which the stress-strain relationship derives from a strain energy density function. The hyperelastic material is a special case of a Cauchy elastic material.
For many materials, linear elastic models do not accurately describe the observed material behaviour. The most common example of this kind of material is rubber, whose stress-strain relationship can be defined as non-linearly elastic, isotropic, incompressible and generally independent of strain rate. Hyperelasticity provides a means of modeling the stress-strain behavior of such materials.2 The behavior of unfilled, vulcanized elastomers often conforms closely to the hyperelastic ideal. Filled elastomers and biological tissues are also often modeled via the hyperelastic idealization.
Ronald Rivlin and Melvin Mooney developed the first hyperelastic models, the Neo-Hookean and Mooney–Rivlin solids. Many other hyperelastic models have since been developed. Other widely used hyperelastic material models include the Ogden model and the Arruda–Boyce model.
Hyperelastic material models
Saint Venant–Kirchhoff model
The simplest hyperelastic material model is the Saint Venant–Kirchhoff model which is just an extension of the linear elastic material model to the nonlinear regime. This model has the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress and 
 
 
 
  is the Lagrangian Green strain, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Lamé constants.
The strain-energy density function for the St. Venant–Kirchhoff model is


 
  and the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress can be derived from the relation



Classification of hyperelastic material models
Hyperelastic material models can be classified as:
1) phenomenological descriptions of observed behavior

Fung
Mooney–Rivlin
Ogden
Polynomial
Saint Venant–Kirchhoff
Yeoh
Marlow

2) mechanistic models deriving from arguments about underlying structure of the material

Arruda–Boyce model
Neo-Hookean

3) hybrids of phenomenological and mechanistic models

Gent
Van der Waals

Generally, a hyperelastic model should satisfy the Drucker stability criterion. Some hyperelastic models satisfy the Valanis-Landel hypothesis which states that the strain energy function can be separated into the sum of separate functions of the principal stretches

 
 :



Stress-strain relations
Compressible hyperelastic materials
First Piola–Kirchhoff stress
If 
 
 
 
  is the strain energy density function, the 1st Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor can be calculated for a hyperelastic material as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient. In terms of the Lagrangian Green strain (
 
 
 
 )


 
  In terms of the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor (
 
 
 
 )



Second Piola–Kirchhoff stress
If 
 
 
 
  is the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor then


 
  In terms of the Lagrangian Green strain


 
  In terms of the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor


 
  The above relation is also known as the Doyle-Ericksen formula in the material configuration.
Cauchy stress
Similarly, the Cauchy stress is given by


 
  In terms of the Lagrangian Green strain


 
  In terms of the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor


 
  The above expression can also be expressed in terms of the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor. In that case 3



Incompressible hyperelastic materials
For an incompressible material 
 
 
 
 . The incompressibility constraint is therefore 
 
 
 
 . To ensure incompressibility of a hyperelastic material, the strain-energy function can be written in form:


 
  where the hydrostatic pressure 
 
 
 
  functions as a Lagrangian multiplier to enforce the incompressibility constraint. The 1st Piola–Kirchhoff stress now becomes


 
  This stress tensor can subsequently be converted into any of the other conventional stress tensors, such as the Cauchy Stress tensor which is given by



Expressions for the Cauchy stress
Compressible isotropic hyperelastic materials
For isotropic hyperelastic materials, the Cauchy stress can be expressed in terms of the invariants of the left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor (or right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor). If the strain energy density function is 
 
 
 
 
 , then


 
 
  (See the page on the left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor for the definitions of these symbols).






Proof 1:





The second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor for a hyperelastic material is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor and 
 
 
 
  is the deformation gradient. The Cauchy stress is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the three principal invariants of 
 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  The derivatives of the invariants of the symmetric tensor 
 
 
 
  are


 
  Therefore we can write


 
  Plugging into the expression for the Cauchy stress gives


 
  Using the left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor

 
  and noting that 
 
 
 
 , we can write


 
  For an incompressible material 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
 .Then


 
  Therefore the Cauchy stress is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an undetermined pressure which acts as a Lagrange multiplier to enforce the incompressibility constraint. If, in addition, 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
  and hence


 
  In that case the Cauchy stress can be expressed as














Proof 2:





The isochoric deformation gradient is defined as 
 
 
 
 , resulting in the isochoric deformation gradient having a determinant of 1, in other words it is volume stretch free. Using this one can subsequently define the isochoric left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor tensor 
 
 
 
 . The invariants of 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
  The set of invariants which are used to define the distortional behavior are the first two invariants of the isochoric left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor tensor, (which are identical to the ones for the right Cauchy Green stretch tensor), and add 
 
 
 
  into the fray to describe the volumetric behaviour. To express the Cauchy stress in terms of the invariants 
 
 
 
  recall that


 
  The chain rule of differentiation gives us


 
 
  Recall that the Cauchy stress is given by


 
  In terms of the invariants 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  Plugging in the expressions for the derivatives of 
 
 
 
  in terms of 
 
 
 
 , we have


 
 
  or,


 
 
  In terms of the deviatoric part of 
 
 
 
 , we can write


 
 
  For an incompressible material 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
 .Then the Cauchy stress is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an undetermined pressure-like Lagrange multiplier term. In addition, if 
 
 
 
 , we have 
 
 
 
  and hence the Cauchy stress can be expressed as














Proof 3:





To express the Cauchy stress in terms of the stretches

 
  recall that


 
  The chain rule gives


 
 
  The Cauchy stress is given by


 
  Plugging in the expression for the derivative of 
 
 
 
  leads to


 
  Using the spectral decomposition of 
 
 
 
  we have


 
  Also note that


 
  Therefore the expression for the Cauchy stress can be written as


 
  For an incompressible material 
 
 
 
  and hence 
 
 
 
 . Following Ogden4 p. 485, we may write


 
  Some care is to required at this stage because, when an eigenvalue is repeated, it is in general only Gâteaux differentiable, but not Fréchet differentiable.56 A rigorous tensor derivative can only be found by solving another eigenvalue problem. If we express the stress in terms of differences between components,


 
  If in addition to incompressibility we have 
 
 
 
  then a possible solution to the problem requires 
 
 
 
  and we can write the stress differences as









Incompressible isotropic hyperelastic materials
For incompressible isotropic hyperelastic materials, the strain energy density function is 
 
 
 
 . The Cauchy stress is then given by


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an undetermined pressure. In terms of stress differences


 
  If in addition 
 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  If 
 
 
 
 , then



Consistency with linear elasticity
Consistency with linear elasticity is often used to determine some of the parameters of hyperelastic material models. These consistency conditions can be found by comparing Hooke's law with linearized hyperelasticity at small strains.
Consistency conditions for isotropic hyperelastic models
For isotropic hyperelastic materials to be consistent with isotropic linear elasticity, the stress-strain relation should have the following form in the infinitesimal strain limit:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  are the Lame constants. The strain energy density function that corresponds to the above relation is7


 
  For an incompressible material 
 
 
 
  and we have


 
  For any strain energy density function 
 
 
 
  to reduce to the above forms for small strains the following conditions have to be met8



If the material is incompressible then the above conditions may be expressed in the following form.


 
 
  These conditions can be used to find relations between the parameters of a given hyperelastic model and shear and bulk moduli.
Consistency conditions for incompressible 
 
 
 
  based rubber materials
Many elastomers are modeled adequately by a strain energy density function that depends only on 
 
 
 
 
 . For such materials we have 
 
 
 
 . The consistency conditions for incompressible materials for 
 
 
 
  may then be expressed as


 
  The second consistency condition above can be derived by noting that


 
  The can then be substituted into the consistency condition for isotropic incompressible hyperelastic materials.
References


See also

Cauchy elastic material
Continuum mechanics
Deformation (mechanics)
Finite strain theory
Rubber elasticity
Stress measures
Stress (mechanics)

"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Elasticity (physics) Category:Rubber properties Category:Solid mechanics



R.W. Ogden, 1984, Non-Linear Elastic Deformations, ISBN 0-486-69648-0, Dover.↩
Muhr, A. H. (2005). Modeling the stress-strain behavior of rubber. Rubber chemistry and technology, 78(3), 391-425. 1↩
Y. Basar, 2000, Nonlinear continuum mechanics of solids, Springer, p. 157.↩

Fox & Kapoor, Rates of change of eigenvalues and eigenvectors, AIAA Journal, 6 (12) 2426–2429 (1968)↩
Friswell MI. The derivatives of repeated eigenvalues and their associated eigenvectors. Journal of Vibration and Acoustics (ASME) 1996; 118:390–397.↩






