


Mountain pass theorem




Mountain pass theorem

The mountain pass theorem is an existence theorem from the calculus of variations. Given certain conditions on a function, the theorem demonstrates the existence of a saddle point. The theorem is unusual in that there are many other theorems regarding the existence of extrema, but few regarding saddle points.
Theorem statement
The assumptions of the theorem are:

I is a functional from a Hilbert space H to the reals,


 
  and 
 
 
 
  is Lipschitz continuous on bounded subsets of H,
I satisfies the Palais-Smale compactness condition,


 
 ,
there exist positive constants r and a such that 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 , and
there exists 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .

If we define:


 
  and:


 
  then the conclusion of the theorem is that c is a critical value of I.
Visualization
The intuition behind the theorem is in the name "mountain pass." Consider I as describing elevation. Then we know two low spots in the landscape: the origin because 
 
 
 
 , and a far-off spot v where 
 
 
 
 . In between the two lies a range of mountains (at 
 
 
 
 ) where the elevation is high (higher than a>0). In order to travel along a path g from the origin to v, we must pass over the mountains — that is, we must go up and then down. Since I is somewhat smooth, there must be a critical point somewhere in between. (Think along the lines of the mean-value theorem.) The mountain pass lies along the path that passes at the lowest elevation through the mountains. Note that this mountain pass is almost always a saddle point.
For a proof, see section 8.5 of Evans.
Weaker formulation
Let 
 
 
 
  be Banach space. The assumptions of the theorem are:



 
  and have a Gâteaux derivative

 
  which is continuous when 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are endowed with strong topology and weak* topology respectively.
There exists 
 
 
 
  such that one can find certain 
 
 
 
  with



 
 .



 
  satisfies weak Palais-Smale condition on 
 
 
 
 .

In this case there is a critical point

 
  of 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . Moreover if we define


 
  then



For a proof, see section 5.5 of Aubin and Ekeland.
References






"
Category:Mathematical analysis Category:Calculus of variations Category:Theorems in analysis


