


Constraint inference




Constraint inference

In constraint satisfaction, constraint inference is a relationship between constraints and their consequences. A set of constraints 
 
 
 
  entails a constraint 
 
 
 
  if every solution to 
 
 
 
  is also a solution to 
 
 
 
 . In other words, if 
 
 
 
  is a valuation of the variables in the scopes of the constraints in 
 
 
 
  and all constraints in 
 
 
 
  are satisfied by 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  also satisfies the constraint 
 
 
 
 .
Some operations on constraints produce a new constraint that is a consequence of them. Constraint composition operates on a pair of binary constraints 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with a common variable. The composition of such two constraints is the constraint 
 
 
 
  that is satisfied by every evaluation of the two non-shared variables for which there exists a value of the shared variable 
 
 
 
  such that the evaluation of these three variables satisfies the two original constraints 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Constraint projection restricts the effects of a constraint to some of its variables. Given a constraint 
 
 
 
  its projection to a subset 
 
 
 
  of its variables is the constraint 
 
 
 
  that is satisfied by an evaluation if this evaluation can be extended to the other variables in such a way the original constraint 
 
 
 
  is satisfied.
Extended composition is similar in principle to composition, but allows for an arbitrary number of possibly non-binary constraints; the generated constraint is on an arbitrary subset of the variables of the original constraints. Given constraints 
 
 
 
  and a list 
 
 
 
  of their variables, the extended composition of them is the constraint 
 
 
 
  where an evaluation of 
 
 
 
  satisfies this constraint if it can be extended to the other variables so that 
 
 
 
  are all satisfied.
See also

Constraint satisfaction problem

References


ISBN 1-55860-890-7

ISBN 0-521-82583-0

ISBN 0-262-13341-5

"
Category:Constraint programming Category:Inference


