


Lagrange's theorem (number theory)




Lagrange's theorem (number theory)

In number theory, Lagrange's theorem is a statement named after Joseph-Louis Lagrange about how frequently a polynomial over the integers may evaluate to a multiple of a fixed prime. More precisely, it states that if p is a prime number and 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial with integer coefficients, then either:

every coefficient of f(x) is divisible by p, or


 
  has at most deg f(x) incongruent solutions.

Solutions are "incongruent" if they do not differ by a multiple of p. If the modulus is not prime, then it is possible for there to be more than deg f(x) solutions.
A proof of Lagrange's theorem
The two key ideas are the following. Let 
 
 
 
  be the polynomial obtained from 
 
 
 
  by taking the coefficients 
 
 
 
 . Now (i) 
 
 
 
  is divisible by 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 ; (ii) 
 
 
 
  has no more roots than its degree.
More rigorously, start by noting that 
 
 
 
  if and only if each coefficient of 
 
 
 
  is divisible by 
 
 
 
 . Assume 
 
 
 
  is not 0; its degree is thus well-defined. It's easy to see 
 
 
 
 . To prove (i), first note that we can compute 
 
 
 
  either directly, i.e. by plugging in (the residue class of) 
 
 
 
  and performing arithmetic in 
 
 
 
 , or by reducing 
 
 
 
 . Hence 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 , i.e. if and only if 
 
 
 
  is divisible by 
 
 
 
 . To prove (ii), note that 
 
 
 
  is a field, which is a standard fact; a quick proof is to note that since 
 
 
 
  is prime, 
 
 
 
  is a finite integral domain, hence is a field. Another standard fact is that a non-zero polynomial over a field has at most as many roots as its degree; this follows from the division algorithm.
Finally, note that two solutions 
 
 
 
  are incongruent if and only if 
 
 
 
 . Putting it all together: the number of incongruent solutions by (i) is the same as the number of roots of 
 
 
 
 , which by (ii) is at most 
 
 
 
 , which is at most 
 
 
 
 .
References




"
Category:Theorems about prime numbers Category:Polynomials


