


Semiparametric model




Semiparametric model

In statistics a semiparametric model is a model that has parametric and nonparametric components.
A model is a collection of distributions
 
 
 
  indexed by a parameter 
 
 
 
 .

A parametric model is one in which the indexing parameter is a finite-dimensional vector (in 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space for some integer 
 
 
 
 ); i.e. the set of possible values for 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 . In this case we say that 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional.
In nonparametric models, the set of possible values of the parameter 
 
 
 
  is a subset of some space, not necessarily finite-dimensional. For example, we might consider the set of all distributions with mean 0. Such spaces are vector spaces with topological structure, but may not be finite-dimensional as vector spaces. Thus, 
 
 
 
  for some possibly infinite-dimensional space 
 
 
 
 .
In semiparametric models, the parameter has both a finite-dimensional component and an infinite-dimensional component (often a real-valued function defined on the real line). Thus the parameter space 
 
 
 
  in a semiparametric model satisfies 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an infinite-dimensional space.

It may appear at first that semiparametric models include nonparametric models, since they have an infinite-dimensional as well as a finite-dimensional component. However, a semiparametric model is considered to be "smaller" than a completely nonparametric model because we are often interested only in the finite-dimensional component of 
 
 
 
 . That is, we are not interested in estimating the infinite-dimensional component. In nonparametric models, by contrast, the primary interest is in estimating the infinite-dimensional parameter. Thus the estimation task is statistically harder in nonparametric models.
These models often use smoothing or kernels.
Example
A well-known example of a semiparametric model is the Cox proportional hazards model.1 If we are interested in studying the time 
 
 
 
  to an event such as death due to cancer or failure of a light bulb, the Cox model specifies the following distribution function for 
 
 
 
 :


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the covariate vector, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are unknown parameters. 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional and is of interest; 
 
 
 
  is an unknown non-negative function of time (known as the baseline hazard function) and is often a nuisance parameter. The collection of possible candidates for 
 
 
 
  is infinite-dimensional.
See also

Semiparametric regression
Statistical model

References
"
Category:Statistical theory Category:Statistical models Category:Semi-parametric models








