


Hopf invariant




Hopf invariant

In mathematics, in particular in algebraic topology, the Hopf invariant is a homotopy invariant of certain maps between spheres. __TOC__
Motivation
In 1931 Heinz Hopf used Clifford parallels to construct the Hopf map


 
 ,
and proved that 
 
 
 
  is essential, i.e. not homotopic to the constant map, by using the linking number (=1) of the circles


 
  for any 
 
 
 
 
 .
It was later shown that the homotopy group

 
  is the infinite cyclic group generated by 
 
 
 
 . In 1951, Jean-Pierre Serre proved that the rational homotopy groups



for an odd-dimensional sphere (
 
 
 
  odd) are zero unless i = 0 or n. However, for an even-dimensional sphere (n even), there is one more bit of infinite cyclic homotopy in degree 
 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous map (assume 
 
 
 
 ). Then we can form the cell complex



where 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 
 -dimensional disc attached to 
 
 
 
  via 
 
 
 
 . The cellular chain groups 
 
 
 
  are just freely generated on the 
 
 
 
 -cells in degree 
 
 
 
 
 , so they are 
 
 
 
  in degree 0, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and zero everywhere else. Cellular (co-)homology is the (co-)homology of this chain complex, and since all boundary homomorphisms must be zero (recall that 
 
 
 
 ), the cohomology is



Denote the generators of the cohomology groups by


 
  and 
 
 

For dimensional reasons, all cup-products between those classes must be trivial apart from 
 
 
 
 . Thus, as a ring, the cohomology is



The integer 
 
 
 
 
  is the Hopf invariant of the map 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
Theorem

 
  is a homomorphism. Moreover, if 
 
 
 
  is even, 
 
 
 
  maps onto 
 
 
 
 
 .
The Hopf invariant is 
 
 
 
  for the Hopf maps (where 
 
 
 
 , corresponding to the real division algebras 
 
 
 
 , respectively, and to the double cover 
 
 
 
  sending a direction on the sphere to the subspace it spans). It is a theorem, proved first by Frank Adams and subsequently by Michael Atiyah with methods of topological K-theory, that these are the only maps with Hopf invariant 1.
Generalisations for stable maps
A very general notion of the Hopf invariant can be defined, but it requires a certain amount of homotopy theoretic groundwork:
Let 
 
 
 
 
  denote a vector space and 
 
 
 
  its one-point compactification, i.e. 
 
 
 
  and


 
  for some 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
 
  is any pointed space (as it is implicitly in the previous section), and if we take the point at infinity to be the basepoint of 
 
 
 
 , then we can form the wedge products


 
 .
Now let



be a stable map, i.e. stable under the reduced suspension functor. The (stable) geometric Hopf invariant of 
 
 
 
  is


 
 ,
an element of the stable 
 
 
 
 -equivariant homotopy group of maps from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . Here "stable" means "stable under suspension", i.e. the direct limit over 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 
 , if you will) of the ordinary, equivariant homotopy groups; and the 
 
 
 
 -action is the trivial action on 
 
 
 
  and the flipping of the two factors on 
 
 
 
 . If we let



denote the canonical diagonal map and 
 
 
 
 
  the identity, then the Hopf invariant is defined by the following:



This map is initially a map from


 
  to 
 
 
 
 ,
but under the direct limit it becomes the advertised element of the stable homotopy 
 
 
 
 -equivariant group of maps. There exists also an unstable version of the Hopf invariant 
 
 
 
 
 , for which one must keep track of the vector space 
 
 
 
 .
References









"
Category:Homotopy theory


