


Theta representation




Theta representation

In mathematics, the theta representation is a particular representation of the Heisenberg group of quantum mechanics. It gains its name from the fact that the Jacobi theta function is invariant under the action of a discrete subgroup of the Heisenberg group. The representation was popularized by David Mumford.
Construction
The theta representation is a representation of the continuous Heisenberg group 
 
 
 
  over the field of the real numbers. In this representation, the group elements act on a particular Hilbert space. The construction below proceeds first by defining operators that correspond to the Heisenberg group generators. Next, the Hilbert space on which these act is defined, followed by a demonstration of the isomorphism to the usual representations.
Group generators
Let f(z) be a holomorphic function, let a and b be real numbers, and let 
 
 
 
  be fixed, but arbitrary complex number in the upper half-plane; that is, so that the imaginary part of 
 
 
 
  is positive. Define the operators Sa and Tb such that they act on holomorphic functions as



and



It can be seen that each operator generates a one-parameter subgroup:



and



However, S and T do not commute:



Thus we see that S and T together with a unitary phase form a nilpotent Lie group, the (continuous real) Heisenberg group, parametrizable as 
 
 
 
  where U(1) is the unitary group.
A general group element 
 
 
 
  then acts on a holomorphic function f(z) as



where 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is the center of H, the commutator subgroup

 
 . The parameter 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  serves only to remind that every different value of 
 
 
 
  gives rise to a different representation of the action of the group.
Hilbert space
The action of the group elements 
 
 
 
  is unitary and irreducible on a certain Hilbert space of functions. For a fixed value of τ, define a norm on entire functions of the complex plane as



Here, 
 
 
 
  is the imaginary part of 
 
 
 
  and the domain of integration is the entire complex plane. Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of entire functions f with finite norm. The subscript 
 
 
 
  is used only to indicate that the space depends on the choice of parameter 
 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
  forms a Hilbert space. The action of 
 
 
 
  given above is unitary on 
 
 
 
 , that is, 
 
 
 
  preserves the norm on this space. Finally, the action of 
 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is irreducible.
This norm is closely related to that used to define Segal–Bargmann space.
Isomorphism
The above theta representation of the Heisenberg group is isomorphic to the canonical Weyl representation of the Heisenberg group. In particular, this implies that 
 
 
 
  and L2(R) are isomorphic as H-modules. Let



stand for a general group element of 
 
 
 
 . In the canonical Weyl representation, for every real number h, there is a representation 
 
 
 
 
  acting on L2(R) as


 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Here, h is Planck's constant. Each such representation is unitarily inequivalent. The corresponding theta representation is:









Discrete subgroup
Define the subgroup 
 
 
 
  as



The Jacobi theta function is defined as



It is an entire function of z that is invariant under 
 
 
 
 
 . This follows from the properties of the theta function:



and



when a and b are integers. It can be shown that the Jacobi theta is the unique such function.
See also

Segal–Bargmann space
Hardy space

References

David Mumford, Tata Lectures on Theta I (1983), Birkhauser, Boston ISBN 3-7643-3109-7

"
Category:Elliptic functions Category:Theta functions Category:Lie groups Category:Mathematical quantization


