


Cuntz algebra




Cuntz algebra

In mathematics, the Cuntz algebra

 
  (after Joachim Cuntz) is the universal C*-algebra generated by n isometries satisfying certain relations. It is the first concrete example of a separable infinite simple C*-algebra.
Every simple infinite C*-algebra contains, for any given n, a subalgebra that has 
 
 
 
  as quotient.
Definition and basic properties
Let n ≥ 2 and H be a separable Hilbert space. Consider the C*-algebra

 
  generated by a set








of isometries acting on H satisfying








and








Theorem. The concrete C*-algebra 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to the universal C*-algebra 
 
 
 
  generated by n generators s1... sn subject to relations si*si = 1 for all i and ∑ sisi* = 1.
The proof of the theorem hinges on the following fact: any C*-algebra generated by n isometries s1... sn with orthogonal ranges contains a copy of the UHF algebra

 
  type n∞. Namely 
 
 
 
  is spanned by words of the form



The *-subalgebra 
 
 
 
 , being approximately finite-dimensional, has a unique C*-norm. The subalgebra 
 
 
 
  plays role of the space of Fourier coefficients for elements of the algebra. A key technical lemma, due to Cuntz, is that an element in the algebra is zero if and only if all its Fourier coefficients vanish. Using this, one can show that the quotient map from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is injective, which proves the theorem.
This universal C*-algebra is called the Cuntz algebra, denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
A C*-algebra is said to be purely infinite if every hereditary C*-subalgebra of it is infinite. 
 
 
 
  is a separable, simple, purely infinite C*-algebra.
Any simple infinite C*-algebra contains a subalgebra that has 
 
 
 
  as a quotient.
The UHF algebra 
 
 
 
  has a non-unital subalgebra 
 
 
 
  that is canonically isomorphic to 
 
 
 
  itself: In the Mn stage of the direct system defining 
 
 
 
 , consider the rank-1 projection e11, the matrix that is 1 in the upper left corner and zero elsewhere. Propagate this projection through the direct system. At the Mnk stage of the direct system, one has a rank nk - 1 projection. In the direct limit, this gives a projection P in 
 
 
 
 . The corner



is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 . The *-endomorphism Φ that maps 
 
 
 
  onto 
 
 
 
  is implemented by the isometry s1, i.e. Φ(·) = s1(·)s1*. 
 
 
 
 is in fact the crossed product of 
 
 
 
  with the endomorphism Φ.
Classification
The Cuntz algebras are pairwise non-isomorphic, i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are non-isomorphic for n ≠ m. The K0 group of 
 
 
 
  is Zn − 1, the abelian cyclic group of order n − 1. Since K0 is a (functorial) invariant, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are non-isomorphic.
Generalisations
Cuntz algebras have been generalised in many ways. Notable amongst which are the Cuntz–Krieger algebras, graph C*-algebras and k-graph C*-algebras.
Applied mathematics
In signal processing, subband filter with exact reconstruction give rise to representations of Cuntz algebra. The same filters also comes from the multiresolution analysis construction in wavelet theory.
References




"
Category:C*-algebras


