


Elementary divisors




Elementary divisors

In algebra, the elementary divisors of a module over a principal ideal domain (PID) occur in one form of the structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain.
If 
 
 
 
  is a PID and 
 
 
 
  a finitely generated 
 
 
 
 -module, then M is isomorphic to a finite sum of the form







where the 
 
 
 
  are nonzero primary ideals.
 

The list of primary ideals is unique up to order (but a same ideal may be present more than once, so the list represents a multiset of primary ideals); the elements 
 
 
 
  are unique only up to associatedness, and are called the elementary divisors. Note that in a PID, the nonzero primary ideals are powers of prime ideals, so the elementary divisors can be written as powers 
 
 
 
  of irreducible elements. The nonnegative integer 
 
 
 
  is called the free rank or Betti number of the module 
 
 
 
 .
The module is determined up to isomorphism by specifying its free rank 
 
 
 
 , and for class of associated irreducible elements 
 
 
 
  and each positive integer 
 
 
 
  the number of times that  occurs among the elementary divisors. The elementary divisors can be obtained from the list of invariant factors of the module by decomposing each of them as far as possible into pairwise relatively prime (non-unit) factors, which will be powers of irreducible elements. This decomposition corresponds to maximally decomposing each submodule corresponding to an invariant factor by using the Chinese remainder theorem for R. Conversely, knowing the multiset 
 
 
 
  of elementary divisors, the invariant factors can be found, starting from the final one (which is a multiple of all others), as follows. For each irreducible element 
 
 
 
  such that some power  occurs in 
 
 
 
 , take the highest such power, removing it from 
 
 
 
 , and multiply these powers together for all (classes of associated) 
 
 
 
  to give the final invariant factor; as long as 
 
 
 
  is non-empty, repeat to find the invariant factors before it.
See also

Invariant factors

References


Chap.11, p.182.
Chap. III.7, p.153 of 

"
Category:Module theory


