


Frame of a vector space




Frame of a vector space

In linear algebra, a frame of an inner product space is a generalization of a basis of a vector space to sets that may be linearly dependent. In the terminology of signal processing, a frame provides a redundant, stable way of representing a signal. Frames are used in error detection and correction and the design and analysis of filter banks and more generally in applied mathematics, computer science, and engineering.
Definition and motivation
Motivating example: computing a basis from a linearly dependent set
Suppose we have a set of vectors 
 
 
 
  in the vector space V and we want to express an arbitrary element 
 
 
 
  as a linear combination of the vectors 
 
 
 
 , that is, we want to find coefficients 
 
 
 
 
  such that



If the set 
 
 
 
  does not span 
 
 
 
 , then such coefficients do not exist for every such 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 
  spans 
 
 
 
  and also is linearly independent, this set forms a basis of 
 
 
 
 , and the coefficients 
 
 
 
  are uniquely determined by 
 
 
 
 . If, however, 
 
 
 
 
  spans 
 
 
 
  but is not linearly independent, the question of how to determine the coefficients becomes less apparent, in particular if 
 
 
 
  is of infinite dimension.
Given that 
 
 
 
  spans 
 
 
 
  and is linearly dependent, one strategy is to remove vectors from the set until it becomes linearly independent and forms a basis. There are some problems with this plan:

Removing arbitrary vectors from the set may cause it to be unable to span 
 
 
 
 
  before it becomes linearly independent.
Even if it is possible to devise a specific way to remove vectors from the set until it becomes a basis, this approach may become infeasible in practice if the set is large or infinite.
In some applications, it may be an advantage to use more vectors than necessary to represent 
 
 
 
 . This means that we want to find the coefficients 
 
 
 
  without removing elements in 
 
 
 
 . The coefficients 
 
 
 
  will no longer be uniquely determined by 
 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, the vector 
 
 
 
  can be represented as a linear combination of 
 
 
 
  in more than one way.

Formal definition
Let V be an inner product space and 
 
 
 
  be a set of vectors in 
 
 
 
 . These vectors satisfy the frame condition if there are positive real numbers A and B such that A ≤ B and for each 
 
 
 
 
  in V,


 
  A set of vectors that satisfies the frame condition is a frame for the vector space.
The numbers A and B are called the lower and upper frame bounds, respectively. The frame bounds are not unique because numbers less than A and greater than B are also valid frame bounds. The optimal lower bound is the supremum of all lower bounds and the optimal upper bound is the infimum of all upper bounds.
A frame is overcomplete (or redundant) if it is not a basis for the vector space.
History
Because of the various mathematical components surrounding frames, frame theory has roots in harmonic and functional analysis, operator theory, linear algebra, and matrix theory.
The Fourier transform has been used for over a century as a way of decomposing and expanding signals. However, the Fourier transform masks key information regarding the moment of emission and the duration of a signal. In 1946, Dennis Gabor was able to solve this using a technique that simultaneously reduced noise, provided resiliency, and created quantization while encapsulating important signal characteristics. This discovery marked the first concerted effort towards frame theory.
The frame condition was first described by Richard Duffin and Albert Charles Schaeffer in a 1952 article on nonharmonic Fourier series as a way of computing the coefficients in a linear combination of the vectors of a linearly dependent spanning set (in their terminology, a "Hilbert space frame"). In the 1980s, Stéphane Mallat, Ingrid Daubechies, and Mayer used frames to analyze wavelets. Today frames are associated with wavelets, signal and image processing, and data compression.
Relation to bases
A frame satisfies a generalization of Parseval's identity, namely the frame condition, while still maintaining norm equivalence between a signal and its sequence of coefficients.
If the set 
 
 
 
  is a frame of V, it spans V. Otherwise there would exist at least one non-zero 
 
 
 
  which would be orthogonal to all 
 
 
 
 . If we insert 
 
 
 
 
  into the frame condition, we obtain


 
  therefore 
 
 
 
 , which is a violation of the initial assumptions on the lower frame bound.
If a set of vectors spans V, this is not a sufficient condition for calling the set a frame. As an example, consider 
 
 
 
  with the dot product, and the infinite set 
 
 
 
  given by



This set spans V but since 
 
 
 
 , we cannot choose a finite upper frame bound B. Consequently, the set 
 
 
 
  is not a frame.
Applications
In signal processing, each vector is interpreted as a signal. In this interpretation, a vector expressed as a linear combination of the frame vectors is a redundant signal. Using a frame, it is possible to create a simpler, more sparse representation of a signal as compared with a family of elementary signals (that is, representing a signal strictly with a set of linearly independent vectors may not always be the most compact form). Frames, therefore, provide robustness. Because they provide a way of producing the same vector within a space, signals can be encoded in various ways. This facilitates fault tolerance and resilience to a loss of signal. Finally, redundancy can be used to mitigate noise, which is relevant to the restoration, enhancement, and reconstruction of signals.
In signal processing, it is common to assume the vector space is a Hilbert space.
Special cases
A frame is a tight frame if A = B; in other words, the frame satisfies a generalized version of Parseval's identity. For example, the union of k orthonormal bases of a vector space is a tight frame with A = B = k. A tight frame is a Parseval frame (sometimes called a normalized frame) if A = B = 1. Each orthonormal basis is a Parseval frame, but the converse is not always true.
A frame is an equal norm frame (sometimes called a uniform frame or a normalized frame) if there is a constant c such that 
 
 
 
  for each i. An equal norm frame is a unit norm frame if c = 1. A Parseval (or tight) unit norm frame is an orthonormal basis; such a frame satisfies Parseval's identity.
A frame is an equiangular frame if there is a constant c such that 
 
 
 
  for each distinct i and j.
A frame is an exact frame if no proper subset of the frame spans the inner product space. Each basis for an inner product space is an exact frame for the space (so a basis is a special case of a frame).
Generalizations
A bessel sequence is a set of vectors that satisfies only the upper bound of the frame condition.
Dual frames
The frame condition entails the existence of a set of dual frame vectors

 
 
  with the property that


 
  for any 
 
 
 
 . This implies that a frame together with its dual frame has the same property as a basis and its dual basis in terms of reconstructing a vector from scalar products.
In order to construct a dual frame, we first need the linear mapping 
 
 
 
 , called the frame operator, defined as


 
 .
From this definition of 
 
 
 
  and linearity in the first argument of the inner product,


 
  which, when substituted in the frame condition inequality, yields


 
  for each 
 
 
 
 .
The frame operator 
 
 
 
  is self-adjoint, positive definite, and has positive upper and lower bounds. The inverse 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  exists and it, too, is self-adjoint, positive definite, and has positive upper and lower bounds.
The dual frame is defined by mapping each element of the frame with 
 
 
 
 :



To see that this makes sense, let 
 
 
 
  be an element of 
 
 
 
  and let


 
 .
Thus


 
 ,
which proves that


 
 .
Alternatively, we can let


 
 .
By inserting the above definition of 
 
 
 
  and applying the properties of 
 
 
 
  and its inverse,



which shows that


 
 .
The numbers 
 
 
 
  are called frame coefficients. This derivation of a dual frame is a summary of Section 3 in the article by Duffin and Schaeffer. They use the term conjugate frame for what here is called a dual frame.
The dual frame 
 
 
 
  is called the canonical dual of 
 
 
 
  because it acts similarly as a dual basis to a basis.
When the frame 
 
 
 
  is overcomplete, a vector 
 
 
 
  can be written as a linear combination of 
 
 
 
  in more than one way. That is, there are different choices of coefficients 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . This allows us some freedom for the choice of coefficients 
 
 
 
  other than 
 
 
 
 . It is necessary that the frame 
 
 
 
  is overcomplete for other such coefficients 
 
 
 
  to exist. If so, then there exist frames 
 
 
 
  for which


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . We call 
 
 
 
  a dual frame of 
 
 
 
 .
See also

k-frame
Biorthogonal wavelet
Orthogonal wavelet
Restricted isometry property
Schauder basis
Harmonic analysis
Fourier analysis
Functional analysis

Notes
References









"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Differential geometry Category:Signal processing


