


Radial distribution function




Radial distribution function

 
In statistical mechanics, the radial distribution function, (or pair correlation function) 
 
 
 
  in a system of particles (atoms, molecules, colloids, etc.), describes how density varies as a function of distance from a reference particle.
If a given particle is taken to be at the origin O, and if 
 
 
 
  is the average number density of particles, then the local time-averaged density at a distance 
 
 
 
  from O is 
 
 
 
 
 . This simplified definition holds for a homogeneous and isotropic system. A more general case will be considered below.
In simplest terms it is a measure of the probability of finding a particle at a distance of 
 
 
 
  away from a given reference particle, relative to that for an ideal gas. The general algorithm involves determining how many particles are within a distance of r and r+dr away from a particle. This general theme is depicted to the right, where the red particle is our reference particle, and blue particles are those which are within the circular shell, dotted in orange.
The RDF is usually determined by calculating the distance between all particle pairs and binning them into a histogram. The histogram is then normalized with respect to an ideal gas, where particle histograms are completely uncorrelated. For three dimensions, this normalization is the number density of the system multiplied by the volume of the spherical shell, which mathematically can be expressed as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the number density.
Given a potential energy function, the radial distribution function can be computed either via computer simulation methods like the Monte Carlo method, or via the Ornstein-Zernike equation, using approximative closure relations like the Percus-Yevick approximation or the Hypernetted Chain Theory. It can also be determined experimentally, by radiation scattering techniques or by direct visualization for large enough (micrometer-sized) particles via traditional or confocal microscopy.
The radial distribution function is of fundamental importance since it can be used, using the Kirkwood–Buff solution theory, to link the microscopic details to macroscopic properties. Moreover, by the reversion of the Kirkwood-Buff theory, it is possible to attain the microscopic details of the radial distribution function from the macroscopic properties.
Definition
Consider a system of 
 
 
 
  particles in a volume 
 
 
 
 
  (for an average number density 
 
 
 
 ) and at a temperature 
 
 
 
  (let us also define 
 
 
 
 ). The particle coordinates are 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 
 . The potential energy due to the interaction between particles is 
 
 
 
  and we do not consider the case of an externally applied field.
The appropriate averages are taken in the canonical ensemble

 
 , with 
 
 
 
  the configurational integral, taken over all possible combinations of particle positions. The probability of an elementary configuration, namely finding particle 1 in 
 
 
 
 , particle 2 in 
 
 
 
 
 , etc. is given by
}{Z_N} \, \mathrm{d} \mathbf{r}_1 \cdots \mathrm{d} \mathbf{r}_N\, .|1}}
The total number of particles is huge, so that 
 
 
 
  in itself is not very useful. However, one can also obtain the probability of a reduced configuration, where the positions of only 
 
 
 
  particles are fixed, in 
 
 
 
 , with no constraints on the remaining 
 
 
 
  particles. To this end, one has to integrate () over the remaining coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .
The particles being identical, it is more relevant to consider the probability that any

 
  of them occupy positions 
 
 
 
  in any permutation, thus defining the 
 
 
 
 -particle density
For 
 
 
 
 
 , () gives the one-particle density which, for a crystal, is a periodic function with sharp maxima at the lattice sites. For a (homogeneous) liquid, it is independent of the position 
 
 
 
  and equal to the overall density of the system:



It is now time to introduce a correlation function 
 
 
 
  by


 
  is called a correlation function, since if the atoms are independent from each other 
 
 
 
 
  would simply equal 
 
 
 
  and therefore 
 
 
 
  corrects for the correlation between atoms.
From () and () it follows that
Relations involving 
 
 

The structure factor
The second-order correlation function 
 
 
 
  is of special importance, as it is directly related (via a Fourier transform) to the structure factor of the system and can thus be determined experimentally using X-ray diffraction or neutron diffraction.
If the system consists of spherically symmetric particles, 
 
 
 
 
  depends only on the relative distance between them, 
 
 
 
 . We will drop the sub- and superscript
 
 
 
 . Taking particle 0 as fixed at the origin of the coordinates, 
 
 
 
  is the number of particles (among the remaining 
 
 
 
 ) to be found in the volume 
 
 
 
 
  around the position 
 
 
 
 .
We can formally count these particles as 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  the ensemble average, yielding:
where the second equality requires the equivalence of particles 
 
 
 
 . The formula above is useful for relating 
 
 
 
 
  to the static structure factor 
 
 
 
 , defined by 
 
 
 
 , since we have:


 
 
  , and thus:


 
 , proving the Fourier relation alluded to above.
This equation is only valid in the sense of distributions, since 
 
 
 
  is not normalized
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
  diverges as the volume 
 
 
 
 , leading to a Dirac peak at the origin for the structure factor. Since this contribution is inaccessible experimentally we can subtract it from the equation above and redefine the structure factor as a regular function:


 
 .
Finally, we rename 
 
 
 
  and, if the system is a liquid, we can invoke its isotropy:
[g(r) - 1] = 1 + 4\pi\rho\frac{1}{q} \int \mathrm{d} r \, r\, \mathrm{sin}(qr) [g(r) - 1].|6}}
The compressibility equation
Evaluating () in 
 
 
 
  and using the relation between the isothermal compressibility

 
  and the structure factor at the origin yields the compressibility equation: 
The potential of mean force
It can be shown1 that the radial distribution function is related to the two-particle potential of mean force

 
  by: 
The energy equation
If the particles interact via identical pairwise potentials
 
 
 
 , the average internal energy per particle is:2 
The pressure equation of state
Developing the virial equation yields the pressure equation of state: 
Thermodynamic properties
The radial distribution function is an important measure because several key thermodynamic properties, such as potential energy and pressure can be calculated from it.
For a 3-D system where particles interact via pairwise potentials, the potential energy of the system can be calculated as follows:3


Where N is the number of particles in the system, 
 
 
 
  is the number density, u(r) is the pair potential.
The pressure of the system can also be calculated by relating the 2nd virial coefficient to g(r). The pressure can be calculated as follows:4


Where 
 
 
 
  is the temperature and kB is Boltzmann's constant. Note that the results of potential and pressure will not be as accurate as directly calculating these properties because of the averaging involved with the calculation of 
 
 
 
 .
Approximations
For dilute systems (e.g. gases), the correlations in the positions of the particles that 
 
 
 
  accounts for are only due to the potential 
 
 
 
  engendered by the reference particle, neglecting indirect effects. In the first approximation, it is thus simply given by the Boltzmann distribution law:
If 
 
 
 
  were zero for all 
 
 
 
  – i.e., if the particles did not exert any influence on each other, then '
 
 
 
  for all r and the mean local density would be equal to the mean density 
 
 
 
 : the presence of a particle at O would not influence the particle distribution around it and the gas would be ideal. For distances 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is significant, the mean local density will differ from the mean density 
 
 
 
 , depending on the sign of 
 
 
 
  (higher for negative interaction energy and lower for positive 
 
 
 
 ).
As the density of the gas increases, the low-density limit becomes less and less accurate since a particle situated in 
 
 
 
  experiences not only the interaction with the particle in O but also with the other neighbours, themselves influenced by the reference particle. This mediated interaction increases with the density, since there are more neighbours to interact with: it makes physical sense to write a density expansion of 
 
 
 
 , which resembles the virial equation:
This similarity is not accidental; indeed, substituting () in the relations above for the thermodynamic parameters (Equations ,  and ) yields the corresponding virial expansions.5 The auxiliary function 
 
 
 
  is known as the cavity distribution function.6
Experimental
One can determine 
 
 
 
  indirectly (via its relation with the structure factor 
 
 
 
 ) using neutron scattering or x-ray scattering data. The technique can be used at very short length scales (down to the atomic level7) but involves significant space and time averaging (over the sample size and the acquisition time, respectively). In this way, the radial distribution function has been determined for a wide variety of systems, ranging from liquid metals8 to charged colloids.9 It should be noted that going from the experimental 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is not straightforward and the analysis can be quite involved.10
It is also possible to calculate 
 
 
 
  directly by extracting particle positions from traditional or confocal microscopy.11 This technique is limited to particles large enough for optical detection (in the micrometer range), but it has the advantage of being time-resolved so that, aside from the statical information, it also gives access to dynamical parameters (e.g. diffusion constants12) and also space-resolved (to the level of the individual particle), allowing it to reveal the morphology and dynamics of local structures in colloidal crystals,13 glasses,14 gels,1516 and hydrodynamic interactions.17
Higher-order correlation functions
Higher-order distribution functions 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  were less studied, since they are generally less important for the thermodynamics of the system; at the same time, they are not accessible by conventional scattering techniques. They can however be measured by coherent X-ray scattering and are interesting insofar as they can reveal local symmetries in disordered systems.18
References

Widom, B. (2002). Statistical Mechanics: A Concise Introduction for Chemists. Cambridge University Press.
McQuarrie, D. A. (1976). Statistical Mechanics. Harper Collins Publishers.

See also

Ornstein–Zernike equation
Radial Distribution Function on MatDL Wiki.

"
Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Mechanics Category:Physical chemistry



↩
↩
↩

↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




