


Monoidal monad




Monoidal monad

In category theory, a monoidal monad

 
  is a monad

 
  on a monoidal category

 
  such that the functor



is a lax monoidal functor and the natural transformations 
 
 
 
  are monoidal natural transformations. In other words, 
 
 
 
  is equipped with coherence maps



and



satisfying certain properties, and its structure maps



and



must be monoidal with respect to 
 
 
 
 . By monoidality of 
 
 
 
 , the morphisms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are necessarily equal.
This is equivalent to saying that a monoidal monad is a monad in the 2-category MonCat of monoidal categories, monoidal functors, and monoidal natural transformations.
Hopf monads and bimonads
Ieke Moerdijk introduced the notion of a Hopf monad,1 which is an opmonoidal monad, that is, a monad with coherence morphisms 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and opmonoidal natural transformations as multiplication and left/right units.
An easy example for the category 
 
 
 
  of vector spaces is the monad 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a bialgebra.2 The multiplication in 
 
 
 
  then defines the multiplication of the monad, while the comultiplication gives rise to the opmonoidal structure. The algebras of this monad are just right 
 
 
 
 -modules.
In works of Bruguières and Virelizier, this concept has been renamed bimonad,3 by analogy to "bialgebra". They reserve the term "Hopf monad" for bimonads with an antipode, in analogy to "Hopf algebras".
Properties

The Kleisli category of a monoidal monad has a canonical monoidal structure, induced by the monoidal structure of the monad. The canonical adjunction between 
 
 
 
  and the Kleisli category is a monoidal adjunction with respect to this monoidal structure.
The Eilenberg-Moore category (the category of algebras) of a Hopf monad (in Moerdijk's nomenclature) has a canonical monoidal structure.4

Examples
The following monads on the category of sets, with its cartesian monoidal structure, are monoidal monads:

The power set monad.
The probability distributions (Giry) monad.

The following monads on the category of sets, with its cartesian monoidal structure, are not monoidal monads

If 
 
 
 
  is a monoid, then 
 
 
 
  is a monad, but in general there is no reason to expect a monoidal structure on it (unless 
 
 
 
  is commutative).

References
"
Category:Monoidal categories











