


K-edge-connected graph




K-edge-connected graph

In graph theory, a connected graph is k-edge-connected if it remains connected whenever fewer than k edges are removed.
The edge-connectivity of a graph is the largest k for which the graph is k-edge-connected.
Formal definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be an arbitrary graph. If subgraph

 
  is connected for all 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , then G is k-edge-connected.
Relation to minimum vertex degree
Minimum vertex degree gives a trivial upper bound on edge-connectivity. That is, if a graph 
 
 
 
  is k-edge-connected then it is necessary that k ≤ δ(G), where δ(G) is the minimum degree of any vertex v ∈ V. Obviously, deleting all edges incident to a vertex, v, would then disconnect v from the graph.
Computational aspects
There is a polynomial-time algorithm to determine the largest k for which a graph G is k-edge-connected. A simple algorithm would, for every pair (u,v), determine the maximum flow from u to v with the capacity of all edges in G set to 1 for both directions. A graph is k-edge-connected if and only if the maximum flow from u to v is at least k for any pair (u,v), so k is the least u-v-flow among all (u,v).
If n is the number of vertices in the graph, this simple algorithm would perform 
 
 
 
  iterations of the Maximum flow problem, which can be solved in 
 
 
 
  time. Hence the complexity of the simple algorithm described above is 
 
 
 
  in total.
An improved algorithm will solve the maximum flow problem for every pair (u,v) where u is arbitrarily fixed while v varies over all vertices. This reduces the complexity to 
 
 
 
  and is sound since, if a cut of capacity less than k exists, it is bound to separate u from some other vertex. It can be further improved by an algorithm of Gabow that runs in worst case 
 
 
 
  time. 1
A related problem: finding the minimum k-edge-connected subgraph of G (that is: select as few as possible edges in G that your selection is k-edge-connected) is NP-hard for 
 
 
 
 .2
See also

k-vertex-connected graph
Connectivity (graph theory)
Matching preclusion
Menger's theorem
Robbins theorem
Karger's algorithm

References
"
Category:Graph connectivity Category:Graph families



Harold N. Gabow. A matroid approach to finding edge connectivity and packing arborescences. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 50(2):259–273, 1995.↩
M.R. Garey and D.S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: a Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness. Freeman, San Francisco, CA, 1979.↩




