


Convergence tests




Convergence tests

In mathematics, convergence tests are methods of testing for the convergence, conditional convergence, absolute convergence, interval of convergence or divergence of an infinite series.
List of tests
Limit of the summand
If the limit of the summand is undefined or nonzero, that is 
 
 
 
 , then the series must diverge. In this sense, the partial sums are Cauchy only if this limit exists and is equal to zero. The test is inconclusive if the limit of the summand is zero.
Ratio test
This is also known as D'Alembert's criterion. Suppose that there exists 
 
 
 
  such that




If r  1, then the series diverges. If r = 1, the ratio test is inconclusive, and the series may converge or diverge.
 

Root test
This is also known as the nth root test or Cauchy's criterion. Define r as follows:




where "lim sup" denotes the limit superior (possibly ∞; if the limit exists it is the same value).
 


If r  1, then the series diverges. If r = 1, the root test is inconclusive, and the series may converge or diverge.
 

Integral test
The series can be compared to an integral to establish convergence or divergence. Let 
 
 
 
  be a non-negative and monotone decreasing function such that 
 
 
 
 . If




then the series converges. But if the integral diverges, then the series does so as well.
 
In other words, the series 
 
 
 
  converges if and only if the integral converges.
 

Direct comparison test
If the series 
 
 
 
 
  is an absolutely convergent series and 
 
 
 
  for sufficiently large n , then the series 
 
 
 
  converges absolutely.
Limit comparison test
If 
 
 
 
 , and the limit 
 
 
 
  exists, is finite and is not zero, then 
 
 
 
 
  converges if and only if

 
  converges. '''
Cauchy condensation test
Let 
 
 
 
  be a positive non-increasing sequence. Then the sum 
 
 
 
  converges if and only if the sum 
 
 
 
  converges. Moreover, if they converge, then 
 
 
 
 
  holds.
Abel's test
Suppose the following statements are true:



 
  is a convergent series,
{bn} is a monotone sequence, and
{bn} is bounded.

Then 
 
 
 
  is also convergent.
Alternating series test
This is also known as the Leibniz criterion. If 
 
 
 
  is a series whose terms alternative from positive to negative, and if the limit as n approaches infinity of 
 
 
 
  is zero and the absolute value of each term is less than the absolute value of the previous term, then 
 
 
 
 
  is convergent.
Dirichlet's test
Raabe-Duhamel's test
Let { an } > 0.
Define


 
 .
If



exists there are three possibilities:

if L > 1 the series converges
if L < 1 the series diverges
and if L = 1 the test is inconclusive.

An alternative formulation of this test is as follows. Let { an } be a series of real numbers. Then if b > 1 and K (a natural number) exist such that



for all n > K then the series { an } is convergent.
Notes

For some specific types of series there are more specialized convergence tests, for instance for Fourier series there is the Dini test

Comparison
The root test is stronger than the ratio test (it is more powerful because the required condition is weaker): whenever the ratio test determines the convergence or divergence of an infinite series, the root test does too, but not conversely.1
For example, for the series

1 + 1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.25 + 0.25 + 0.125 + 0.125 + ...=4
 

convergence follows from the root test but not from the ratio test.
Examples
Consider the series


 
 .
Cauchy condensation test implies that (*) is finitely convergent if



is finitely convergent. Since



(**) is geometric series with ratio 
 
 
 
 . (**) is finitely convergent if its ratio is less than one (namely 
 
 
 
 ). Thus, (*) is finitely convergent if and only if

 
 .
Convergence of products
While most of the tests deal with the convergence of infinite series, they can also be used to show the convergence or divergence of infinite products. This can be achieved using following theorem: Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of positive numbers. Then the infinite product 
 
 
 
  converges if and only if the series 
 
 
 
  converges. Also similarly, if 
 
 
 
  holds, then 
 
 
 
  approaches a non-zero limit if and only if the series 
 
 
 
  converges .
This can be proved by taking logarithm of the product and using limit comparison test.2
See also

L'Hôpital's rule
Shift rule

References


External links

Flowchart for choosing convergence test

"
*



Ratio Test
Convergence of Infinite Products




