


Rapidity




Rapidity

In relativity, rapidity is an alternative to speed as a measure of rate of motion. On parallel velocities (say, in one-dimensional space) rapidities are simply additive, unlike speeds at relativistic velocities. For low speeds, rapidity and speed are proportional, but for high speeds, rapidity takes a larger value. The rapidity of light is infinite.
Using the inverse hyperbolic function

 
 , the rapidity  corresponding to velocity  is  artanh(v / c)}}. For low speeds,  is approximately . The speed of light 
 
 
 
  being finite, any velocity 
 
 
 
  is constrained to the interval  and the ratio 
 
 
 
  satisfies . Since the inverse hyperbolic tangent has the unit interval 
 
 
 
  for its domain and the whole real line for its range, the interval  maps onto .
Mathematically, rapidity can be defined as the hyperbolic angle that differentiates two frames of reference in relative motion, each frame being associated with distance and time coordinates.
History
In 1908 Hermann Minkowski explained how the Lorentz transformation could be seen as simply a hyperbolic rotation of the spacetime coordinates, i.e., a rotation through an imaginary angle.1 This angle therefore represents (in one spatial dimension) a simple additive measure of the velocity between frames.2 The rapidity was used by Whittaker 1910 3 and by Varićak 1910. The name "rapidity" is due to Alfred Robb 1911 4 and this term was adopted by many subsequent authors, such as Varićak 1912, Silberstein (1914), Morley (1936) and Rindler (2001). The development of the theory of rapidity is mainly due to Varićak in writings from 1910 to 1924.5
In one spatial dimension
The rapidity  arises in the linear representation of a Lorentz boost as a vector-matrix product


 
 . The matrix  is of the type 
 
 
 
  with  and  satisfying  1}}, so that  lies on the unit hyperbola. Such matrices form the indefinite orthogonal group indefinite orthogonal group O(1,1) with one-dimensional Lie algebra spanned by the anti-diagonal unit matrix, showing that the rapidity is the coordinate on this Lie algebra. This action may be depicted in a spacetime diagram. In matrix exponential notation,  can be expressed as 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the anti-diagonal unit matrix



It is not hard to prove that


 
 . This establishes the useful additive property of rapidity: if 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are frames of reference, then


 
  where  denotes the rapidity of a frame of reference 
 
 
 
  relative to a frame of reference 
 
 
 
 . The simplicity of this formula contrasts with the complexity of the corresponding velocity-addition formula.
As we can see from the Lorentz transformation above, the Lorentz factor identifies with :


 
 , so the rapidity  is implicitly used as a hyperbolic angle in the Lorentz transformation expressions using  and β. We relate rapidities to the velocity-addition formula

 
  by recognizing 
 
 
 
  and so



Proper acceleration (the acceleration 'felt' by the object being accelerated) is the rate of change of rapidity with respect to proper time (time as measured by the object undergoing acceleration itself). Therefore the rapidity of an object in a given frame can be viewed simply as the velocity of that object as would be calculated non-relativistically by an inertial guidance system on board the object itself if it accelerated from rest in that frame to its given speed.
The Doppler-shift factor associated with rapidity  is 
 
 
 
 .
In more than one spatial dimension
From mathematical point of view, possible values of relativistic velocity form a manifold, where the metric tensor corresponds to the proper acceleration (see above). This is a non-flat space (namely, a hyperbolic space), and rapidity is the distance from the given velocity to the zero velocity in the given frame of reference. Although it is possible, as noted above, to add and subtract rapidities where corresponding relative velocities are parallel, in the general case the rapidity-addition formula is more complex because of negative curvature. For example, the result of "addition" of two perpendicular motions with rapidities  and  will be greater than 
 
 
 
  expected by the Pythagorean theorem. Rapidity in two dimensions can be usefully visualized using the Poincaré disk.6 Points at the edge of the disk correspond to infinite rapidity. Geodesics correspond to steady accelerations. The Thomas precession is equal to minus the angular deficit of a triangle, or to minus the area of the triangle.
In experimental particle physics
The energy  and scalar momentum 
 
 
 
  of a particle of non-zero (rest) mass  are given by





 
  and so rapidity can be calculated from measured energy and momentum by



However, experimental particle physicists often use a modified definition of rapidity relative to a beam axis


 
  where  is the component of momentum along the beam axis.7 This is the rapidity of the boost along the beam axis which takes an observer from the lab frame to a frame in which the particle moves only perpendicular to the beam. Related to this is the concept of pseudorapidity.
See also

Theory of relativity
Lorentz transformation
Pseudorapidity

Notes and references


page 441

Borel E (1913) La théorie de la relativité et la cinématique, Comptes Rendus Acad Sci Paris 156 215-218; 157 703-705

Vladimir Karapetoff (1936) "Restricted relativity in terms of hyperbolic functions of rapidities", American Mathematical Monthly 43:70.
Frank Morley (1936) "When and Where", The Criterion, edited by T.S. Eliot, 15:200-2009.
Wolfgang Rindler (2001) Relativity: Special, General, and Cosmological, page 53, Oxford University Press.
Shaw, Ronald (1982) Linear Algebra and Group Representations, v. 1, page 229, Academic Press ISBN 0-12-639201-3.

(see page 17 of e-link)
Varićak V (1910), (1912), (1924) See Vladimir Varićak#Publications

pl:Pospieszność"
Category:Special relativity



Minkowski, H., Fundamental Equations for Electromagnetic Processes in Moving Bodies" 1908↩
Sommerfeld, Phys. Z 1909↩
"A History of the Theories of the Aether and Electricity" 1910. In a later edition of this book in 1953 the rapidity is used consistently for the theory↩
"Optical Geometry of Motion" p.9↩
See his papers, available in translation in Wikisource↩
John A. Rhodes & Mark D. Semon (2003) "Relativistic velocity space, Wigner rotation, and Thomas precession", American Journal of Physics 72(7):943–961↩
Amsler, C. et al., "The Review of Particle Physics", Physics Letters B 667 (2008) 1, Section 38.5.2↩




