


Effective potential




Effective potential

The effective potential (also known as effective potential energy) is a mathematical expression combining multiple (perhaps opposing) effects into a single potential. In classical mechanics it is defined as the sum of the 'opposing' centrifugal potential energy with the potential energy of a dynamical system. It is commonly used in calculating the orbits of planets (both Newtonian and relativistic) and in semi-classical atomic calculations, and often allows problems to be reduced to fewer dimensions.
Definition
The effective potential 
 
 
 
  is defined in the following way:




L is the angular momentum

r is the distance between the two masses
 
m is the mass of the orbiting body
 
U(r) is the general form of the potential


The effective force, then, is the negative gradient of the effective potential:



Where 
 
 
 
  denotes a unit vector in the radial direction.
Important properties
There are many useful features of the effective potential:



To find the radius of a circular orbit, we simply minimize the effective potential with respect to 
 
 
 
 , or equivalently set the net force to zero and then solve for 
 
 
 
 :


 
  After solving for 
 
 
 
 , plug this back into 
 
 
 
  to find the maximum value of the effective potential 
 
 

To find the frequency of small oscillations:


 
  where the double prime indicates the second derivative of the effective potential with respect to 
 
 
 
 .
Example: gravitational potential
For example, consider a particle of mass m orbiting a much heavier object of mass M. Assuming Newtonian mechanics can be used, and the motion of the larger mass is negligible, then the conservation of energy and angular momentum give two constants E and L, with values






where


 
  is the derivative of r with respect to time,


 
  is the angular velocity of mass m,

G is the gravitational constant,
 
E is the total energy, and
 

Only two variables are needed, since the motion occurs in a plane. Substituting the second expression into the first and rearranging gives






where



is the effective potential.1 As is evident from the above equation, the original two variable problem has been reduced to a one variable problem. For many applications the effective potential can be treated exactly like the potential energy of a one-dimensional system: for instance, an energy diagram using the effective potential determines turning points and locations of stable and unstable equilibria. A similar method may be used in other applications, for instance determining orbits in a general relativistic Schwarzschild metric.
Effective potentials are widely used in various fields of condensed matter, like e.g. the Gauss-core potential (Likos 2002, Baeurle 2004) and the screened Coulomb potential (Likos 2001).
Notes


References


.










"
Category:Mechanics



A similar derivation may be found in José & Saletan, Classical Dynamics: A Contemporary Approach, pgs. 31–33↩




