


Semiparametric regression




Semiparametric regression

In statistics, semiparametric regression includes regression models that combine parametric and nonparametric models. They are often used in situations where the fully nonparametric model may not perform well or when the researcher wants to use a parametric model but the functional form with respect to a subset of the regressors or the density of the errors is not known. Semiparametric regression models are a particular type of semiparametric modelling and, since semiparametric models contain a parametric component, they rely on parametric assumptions and may be misspecified and inconsistent, just like a fully parametric model.
Methods
Many different semiparametric regression methods have been proposed and developed. The most popular methods are the partially linear, index and varying coefficient models.
Partially linear models
A partially linear model is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the dependent variable, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
  vectors of explanatory variables, 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  vector of unknown parameters and 
 
 
 
 . The parametric part of the partially linear model is given by the parameter vector 
 
 
 
  while the nonparametric part is the unknown function 
 
 
 
 . The data is assumed to be i.i.d. with 
 
 
 
  and the model allows for a conditionally heteroskedastic error process 
 
 
 
  of unknown form. This type of model was proposed by Robinson (1988) and extended to handle categorical covariates by Racine and Liu (2007).
This method is implemented by obtaining a 
 
 
 
  consistent estimator of 
 
 
 
  and then deriving an estimator of 
 
 
 
  from the nonparametric regression of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  using an appropriate nonparametric regression method.1
Index models
A single index model takes the form



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are defined as earlier and the error term 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
 . The single index model takes its name from the parametric part of the model 
 
 
 
  which is a scalar single index. The nonparametric part is the unknown function 
 
 
 
 .
Ichimura's method
The single index model method developed by Ichimura (1993) is as follows. Consider the situation in which 
 
 
 
  is continuous. Given a known form for the function 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  could be estimated using the nonlinear least squares method to minimize the function



Since the functional form of 
 
 
 
  is not known, we need to estimate it. For a given value for 
 
 
 
  an estimate of the function



using kernel method. Ichimura (1993) proposes estimating 
 
 
 
  with



the leave-one-out nonparametric kernel estimator of 
 
 
 
 .
Klein and Spady's estimator
If the dependent variable 
 
 
 
  is binary and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are assumed to be independent, Klein and Spady (1993) propose a technique for estimating 
 
 
 
  using maximum likelihood methods. The log-likelihood function is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the leave-one-out estimator.
Smooth coefficient/varying coefficient models
Hastie and Tibshirani (1993) propose a smooth coefficient model given by



where 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
  vector and 
 
 
 
  is a vector of unspecified smooth functions of 
 
 
 
 .


 
  may be expressed as



See also

Nonparametric regression

Notes
References








"
Category:Regression analysis Category:Non-parametric statistics



See Li and Racine (2007) for an in-depth look at nonparametric regression methods.




