


Gravitational coupling constant




Gravitational coupling constant

In physics, a gravitational coupling constant is a constant characterizing the gravitational attraction between a given pair of elementary particles. The electron mass is typically used, and the associated constant typically denoted αG. It is a dimensionless quantity, with the result that its numerical value does not vary with the choice of units of measurement, only with the choice of particle.
Definition
αG is typically defined in terms of the gravitational attraction between pair of electrons. More precisely,



where:

G is the gravitational constant;
me is the electron rest mass;
c is the speed of light in vacuum;
ħ ("h-bar") is the reduced Planck constant;
mP is the Planck mass.

In natural units, where 
 
 
 
 , the expression becomes 
 
 
 
 . This shows that the gravitational coupling constant can be thought of as the analogue of the fine-structure constant; while the fine-structure constant measures the electromagnetic repulsion between two particles with equal charge, the magnitude of which is equal to the elementary charge, this gravitational coupling constant measures the gravitational attraction between two electrons.
Measurement and uncertainty
There is no known way of measuring αG directly, and CODATA does not report an estimate of its value. The above estimate is calculated from the CODATA values of me and mP.
While me and ħ are known to one part in 20,000,000, mP is only known to one part in 20,000 (mainly because G is known to only one part in 10,000). Hence αG is known to only four significant digits. By contrast, the fine structure constant α can be measured directly via the quantum Hall effect with a precision exceeding one part per billion. Also, the meter and second are now defined in a way such that c has an exact value by definition. Hence the precision of αG depends only on that of G, ħ, and me.
Related definitions
Let μ = mp/me = 1836.15267247(80) be the dimensionless proton-to-electron mass ratio, the ratio of the rest mass of the proton to that of the electron. Other definitions of αG that have been proposed in the literature differ from the one above merely by a factor of μ or its square;

If αG is defined using the mass of one electron, me, and one proton (mp = μme), then αG = μ1.752×10−45 = 3.217×10−42, and α/αG ≈ 1039. α/αG defined in this manner is C in Eddington (1935: 232), with Planck's constant replacing the "reduced" Planck constant;
(4.5) in Barrow and Tipler (1986) tacitly defines α/αG as e2/(Gmpme) ≈ 1039. Even though they do not name the α/αG defined in this manner, it nevertheless plays a role in their broad-ranging discussion of astrophysics, cosmology, quantum physics, and the anthropic principle;
N in Rees (2000) is α/αG = α/(μ21.752×10−45) = α/(5.906×10−39) ≈ 1036, where the denominator is defined using a pair of protons.

Discussion
There is an arbitrariness in the choice of which particle's mass to use (whereas 
 
 
 
 
  is a function of the elementary charge, 
 
 
 
  is normally a function of the electron rest mass). In this article 
 
 
 
  is defined in terms of a pair of electrons unless stated otherwise. For such a system, 
 
 
 
  is to gravitation as the fine-structure constant is to electromagnetism.
The electron is a stable particle possessing one elementary charge and one electron mass. Hence the ratio 
 
 
 
  measures the relative strengths of the electrostatic and gravitational forces between two electrons. Expressed in natural units (so that 
 
 
 
 
 ), the coupling constants become 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , resulting in a meaningful ratio 
 
 
 
 . Thus the ratio of the electron charge to the electron mass (in natural units) determines the relative strengths of electromagnetic and gravitational interaction between two electrons.


 
  is 43 orders of magnitude greater than 
 
 
 
 
  calculated for two electrons (or 37 orders, for two protons). The electrostatic force between two charged elementary particles is vastly greater than the corresponding gravitational force between them. This is so because a charged elementary particle has in the order of one Planck charge, but a mass many orders of magnitude smaller than the Planck mass. The gravitational attraction among elementary particles, charged or not, can hence be ignored. Gravitation dominates for macroscopic objects because they are electrostatically neutral to a very high degree.


 
  has a surprisingly simple physical interpretation: it is the square of the electron mass, measured in units of Planck mass. By virtue of this, 
 
 
 
  is connected to the Higgs mechanism, which determines the rest masses of the elementary particles. 
 
 
 
  can only be measured with relatively low precision, and is seldom mentioned in the physics literature.
Because 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is the Planck time, 
 
 
 
  is related to 
 
 
 
 , the Compton angular frequency of the electron.
See also

Coupling constant
Dimensionless numbers
Fine structure constant
Gravitational constant
Hierarchy problem

References


John D. Barrow, 2002. The Constants of Nature. Pantheon Books.
Arthur Eddington, 1935. New Pathways in Science. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Martin Rees, 2000. Just Six Numbers: The Deep Forces That Shape the Universe. ISBN 0-465-03673-2

External links

Hyperphysics: Gravitational coupling constant.

"
Category:Fundamental constants Category:Gravitation Category:Dimensionless numbers Category:Anthropic principle


