


Easton's theorem




Easton's theorem

In set theory, Easton's theorem is a result on the possible cardinal numbers of powersets.  (extending a result of Robert M. Solovay) showed via forcing that



and, for 
 
 
 
 , that



are the only constraints on permissible values for 2κ when κ is a regular cardinal.
Statement of the theorem
Easton's theorem states that if G is a class function whose domain consists of ordinals and whose range consists of ordinals such that

G is non-decreasing,
the cofinality of 
 
 
 
  is greater than 
 
 
 
  for each α in the domain of G, and


 
  is regular for each α in the domain of G,

then there is a model of ZFC such that



for each 
 
 
 
  in the domain of G.
The proof of Easton's theorem uses forcing with a proper class of forcing conditions over a model satisfying the generalized continuum hypothesis.
The first two conditions in the theorem are necessary. Condition 1 is a well known property of cardinality, while condition 2 follows from König's theorem.
In Easton's model the powersets of singular cardinals have the smallest possible cardinality compatible with the conditions that 2κ has cofinality greater than κ and is a non-decreasing function of κ.
No extension to singular cardinals
proved that a singular cardinal of uncountable cofinality cannot be the smallest cardinal for which the generalized continuum hypothesis fails. This shows that Easton's theorem cannot be extended to the class of all cardinals. The program of PCF theory gives results on the possible values of 
 
 
 
  for singular cardinals

 
 . PCF theory shows that the values of the continuum function on singular cardinals are strongly influenced by the values on smaller cardinals, whereas Easton's theorem shows that the values of the continuum function on regular cardinals are only weakly influenced by the values on smaller cardinals.
See also

Singular cardinal hypothesis
Aleph number
Beth number

References




"
Category:Set theory Category:Theorems in the foundations of mathematics Category:Cardinal numbers Category:Forcing (mathematics) Category:Independence results


