


Matrix grammar




Matrix grammar

A matrix grammar is a formal grammar in which instead of single productions, productions are grouped together into finite sequences. A production cannot be applied separately, it must be applied in sequence. In the application of such a sequence of productions, the rewriting is done in accordance to the each production in sequence, the first one, second one etc. till the last production has been used for rewriting. The sequences are referred to as matrices.
Matrix grammar is an extension of context-free grammar, and one instance of a Controlled grammar.
Formal definition
A matrix grammar is an ordered quadruple



where



 
  is a finite set of non-terminals


 
  is a finite set of terminals


 
 
  is a special element of 
 
 
 
 , viz. the starting symbol


 
  is a finite set of non-empty sequences whose elements are ordered pairs




The pairs are called productions, written as 
 
 
 
 . The sequences are called matrices and can be written as



Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of all productions appearing in the matrices 
 
 
 
  of a matrix grammar 
 
 
 
 . Then the matrix grammar 
 
 
 
  is of type-
 
 
 
 
 , length-increasing, linear, 

 
 -free, context-free or context-sensitive if and only if the grammar 
 
 
 
  has the following property.
For a matrix grammar 
 
 
 
 , a binary relation 
 
 
 
  is defined; also represented as 
 
 
 
 
 . For any 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  holds if and only if there exists an integer 
 
 
 
  such that the words



over V exist and



 
 
  and 
 
 



 
  is one of the matrices of 
 
 



 
  and 
 
 


If the above conditions are satisfied, it is also said that 
 
 
 
  holds with 
 
 
 
  as the specifications.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the reflexive transitive closure of the relation 
 
 
 
 . Then, the language generated by the matrix grammar 
 
 
 
 
  is given by



Example
Consider the matrix grammar



where 
 
 
 
  is a collection containing the following matrices:



These matrices, which contain only context-free rules generate the context-sensitive language



This example can be found on pages 8 and 9 of .
Properties
Let 
 
 
 
  be the class of languages produced by matrix grammars, and 
 
 
 
  the class of languages produced by 
 
 
 
 -free matrix grammars.

Trivially, 
 
 
 
  is included in 
 
 
 
 
 .
All context-free languages are in 
 
 
 
 , and all languages in 
 
 
 
  are recursively enumerable.


 
  is closed under union, concatenation, intersection with regular languages and permutation.
All languages in 
 
 
 
  can be produced by a context-sensitive grammar.
There exists some languages in 
 
 
 
 
  which can not be produced by a context-sensitive grammar.
Each language produced by a matrix grammar with only one terminal symbol is regular.

Open problems
It is not known whether there exist languages in 
 
 
 
  which are not in 
 
 
 
 , and it is neither known whether 
 
 
 
  contains languages which are not context-sensitive .
References


Ábrahám, S. Some questions of language theory. International Conference on Computational Linguistic, 1965. pp 1-11. 1

Gheorghe Păun, Membrane Computing: An Introduction, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 2002. pp 30-32

"
Category:Formal languages


