   Path coloring      Path coloring     In graph theory (Click here for Glossary of graph theory ), path coloring usually refers to one of two problems:   The problem of coloring a (multi)set of paths    R   R   R   in graph   G   G   G   , in such a way that any two paths of   R   R   R   which share an edge in   G   G   G   receive different colors. Set   R   R   R   and graph   G   G   G   are provided at input. This formulation of path coloring of a set   R   R   R   on a tree T is equivalent to vertex coloring the conflict graph of set   R   R   R   , i.e. a graph with vertex set   R   R   R   and edges connecting all pairs of paths of   R   R   R   which are not edge-disjoint with respect to   G   G   G   .  The problem of coloring (in accordance with the above definition) any chosen (multi)set    R   R   R   of paths in   G   G   G   , such that the set of pairs of end-vertices of paths from   R   R   R   is equal to some set or multiset   I   I   I   , called a set of requests . Set   I   I   I   and graph   G   G   G   are provided at input. This problem is a special case of a more general class of graph routing problems, known as call scheduling .   In both the above problems, the goal is usually to minimise the number of colors used in the coloring. In different variants of path coloring,   G   G   G   may be a simple graph , digraph or multigraph .  Definition  Path coloring involves the coloring of paths which links a given set of vertices and edges such that no two paths sharing the same edge have the same color.Here we seek an assignment of colors to the edges of a graph so that any two edges which are incident to the same node are assigned different colors.  History  Path coloring problems have been studied by many authors in which edge-intersection graphs of undirected paths in a tree is considered. This is known as EPT graphs. It was learnt that vertex coloring of EPT graphs is equivalent to undirected path coloring in trees.   Golumbic and Jamison also contributed towards the vertex coloring of EPT graphs.  Tarjan gave a (3/2)-approximation algorithm for coloring of EPT graphs .   This approximation algorithm was rediscovered in the context of path coloring by Raghavan and Upfal and improved to asymptotic approximation ratio 9/8 by Mihail et al.   The best known approximation algorithm for undirected path coloring in meshes is due to Rabani and achieves approximation ratio polynomial in log(log n), where n is the size of the mesh.  Kumar gave a randomized approximation algorithm for undirected path coloring in rings.   All approximation algorithms presented so far for directed path coloring in trees belong to a certain class of local greedy algorithms . For a maximum load    L   L   L   , it was shown that every deterministic local greedy algorithm uses at least 5/3   L   L   L   colors .   Gargano et al. studied the all-to-all instance of path coloring in bidirected trees and showed that the optimal number of colors is equal to the maximum load .    Path coloring in bidirected ring networks was studied by Wilfong and Winkler . They proved that there is a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a routing (assignment of paths to connection requests) that minimizes the maximum load.    For chain networks, the undirected and directed path coloring problems can be solved optimally in polynomial time, because the conflict graph of the paths is an interval graph and optimal vertex coloring for interval graphs can be computed efficiently .   Minimum Path Coloring  The concept of path coloring finds its applications in networks in which minimum number of colors are used to color the paths of the network with the reliability of the network maximised and the probability of failures of its nodes or links is reduced.  In a minimum path coloring , the colors are assigned to each of the paths in a network in such a way that each color corresponds to the occurrence of a failure in the network.Hence it is assumed that, when a certain color fails , then all the nodes and links associated with that color fails.  For a better understanding of the different kinds of path problems in path coloring, we divide them into two categories:  Single Path Problem: In this kind of problem, the probability of failure of a path can be reduced by reducing the number of colors used on the corresponding path.  Multiple Path Problem: Here, our objective is to determine the two link-disjoint paths which either have minimum total number of colors(as in the case of single path problem) or have minimum number of overlapping colors when each of the colors have equal probability of causing failures in the given network. Hence, by decreasing the number of overlapping colors , the probability that a single failure event will cause both paths to fail simultaneously is reduced.  Path coloring in tree networks  For a set   P   P   P   of undirected paths (connection requests) in an undirected tree G = (V; E), denote by    P  v     subscript  P  v    P_{v}   (for any v ∈ V) the subset of   P   P   P   that contains all paths touching node   v   v   v   . Paths in a set    P  v     subscript  P  v    P_{v}   intersect if and only if they share an edge incident to   v   v   v   . Hence, coloring the paths in a set    P  v     subscript  P  v    P_{v}   is equivalent to path coloring in a star.  Applications  Mathematical model for the call scheduling of a network: Here, a set of requests to transfer data between certain nodes is to be handled, and paths which have common edges, or intersecting vertices, must be given different colors.  Coloring of tourist routes: The routes intersecting at any crossing point must be given different colors.Certain routes which may have common segments are represented by edges with more than one color.  References   1  The Complexity of Path Coloring and Call Scheduling by Thomas Erlebach and Klaus Jansen  2  A compendium of NP optimization problems by Viggo Kann (problem: Minimum Path Coloring)    3  A Survey of the Graph Coloring-its Types, Methods and Applications by Piotr Formanowicz and Krzysztof Tanas  4 Approximation Algorithms for Path Coloring in Trees by Christos Kaklamanis,Ioannis Caragiannis and Giuseppe Persiano  5  Efficient routing in optical networks by A. Aggarwal, A. Bar-Noy, D.Coppersmith, R. Ramaswami, B. Schieber, M. Sudan  6  Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications R.K. Ahuja, T.L. Magnanti, J.B. Orlin  7  Minimum-Color Path Problems for Reliability in Mesh Networks Shengli Yuan, Saket Varma, Jason P. Jue  8  Call scheduling in trees, rings and meshes by T. Erlebach, K. Jansen   "  Category:Graph coloring   