


Degree of unsaturation




Degree of unsaturation

 The degree of saturation (also known as the index of hydrogen deficiency (IHD) or rings plus double bonds1) formula is used in organic chemistry to help draw chemical structures. The formula lets the user determine how many rings, double bonds, and triple bonds are present in the compound to be drawn. It does not give the exact number of rings or double or triple bonds, but rather the sum of the number of rings and double bonds plus twice the number of triple bonds. The final structure is verified with use of NMR, mass spectrometry and IR spectroscopy, as well as qualitative inspection.
General formula
The formula for degree of unsaturation is shown here



where 
 
 
 
  is the number of atoms with valence

 
 .2
That is, an atom that has a valence of x contributes a total of x-2 to the degree of unsaturation. The result is then halved and increased by 1.
There is also another formula to determine the number of double bonds present in an Hydrocarbon


 
  where

a = number of Carbon atoms in the compound
 
b = number of Hydrogen atoms in the compound
 
c = number of Nitrogen atoms in the compound
 
f = number of Halogen atoms in the compound
 

Rings plus pi bonds formulation
For molecules containing only carbon, hydrogen, monovalent halogens, nitrogen, and oxygen, the formula



where C = number of carbons, H = number of hydrogens, X= number of halogens and N = number of nitrogens,3 gives an equivalent result. Oxygen and other divalent atoms do not contribute to the degree of unsaturation, as (2-2) = 0.
The degree of unsaturation is used to calculate the number of rings and pi bonds, where

Rings count as 1 degree of unsaturation
Double bonds count as one degree of unsaturation
Triple bonds count as two degrees of unsaturation

n.b.: Benzene rings count as four degrees of unsaturation, since they consist of a ring and three pi bonds.
See also

Saturation (chemistry)

References
Paul R. Young, Practical Spectroscopy ISBN 0-534-37230-9
External links

Degree of Unsaturation Calculator
[http://www.chemie.fu-berlin.de/cgi-bin/molform? Molecular weight and degree of unsaturation calculator]
Degree of Unsaturation

"
Category:Articles with inconsistent citation formats Category:Organic chemistry





Organic structural spectroscopy, chapter 1.




