


Iterated monodromy group




Iterated monodromy group

In geometric group theory and dynamical systems the iterated monodromy group of a covering map is a group describing the monodromy action of the fundamental group on all iterations of the covering. A single covering map between spaces is therefore used to create a tower of coverings, by placing the covering over itself repeatedly. In terms of the Galois theory of covering spaces, this construction on spaces is expected to correspond to a construction on groups. The iterated monodromy group provides this construction, and it is applied to encode the combinatorics and symbolic dynamics of the covering, and provide examples of self-similar groups.
Definition
The iterated monodromy group of f is the following quotient group:



where :



 
  is a covering of a path-connected and locally path-connected topological space X by its subset 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  is the fundamental group of X and




 
  is the monodromy action for f.




 
  is the monodromy action of the 
 
 
 
  iteration of f, 
 
 
 
 .

Action
The iterated monodromy group acts by automorphism on the rooted tree of preimages


 
  where a vertex 
 
 
 
  is connected by an edge with 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
Iterated monodromy groups of rational functions
Let :

f be a complex rational function


 
  be the union of forward orbits of its critical points (the post-critical set).

If 
 
 
 
  is finite (or has a finite set of accumulation points), then the iterated monodromy group of f is the iterated monodromy group of the covering 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Riemann sphere.
Iterated monodromy groups of rational functions usually have exotic properties from the point of view of classical group theory. Most of them are infinitely presented, many have intermediate growth.
IMG of polynomials
Basilica group is the iterated monodromy group of the polynomial 
 
 

See also

Growth rate (group theory)
amenable group
complex dynamics
Julia set

References

Volodymyr Nekrashevych, Self-Similar Groups, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs Vol. 117, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2005; ISBN 0-412-34550-1.
Kevin M. Pilgrim, Combinations of Complex Dynamical Systems, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003; ISBN 3-540-20173-4.

External links

arXiv.org - Iterated Monodromy Group - preprints about the Iterated Monodromy Group.
Laurent Bartholdi's page - Movies illustrating the Dehn twists about a Julia set.
mathworld.wolfram.com - The Monodromy Group page.

"
Category:Geometric group theory Category:Homotopy theory Category:Complex analysis


