


Diagonal functor




Diagonal functor

In category theory, for any object 
 
 
 
  in any category

 
  where the product

 
  exists, there exists the diagonal morphism



satisfying


 
  for 
 
 
 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the canonical projection morphism to the 
 
 
 
 -th component. The existence of this morphism is a consequence of the universal property which characterizes the product (up to isomorphism). The restriction to binary products here is for ease of notation; diagonal morphisms exist similarly for arbitrary products. The image of a diagonal morphism in the category of sets, as a subset of the Cartesian product, is a relation on the domain, namely equality.
For concrete categories, the diagonal morphism can be simply described by its action on elements 
 
 
 
 
  of the object 
 
 
 
 . Namely, 
 
 
 
 , the ordered pair formed from 
 
 
 
 . The reason for the name is that the image of such a diagonal morphism is diagonal (whenever it makes sense), for example the image of the diagonal morphism 
 
 
 
  on the real line is given by the line which is a graph of the equation 
 
 
 
 
 . The diagonal morphism into the infinite product

 
  may provide an injection into the space of sequences valued in 
 
 
 
 ; each element maps to the constant sequence at that element. However, most notions of sequence spaces have convergence restrictions which the image of the diagonal map will fail to satisfy.
In particular, the category of small categories has products, and so one finds the diagonal functor

 
  given by 
 
 
 
 , which maps objects as well as morphisms. This functor can be employed to give a succinct alternate description of the product of objects within the category 
 
 
 
 
 : a product 
 
 
 
  is a universal arrow from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The arrow comprises the projection maps.
More generally, in any functor category

 
  (here 
 
 
 
 
  should be thought of as a small index category), for each object 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , there is a constant functor with fixed object 
 
 

 
 . The diagonal functor 
 
 
 
 
  assigns to each object of 
 
 
 
  the functor 
 
 
 
 , and to each morphism 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  the obvious natural transformation

 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  (given by 
 
 
 
 ). In the case that 
 
 
 
  is a discrete category with two objects, the diagonal functor 
 
 
 
  is recovered.
Diagonal functors provide a way to define limits and colimits of functors. The limit of any functor 
 
 
 
 
  is a universal arrow from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and a colimit is a universal arrow 
 
 
 
 . If every functor from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
  has a limit (which will be the case if 
 
 
 
  is complete), then the operation of taking limits is itself a functor from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The limit functor is the right-adjoint of the diagonal functor. Similarly, the colimit functor (which exists if the category is cocomplete) is the left-adjoint of the diagonal functor. For example, the diagonal functor 
 
 
 
  described above is the left-adjoint of the binary product functor and the right-adjoint of the binary coproduct functor.
"


