


List of formulae involving π




List of formulae involving π

The following is a list of significant formulae involving the mathematical constant 

. The list contains only formulae whose significance is established either in the article on the formula itself, the article Pi, or the article Approximations of 
 
 
.
Classical geometry


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the circumference of a circle, 
 
 
 
  is the diameter.



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the area of a circle and 
 
 
 
  is the radius.



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the volume of a sphere and 
 
 
 
  is the radius.



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the surface area of a sphere and 
 
 
 
  is the radius.

Physics

The cosmological constant:












Heisenberg's uncertainty principle:












Einstein's field equation of general relativity:












Coulomb's law for the electric force:












Magnetic permeability of free space:












Period of a simple pendulum with small amplitude:












The buckling formula:









Formulae yielding 
 
 

Integrals


















 
  (integral form of arctan over its entire domain, giving the period of tan).



 
  (see Gaussian integral).



 
  (when the path of integration winds once counterclockwise around 0. See also Cauchy's integral formula)







 
  (see also Proof that 22/7 exceeds π).

Efficient infinite series


 
  (see also Double factorial)



 
  (see Chudnovsky algorithm)



 
  (see Srinivasa Ramanujan, Ramanujan–Sato series)



1
  The following are efficient for calculating arbitrary binary digits of 
 
 
 
 :


 
  (see Bailey–Borwein–Plouffe formula)





Other infinite series


 
    (see also Basel problem and Riemann zeta function)







 
  , where B2n is a Bernoulli number.



2



 
    (see Leibniz formula for pi)























 
    (Euler, 1748)

After the first two terms, the signs are determined as follows: If the denominator is a prime of the form 4m - 1, the sign is positive; if the denominator is a prime of the form 4m + 1, the sign is negative; for composite numbers, the sign is equal the product of the signs of its factors.3


Machin-like formulae
See also Machin-like formula.


 
  (the original Machin's formula)
































where 
 
 
 
  is the n'th Fibonacci number.
Infinite series
Some infinite series involving pi are:4














































































































































































where


 
  is the Pochhammer symbol for the falling factorial. See also Ramanujan–Sato series.
Infinite products


 
  (Euler)

where the numerators are the odd primes; each denominator is the multiple of four nearest to the numerator.
 



 
  (see also Wallis product)
Vieta's formula:



Three continued fractions











For more on this third identity, see Euler's continued fraction formula.
(See also Continued fraction and Generalized continued fraction.)
Miscellaneous


 
  (Stirling's approximation)



 
  (Euler's identity)



 
  (see Euler's totient function)



 
  (see Euler's totient function)



 
  (see also Gamma function)



 
  (where agm is the arithmetic-geometric mean)



 
  (where mod is the modulo function which gives the rest of a division this formula is getting better for higher n)



 
  (Riemann sum to evaluate the area of the unit circle)



 
  (by Stirling's approximation)
See also

Pi
List of topics related to π

References
Further reading

Peter Borwein, The Amazing Number Pi
Kazuya Kato, Nobushige Kurokawa, Saito Takeshi: Number Theory 1: Fermat's Dream. American Mathematical Society, Providence 1993, ISBN 0-8218-0863-X.

"
Category:Pi Pi Category:Pi algorithms



Cetin Hakimoglu-Brown Derivation of Rapidly Converging Infinite Series↩
Weisstein, Eric W. "Pi Formulas", MathWorld↩
Carl B. Boyer, A History of Mathematics, Chapter 21., p. 488-489↩

↩




