


Monotone class theorem




Monotone class theorem

In measure theory and probability, the monotone class theorem connects monotone classes and sigma-algebras. The theorem says that the smallest monotone class containing an algebra of sets G is precisely the smallest σ-algebra containing G. It is used as a type of transfinite induction to prove many other theorems, such as Fubini's theorem.
Definition of a monotone class
A monotone class in a set 
 
 
 
  is a collection 
 
 
 
  of subsets of 
 
 
 
  which contains 
 
 
 
  and is closed under countable monotone unions and intersections, i.e. if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 , and similarly for intersections of decreasing sequences of sets.
Monotone class theorem for sets
Statement
Let G be an algebra of sets and define M(G) to be the smallest monotone class containing G. Then M(G) is precisely the σ-algebra generated by G, i.e. σ(G) = M(G)
Monotone class theorem for functions
Statement
Let 
 
 
 
  be a π-system that contains 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be a collection of functions from 
 
 
 
  to R with the following properties:
(1) If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 

(2) If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for any real number 
 
 

(3) If 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of non-negative functions that increase to a bounded function 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 

Then 
 
 
 
  contains all bounded functions that are measurable with respect to 
 
 
 
 , the sigma-algebra generated by 
 
 

Proof
The following argument originates in Rick Durrett's Probability: Theory and Examples. 1
The assumption 
 
 
 
 , (2) and (3) imply that 
 
 
 
  is a λ-system. By (1) and the π − λ theorem, 
 
 
 
 . (2) implies 
 
 
 
  contains all simple functions, and then (3) implies that 
 
 
 
  contains all bounded functions measurable with respect to 
 
 
 
 .
Results and Applications
As a corollary, if G is a ring of sets, then the smallest monotone class containing it coincides with the sigma-ring of G.
By invoking this theorem, one can use monotone classes to help verify that a certain collection of subsets is a sigma-algebra.
The monotone class theorem for functions can be a powerful tool that allows statements about particularly simple classes of functions to be generalized to arbitrary bounded and measurable functions.
References


See also
This article was advanced during a Wikipedia course held at Duke University, which can be found here: Wikipedia and Its Ancestors
fr:Lemme de classe monotone"
Category:Set families Category:Theorems in measure theory








