


Hyperplane separation theorem




Hyperplane separation theorem

 In geometry, the hyperplane separation theorem is either of two theorems about disjoint convex sets in n-dimensional Euclidean space. In the first version of the theorem, if both these sets are closed and at least one of them is compact, then there is a hyperplane in between them and even two parallel hyperplanes in between them separated by a gap. In the second version, if both disjoint convex sets are open, then there is a hyperplane in between them, but not necessarily any gap. An axis which is orthogonal to a separating hyperplane is a separating axis, because the orthogonal projections of the convex bodies onto the axis are disjoint.
The hyperplane separation theorem is due to Hermann Minkowski. The Hahn–Banach separation theorem generalizes the result to topological vector spaces.
A related result is the supporting hyperplane theorem. In geometry, a maximum-margin hyperplane is a hyperplane which separates two 'clouds' of points and is at equal distance from the two. The margin between the hyperplane and the clouds is maximal. See the article on Support Vector Machines for more details.
Statements and proof
The proof is based on the following lemma:

Proof of lemma: Let 
 
 
 
  Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence in K such that 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
 
  is in K since K is convex and so 
 
 
 
 . Since


 
  as 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a Cauchy sequence and so has limit x in K. It is unique since if y is in K and has norm δ, then
 
 
 
 
 and x = y. 
 
 

Proof of theorem: Given disjoint nonempty convex sets A, B, let


 
  Since 
 
 
 
  is convex and the sum of convex sets is convex, K is convex. By the lemma, the closure 
 
 
 
  of K, which is convex, contains a vector v of minimum norm. Since 
 
 
 
 
  is convex, for any x in K, the line segment


 
  lies in 
 
 
 
  and so


 
 . For 
 
 
 
 , we thus have:


 
  and letting 
 
 
 
  gives
 
 
 
 . Hence, for any x in A and y in B, we have
 
 
 
 . Thus, if v is nonzero, the proof is complete since


 
  In general, if the interior of K is nonempty, then it can be exhausted by compact convex subsets 
 
 
 
 
 . Since 0 is not in K, each 
 
 
 
  contains a nonzero vector 
 
 
 
  of minimum length and by the argument in the early part, we have
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 . We also normalize them to have length one; then the sequence 
 
 
 
 
  contains a convergent subsequence with limit v, which has length one and is nonzero. We have 
 
 
 
  for any x in the interior of K and by continuity the same holds for all x in K. We now finish the proof as before. Finally, if K has empty interior, the affine set that it spans has dimension less than that of the whole space. Consequently K is contained in some hyperplane 
 
 
 
 ; thus, 
 
 
 
  for all x in K and we finish the proof as before. 
 
 

The above proof also proves the first version of the theorem mentioned in the lede (to see it, note that K is closed under the hypothesis below.)
Here, the compactness in the hypothesis cannot be relaxed; see an example in the next section. Also,
This follows from the standard version since the separating hyperplane cannot intersect the interiors of the convex sets.
Counterexamples and uniqueness
(Figure)
The theorem does not apply if one of the bodies is not convex.

If one of A or B is not convex, then there are many possible counterexamples. For example, A and B could be concentric circles. A more subtle counterexample is one in which A and B are both closed but neither one is compact. For example, if A is a closed half plane and B is bounded by one arm of a hyperbola, then there is no strictly separating hyperplane:






(Although, by an instance of the second theorem, there is a hyperplane that separates their interiors.) Another type of counterexample has A compact and B open. For example, A can be a closed square and B can be an open square that touches A.
In the first version of the theorem, evidently the separating hyperplane is never unique. In the second version, it may or may not be unique. Technically a separating axis is never unique because it can be translated; in the second version of the theorem, a separating axis can be unique up to translation.
Use in collision detection
The separating axis theorem (SAT) says that:
Two convex objects do not overlap if there exists a line (called axis) onto which the two objects' projections do not overlap.
SAT suggests an algorithm for testing whether two convex solids intersect or not.
Regardless of dimensionality, the separating axis is always a line. For example, in 3D, the space is separated by planes, but the separating axis is perpendicular to the separating plane.
The separating axis theorem can be applied for fast collision detection between polygon meshes. Each face's normal or other feature directions is used as a separating axis, as well as the cross products. Note that this yields possible separating axes, not separating lines/planes.
If the cross products were not used, certain edge-on-edge non-colliding cases would be treated as colliding. For increased efficiency, parallel axes may be calculated as a single axis.
See also

dual cone
Farkas's lemma

Notes
References





External links

Collision detection and response

fr:Séparation des convexes"
Category:Theorems in convex geometry


