


Metric connection




Metric connection

In mathematics, a metric connection is a connection in a vector bundle E equipped with a metric for which the inner product of any two vectors will remain the same when those vectors are parallel transported along any curve. Other common equivalent formulations of a metric connection include:

A connection for which the covariant derivatives of the metric on E vanish.
A principal connection on the bundle of orthonormal frames of E.

A special case of a metric connection is the Levi-Civita connection. Here the bundle E is the tangent bundle of a manifold. In addition to being a metric connection, the Levi-Civita connection is required to be torsion free.
Riemannian connections
An important special case of a metric connection is a Riemannian connection. This is a connection 
 
 
 
  on the tangent bundle of a pseudo-Riemannian manifold (M, g) such that 
 
 
 
  for all vector fields X on M. Equivalently, 
 
 
 
  is Riemannian if the parallel transport it defines preserves the metric g.
A given connection 
 
 
 
  is Riemannian if and only if


 
  for all vector fields X, Y and Z on M, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the derivative of the function 
 
 
 
  along this vector field 
 
 
 
 .
The Levi-Civita connection is the torsion-free Riemannian connection on a manifold. It is unique by the fundamental theorem of Riemannian geometry.
Metric compatibility
In mathematics, given a metric tensor

 
 , a covariant derivative is said to be compatible with the metric if the following condition is satisfied:



Although other covariant derivatives may be supported within the metric, usually one only ever considers the metric-compatible one. This is because given two covariant derivatives, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , there exists a tensor for transforming from one to the other:



If the space is also torsion-free, then the tensor 
 
 
 
  is symmetric in its first two indices.
References




External links

a pdf about this

"
Category:Connection (mathematics) Category:Riemannian geometry


