


Quadrature filter




Quadrature filter

In signal processing, a quadrature filter

 
  is the analytic representation of the impulse response

 
  of a real-valued filter:



If the quadrature filter 
 
 
 
  is applied to a signal 
 
 
 
 , the result is



which implies that 
 
 
 
  is the analytic representation of 
 
 
 
 .
Since 
 
 
 
  is an analytic signal, it is either zero or complex-valued. In practice, therefore, 
 
 
 
  is often implemented as two real-valued filters, which correspond to the real and imaginary parts of the filter, respectively.
An ideal quadrature filter cannot have a finite support, but by choosing the function 
 
 
 
  carefully, it is possible to design quadrature filters which are localized such that they can be approximated reasonably well by means of functions of finite support.
Applications
Estimation of analytic signal
Notice that the computation of an ideal analytic signal for general signals cannot be made in practice since it involves convolutions with the function



which is difficult to approximate as a filter which is either causal or of finite support, or both. According to the above result, however, it is possible to obtain an analytic signal by convolving the signal 
 
 
 
  with a quadrature filter 
 
 
 
 . Given that 
 
 
 
  is designed with some care, it can be approximated by means of a filter which can be implemented in practice. The resulting function 
 
 
 
  is the analytic signal of 
 
 
 
  rather than of 
 
 
 
 . This implies that 
 
 
 
  should be chosen such that convolution by 
 
 
 
  affects the signal as little as possible. Typically, 
 
 
 
  is a band-pass filter, removing low and high frequencies, but allowing frequencies within a range which includes the interesting components of the signal to pass.
Single frequency signals
For single frequency signals (in practice narrow bandwidth signals) with frequency 
 
 
 
  the magnitude of the response of a quadrature filter equals the signal's amplitude A times the frequency function of the filter at frequency 
 
 
 
 .









This property can be useful when the signal s is a narrow-bandwidth signal of unknown frequency. By choosing a suitable frequency function Q of the filter, we may generate known functions of the unknown frequency 
 
 
 
  which then can be estimated.
See also

Analytic signal
Hilbert transform

"
Category:Signal processing


