


Semi-log plot




Semi-log plot

  In science and engineering, a semi-log graph or semi-log plot is a way of visualizing data that are related according to an exponential relationship. One axis is plotted on a logarithmic scale. This kind of plot is useful when one of the variables being plotted covers a large range of values and the other has only a restricted range – the advantage being that it can bring out features in the data that would not easily be seen if both variables had been plotted linearly.1
All equations of the form 
 
 
 
  form straight lines when plotted semi-logarithmically, since taking logs of both sides gives



This can easily be seen as a line in slope-intercept form with 
 
 
 
 
  as the slope and 
 
 
 
  as the vertical intercept. To facilitate use with logarithmic tables, one usually takes logs to base 10 or e, or sometimes base 2:



The term log-lin is used to describe a semi-log plot with a logarithmic scale on the y-axis, and a linear scale on the x-axis. Likewise, a lin-log plot uses a logarithmic scale on the x-axis, and a linear scale on the y-axis. Note that the naming is output-input (y-x), the opposite order from (x, y).
On a semi-log plot the spacing of the scale on the y-axis (or x-axis) is proportional to the logarithm of the number, not the number itself. It is equivalent to converting the y values (or x values) to their log, and plotting the data on lin-lin scales. A log-log plot uses the logarithmic scale for both axes, and hence is not a semi-log plot.
Equations
The equation for a line with an ordinate axis logarithmically scaled would be:






The equation of a line on a plot where the abscissa axis is scaled logarithmically would be



Real-world examples
Phase diagram of water
In physics and chemistry, a plot of logarithm of pressure against temperature can be used to illustrate the various phases of a substance, as in the following for water: 
2009 "swine flu" progression
While ten is the most common base, there are times when other bases are more appropriate, as in this example:
(Figure)
A semi-logarithmic plot of cases and deaths in the 2009 outbreak of influenza A (H1N1). Notice that while the horizontal (time) axis is linear, with the dates evenly spaced, the vertical (cases) axis is logarithmic, with the evenly spaced divisions being labelled with successive powers of two.

Microbial growth
In biology and biological engineering, the change in numbers of microbes due to asexual reproduction and nutrient exhaustion is commonly illustrated by a semi-log plot. Time is usually the independent axis, with the logarithm of the number or mass of bacteria or other microbe as the dependent variable. This forms a plot with four distinct phases, as shown below.
thumb|none|500px|Bacterial growth curve
See also

Nomograph, more complicated graphs
Nonlinear regression#Transformation, for converting a nonlinear form to a semi-log form amenable to non-iterative calculation

References
"
Category:Charts Category:Technical drawing Category:Statistical charts and diagrams



M. Bourne Graphs on Logarithmic and Semi-Logarithmic Paper (www.intmath.com)




