


Mason–Weaver equation




Mason–Weaver equation

The Mason–Weaver equation (named after Max Mason and Warren Weaver) describes the sedimentation and diffusion of solutes under a uniform force, usually a gravitational field.1 Assuming that the gravitational field is aligned in the z direction (Fig. 1), the Mason–Weaver equation may be written



where t is the time, c is the solute concentration (moles per unit length in the z-direction), and the parameters D, s, and g represent the solute diffusion constant, sedimentation coefficient and the (presumed constant) acceleration of gravity, respectively.
The Mason–Weaver equation is complemented by the boundary conditions


 
  at the top and bottom of the cell, denoted as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively (Fig. 1). These boundary conditions correspond to the physical requirement that no solute pass through the top and bottom of the cell, i.e., that the flux there be zero. The cell is assumed to be rectangular and aligned with the Cartesian axes (Fig. 1), so that the net flux through the side walls is likewise zero. Hence, the total amount of solute in the cell


 
  is conserved, i.e., 
 
 
 
 .
(Figure)
Figure 1: Diagram of Mason–Weaver cell and Forces on Solute

Derivation of the Mason–Weaver equation
A typical particle of mass m moving with vertical velocity v is acted upon by three forces (Fig. 1): the drag force

 
 , the force of gravity

 
  and the buoyant force

 
 , where g is the acceleration of gravity, V is the solute particle volume and 
 
 
 
  is the solvent density. At equilibrium (typically reached in roughly 10 ns for molecular solutes), the particle attains a terminal velocity

 
  where the three forces are balanced. Since V equals the particle mass m times its partial specific volume

 
 , the equilibrium condition may be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is the buoyant mass.
We define the Mason–Weaver sedimentation coefficient

 
 . Since the drag coefficient f is related to the diffusion constant D by the Einstein relation


 
 ,
the ratio of s and D equals



where 
 
 
 
  is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature in kelvins.
The flux J at any point is given by



The first term describes the flux due to diffusion down a concentration gradient, whereas the second term describes the convective flux due to the average velocity 
 
 
 
 
  of the particles. A positive net flux out of a small volume produces a negative change in the local concentration within that volume



Substituting the equation for the flux J produces the Mason–Weaver equation



The dimensionless Mason–Weaver equation
The parameters D, s and g determine a length scale 
 
 




and a time scale 
 
 




Defining the dimensionless variables 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the Mason–Weaver equation becomes



subject to the boundary conditions


 
  at the top and bottom of the cell, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
Solution of the Mason–Weaver equation
This partial differential equation may be solved by separation of variables. Defining 
 
 
 
 , we obtain two ordinary differential equations coupled by a constant 
 
 







where acceptable values of 
 
 
 
  are defined by the boundary conditions



at the upper and lower boundaries, 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. Since the T equation has the solution 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a constant, the Mason–Weaver equation is reduced to solving for the function 
 
 
 
 .
The ordinary differential equation for P and its boundary conditions satisfy the criteria for a Sturm–Liouville problem, from which several conclusions follow. First, there is a discrete set of orthonormal eigenfunctions

 
 
  that satisfy the ordinary differential equation and boundary conditions. Second, the corresponding eigenvalues

 
  are real, bounded below by a lowest eigenvalue

 
  and grow asymptotically like 
 
 
 
  where the nonnegative integer k is the rank of the eigenvalue. (In our case, the lowest eigenvalue is zero, corresponding to the equilibrium solution.) Third, the eigenfunctions form a complete set; any solution for 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as a weighted sum of the eigenfunctions



where 
 
 
 
  are constant coefficients determined from the initial distribution 
 
 




At equilibrium, 
 
 
 
  (by definition) and the equilibrium concentration distribution is



which agrees with the Boltzmann distribution. The 
 
 
 
  function satisfies the ordinary differential equation and boundary conditions at all values of 
 
 
 
  (as may be verified by substitution), and the constant B may be determined from the total amount of solute



To find the non-equilibrium values of the eigenvalues

 
 , we proceed as follows. The P equation has the form of a simple harmonic oscillator with solutions 
 
 
 
  where



Depending on the value of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is either purely real (
 
 
 
 ) or purely imaginary (
 
 
 
 ). Only one purely imaginary solution can satisfy the boundary conditions, namely, the equilibrium solution. Hence, the non-equilibrium eigenfunctions can be written as



where A and B are constants and 
 
 
 
  is real and strictly positive.
By introducing the oscillator amplitude

 
  and phase

 
  as new variables,












the second-order equation for P is factored into two simple first-order equations






Remarkably, the transformed boundary conditions are independent of 
 
 
 
  and the endpoints 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 




Therefore, we obtain an equation



giving an exact solution for the frequencies 
 
 




The eigenfrequencies 
 
 
 
  are positive as required, since 
 
 
 
 , and comprise the set of harmonics of the fundamental frequency

 
 . Finally, the eigenvalues

 
  can be derived from 
 
 




Taken together, the non-equilibrium components of the solution correspond to a Fourier series decomposition of the initial concentration distribution 
 
 
 
  multiplied by the weighting function

 
 . Each Fourier component decays independently as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is given above in terms of the Fourier series frequencies 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Lamm equation
The Archibald approach, and a simpler presentation of the basic physics of the Mason–Weaver equation than the original.2

References
"
Category:Laboratory techniques Category:Partial differential equations



↩
↩




