


Holomorphic vector bundle




Holomorphic vector bundle

In mathematics, a holomorphic vector bundle is a complex vector bundle over a complex manifold

 
  such that the total space 
 
 
 
  is a complex manifold and the projection map

 
  is holomorphic. Fundamental examples are the holomorphic tangent bundle of a complex manifold, and its dual, the holomorphic cotangent bundle. A holomorphic line bundle is a rank one holomorphic vector bundle.
By Serre's GAGA, the category of holomorphic vector bundles on a smooth complex projective variety X (viewed as a complex manifold) is equivalent to the category of algebraic vector bundles (i.e., locally free sheaves of finite rank) on X.
Definition through trivialization
Specifically, one requires that the trivialization maps



are biholomorphic maps. This is equivalent to requiring that the transition functions



are holomorphic maps. The holomorphic structure on the tangent bundle of a complex manifold is guaranteed by the remark that the derivative (in the appropriate sense) of a vector-valued holomorphic function is itself holomorphic.
The sheaf of holomorphic sections
Let 
 
 
 
  be a holomorphic vector bundle. A local section U}} is said to be holomorphic if, in a neighborhood of each point of 
 
 
 
 , it is holomorphic in some (equivalently any) trivialization.
This condition is local, meaning that holomorphic sections form a sheaf on 
 
 
 
 . This sheaf is sometimes denoted 
 
 
 
 . Such a sheaf is always locally free of the same rank as the rank of the vector bundle. If 
 
 
 
  is the trivial line bundle 
 
 
 
 , then this sheaf coincides with the structure sheaf

 
  of the complex manifold 
 
 
 
 .
The sheaves of forms with values in a holomorphic vector bundle
If 
 
 
 
  denotes the sheaf of  differential forms of type 
 
 
 
 , then the sheaf of type 
 
 
 
  forms with values in 
 
 
 
  can be defined as the tensor product



These sheaves are fine, meaning that they have partitions of the unity.
A fundamental distinction between smooth and holomorphic vector bundles is that in the latter, there is a canonical differential operator called the Dolbeault operator:



It is obtained by taking antiholomorphic derivatives in local coordinates.
Cohomology of holomorphic vector bundles
If 
 
 
 
  is a holomorphic vector bundle, the cohomology of 
 
 
 
  is defined to be the sheaf cohomology of 
 
 
 
 . In particular, we have


 
  the space of global holomorphic sections of 
 
 
 
 . We also have that 
 
 
 
  parametrizes the group of extensions of the trivial line bundle of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , that is, exact sequences of holomorphic vector bundles 
 
 
 
 . For the group structure, see also Baer sum as well as sheaf extension.
The Picard group
In the context of complex differential geometry, the Picard group 
 
 
 
  of the complex manifold 
 
 
 
  is the group of isomorphism classes of holomorphic line bundles with group law given by tensor product and inversion given by dualization. It can be equivalently defined as the first cohomology group 
 
 
 
  of the sheaf of non-vanishing holomorphic functions.
Hermitian metrics on a holomorphic vector bundle
Let E be a holomorphic vector bundle on a complex manifold M and suppose there is a hermitian metric on E; that is, fibers Ex are equipped with inner products  that vary smoothly. Then there exists a unique connection ∇ on E that is compatible with both complex structure and metric structure; that is, ∇ is a connection such that

(1) For any smooth sections s of E, 
 
 
 
  where p takes the (0, 1)-component of an E-valued 1-form.
 
(2) For any smooth sections s, t of E and a vector field X on M,
 






where we wrote 
 
 
 
  for the contraction of 
 
 
 
  by X. (This is equivalent to saying that the parallel transport by ∇ preserves the metric .)
 



Indeed, if u = (e1, …, en) is a holomorphic frame, then let 
 
 
 
  and define ωu by the equation 
 
 
 
 , which we write more simply as:


 
  If u' = ug is another frame with a holomorphic change of basis g, then


 
  and so ω is indeed a connection form, giving rise to ∇ by ∇s = ds + ω · s. Now, since 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  That is, ∇ is compatible with metric structure. Finally, since ω is a (1, 0)-form, the (0, 1)-component of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be the curvature form of ∇. Since 
 
 
 
  squares to zero, Ω has no (0, 2)-component and since Ω is easily shown to be skew-hermitian,1 it also has no (2, 0)-component. Consequently, Ω is a (1, 1)-form given by



The curvature Ω appears prominently in the vanishing theorem for higher cohomology of holomorphic vector bundles; e.g., Kodaira's vanishing theorem and Nakano's vanishing theorem.
Notes
References




See also

Birkhoff–Grothendieck theorem
Quillen metric
Serre duality

External links

http://mathoverflow.net/questions/87719/splitting-principle-for-holomorphic-vector-bundles/

"
Category:Vector bundles Category:Complex manifolds



For example, the existence of a Hermitian metric on E means the structure group of the frame bundle can be reduced to the unitary group and Ω has values in the Lie algebra of this unitary group, which consists of skew-hermitian metrices.↩




