


Linear dynamical system




Linear dynamical system

Linear dynamical systems are dynamical systems whose evaluation functions are linear. While dynamical systems in general do not have closed-form solutions, linear dynamical systems can be solved exactly, and they have a rich set of mathematical properties. Linear systems can also be used to understand the qualitative behavior of general dynamical systems, by calculating the equilibrium points of the system and approximating it as a linear system around each such point.
Introduction
In a linear dynamical system, the variation of a state vector (an 
 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector denoted 
 
 
 
 ) equals a constant matrix (denoted 
 
 
 
 ) multiplied by 
 
 
 
 . This variation can take two forms: either as a flow, in which 
 
 
 
  varies continuously with time



or as a mapping, in which 
 
 
 
  varies in discrete steps



These equations are linear in the following sense: if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two valid solutions, then so is any linear combination of the two solutions, e.g., 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are any two scalars. The matrix 
 
 
 
  need not be symmetric.
Linear dynamical systems can be solved exactly, in contrast to most nonlinear ones. Occasionally, a nonlinear system can be solved exactly by a change of variables to a linear system. Moreover, the solutions of (almost) any nonlinear system can be well-approximated by an equivalent linear system near its fixed points. Hence, understanding linear systems and their solutions is a crucial first step to understanding the more complex nonlinear systems.
Solution of linear dynamical systems
If the initial vector 
 
 
 
  is aligned with a right eigenvector

 
 
  of the matrix

 
 , the dynamics are simple



where 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding eigenvalue; the solution of this equation is


 
  as may be confirmed by substitution.
If 
 
 
 
  is diagonalizable, then any vector in an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional space can be represented by a linear combination of the right and left eigenvectors (denoted 
 
 
 
 ) of the matrix 
 
 
 
 .



Therefore, the general solution for 
 
 
 
  is a linear combination of the individual solutions for the right eigenvectors



Similar considerations apply to the discrete mappings.
Classification in two dimensions
 The roots of the characteristic polynomial det(A - λI) are the eigenvalues of A. The sign and relation of these roots, 
 
 
 
 , to each other may be used to determine the stability of the dynamical system


 
  For a 2-dimensional system, the characteristic polynomial is of the form 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the trace and 
 
 
 
  is the determinant of A. Thus the two roots are in the form:





 
  Note also that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus if 
 
 
 
  then the eigenvalues are of opposite sign, and the fixed point is a saddle. If 
 
 
 
  then the eigenvalues are of the same sign. Therefore if 
 
 
 
  both are positive and the point is unstable, and if 
 
 
 
  then both are negative and the point is stable. The discriminant will tell you if the point is nodal or spiral (i.e. if the eigenvalues are real or complex).
See also

Linear system
Dynamical system
List of dynamical system topics

"
Category:Dynamical systems


