


Spherical multipole moments




Spherical multipole moments

Spherical multipole moments are the coefficients in a series expansion of a potential that varies inversely with the distance R to a source, i.e., as 1/R. Examples of such potentials are the electric potential, the magnetic potential and the gravitational potential.
For clarity, we illustrate the expansion for a point charge, then generalize to an arbitrary charge density 
 
 
 
 . Through this article, the primed coordinates such as 
 
 
 
  refer to the position of charge(s), whereas the unprimed coordinates such as 
 
 
 
  refer to the point at which the potential is being observed. We also use spherical coordinates throughout, e.g., the vector 
 
 
 
 
  has coordinates 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the radius, 
 
 
 
  is the colatitude and 
 
 
 
  is the azimuthal angle.
Spherical multipole moments of a point charge
(Figure)
Figure 1: Definitions for the spherical multipole expansion

The electric potential due to a point charge located at 
 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the distance between the charge position and the observation point and 
 
 
 
  is the angle between the vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . If the radius 
 
 
 
  of the observation point is greater than the radius 
 
 
 
  of the charge, we may factor out 1/r and expand the square root in powers of 
 
 
 
  using Legendre polynomials



This is exactly analogous to the axial multipole expansion.
We may express 
 
 
 
  in terms of the coordinates of the observation point and charge position using the spherical law of cosines (Fig. 2)



(Figure)
Figure 2: Angles between the unit vectors 
 
 
 
  (the coordinate axis), 
 
 
 
  (the observation point) and 
 
 
 
  (the charge position).

Substituting this equation for 
 
 
 
  into the Legendre polynomials and factoring the primed and unprimed coordinates yields the important formula known as the spherical harmonic addition theorem



where the 
 
 
 
  functions are the spherical harmonics. Substitution of this formula into the potential yields



which can be written as



where the multipole moments are defined


 
 .
As with axial multipole moments, we may also consider the case when the radius 
 
 
 
 
  of the observation point is less than the radius 
 
 
 
  of the charge. In that case, we may write



which can be written as



where the interior spherical multipole moments are defined as the complex conjugate of irregular solid harmonics



The two cases can be subsumed in a single expression if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are defined to be the lesser and greater, respectively, of the two radii 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ; the potential of a point charge then takes the form, which is sometimes referred to as Laplace expansion



General spherical multipole moments
It is straightforward to generalize these formulae by replacing the point charge 
 
 
 
  with an infinitesimal charge element 
 
 
 
  and integrating. The functional form of the expansion is the same



where the general multipole moments are defined



Note
The potential Φ(r) is real, so that the complex conjugate of the expansion is equally valid. Taking of the complex conjugate leads to a definition of the multipole moment which is proportional to Ylm, not to its complex conjugate. This is a common convention, see molecular multipoles for more on this.
Interior spherical multipole moments
Similarly, the interior multipole expansion has the same functional form



with the interior multipole moments defined as



Interaction energies of spherical multipoles
A simple formula for the interaction energy of two non-overlapping but concentric charge distributions can be derived. Let the first charge distribution 
 
 
 
  be centered on the origin and lie entirely within the second charge distribution 
 
 
 
 . The interaction energy between any two static charge distributions is defined by



The potential 
 
 
 
  of the first (central) charge distribution may be expanded in exterior multipoles



where 
 
 
 
  represents the 
 
 
 
  exterior multipole moment of the first charge distribution. Substitution of this expansion yields the formula



Since the integral equals the complex conjugate of the interior multipole moments 
 
 
 
  of the second (peripheral) charge distribution, the energy formula reduces to the simple form



For example, this formula may be used to determine the electrostatic interaction energies of the atomic nucleus with its surrounding electronic orbitals. Conversely, given the interaction energies and the interior multipole moments of the electronic orbitals, one may find the exterior multipole moments (and, hence, shape) of the atomic nucleus.
Special case of axial symmetry
The spherical multipole expansion takes a simple form if the charge distribution is axially symmetric (i.e., is independent of the azimuthal angle 
 
 
 
 
 ). By carrying out the 
 
 
 
  integrations that define 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , it can be shown the multipole moments are all zero except when 
 
 
 
 . Using the mathematical identity



the exterior multipole expansion becomes



where the axially symmetric multipole moments are defined



In the limit that the charge is confined to the 
 
 
 
 -axis, we recover the exterior axial multipole moments.
Similarly the interior multipole expansion becomes



where the axially symmetric interior multipole moments are defined



In the limit that the charge is confined to the 
 
 
 
 -axis, we recover the interior axial multipole moments.
See also

Solid harmonics
Laplace expansion
Multipole expansion
Legendre polynomials
Axial multipole moments
Cylindrical multipole moments

External links
"
Category:Electromagnetism Category:Potential theory


