


Pointwise




Pointwise

In mathematics, the qualifier pointwise is used to indicate that a certain property is defined by considering each value 
 
 
 
  of some function 
 
 
 
  An important class of pointwise concepts are the pointwise operations — operations defined on functions by applying the operations to function values separately for each point in the domain of definition. Important relations can also be defined pointwise.
Pointwise operations
Examples include


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .
See pointwise product, scalar.
Pointwise operations inherit such properties as associativity, commutativity and distributivity from corresponding operations on the codomain. An example of an operation on functions which is not pointwise is convolution.
By taking some algebraic structure

 
  in the place of 
 
 
 
 , we can turn the set of all functions 
 
 
 
  to the carrier set of 
 
 
 
  into an algebraic structure of the same type in an analogous way.
Componentwise operations
Componentwise operations are usually defined on vectors, where vectors are elements of the set 
 
 
 
  for some natural number

 
  and some field

 
 . If we denote the 
 
 
 
 -th component of any vector 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 , then componentwise addition is 
 
 
 
 .
A tuple can be regarded as a function, and a vector is a tuple. Therefore any vector 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the function 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , and any componentwise operation on vectors is the pointwise operation on functions corresponding to those vectors.
Pointwise relations
In order theory it is common to define a pointwise partial order on functions. With A, B posets, the set of functions A → B can be ordered by f ≤ g if and only if (∀x ∈ A) f(x) ≤ g(x). Pointwise orders also inherit some properties of the underlying posets. For instance if A and B are continuous lattices, then so is the set of functions A → B with pointwise order.1 Using the pointwise order on functions one can concisely define other important notions, for instance:2

A closure operator c on a poset P is a monotone and idempotent self-map on P (i.e. a projection operator) with the additional property that idA ≤ c, where id is the identity function.


Similarly, a projection operator k is called a kernel operator if and only if k ≤ idA.

An example of infinitary pointwise relation is pointwise convergence of functions — a sequence of functions


 
  with


converges pointwise to a function 
 
 
 
  if for each 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 




Notes
References
For order theory examples:

T.S. Blyth, Lattices and Ordered Algebraic Structures, Springer, 2005, ISBN 1-85233-905-5.
G. Gierz, K. H. Hofmann, K. Keimel, J. D. Lawson, M. Mislove, D. S. Scott: Continuous Lattices and Domains, Cambridge University Press, 2003.

"
Category:Mathematical terminology



Gierz, p. xxxiii
Gierz, p. 26




