


Cylindrical multipole moments




Cylindrical multipole moments

Cylindrical multipole moments are the coefficients in a series expansion of a potential that varies logarithmically with the distance to a source, i.e., as 
 
 
 
 . Such potentials arise in the electric potential of long line charges, and the analogous sources for the magnetic potential and gravitational potential.
For clarity, we illustrate the expansion for a single line charge, then generalize to an arbitrary distribution of line charges. Through this article, the primed coordinates such as 
 
 
 
  refer to the position of the line charge(s), whereas the unprimed coordinates such as 
 
 
 
  refer to the point at which the potential is being observed. We use cylindrical coordinates throughout, e.g., an arbitrary vector 
 
 
 
  has coordinates 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the radius from the 
 
 
 
  axis, 
 
 
 
  is the azimuthal angle and 
 
 
 
  is the normal Cartesian coordinate. By assumption, the line charges are infinitely long and aligned with the 
 
 
 
  axis.
Cylindrical multipole moments of a line charge
(Figure)
Figure 1: Definitions for cylindrical multipoles; looking down the 
 
 
 
  axis

The electric potential of a line charge 
 
 
 
  located at 
 
 
 
  is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the shortest distance between the line charge and the observation point.
By symmetry, the electric potential of an infinite linecharge has no 
 
 
 
 -dependence. The line charge 
 
 
 
  is the charge per unit length in the 
 
 
 
 -direction, and has units of (charge/length). If the radius 
 
 
 
  of the observation point is greater than the radius 
 
 
 
  of the line charge, we may factor out 
 
 




and expand the logarithms in powers of 
 
 




which may be written as



where the multipole moments are defined as




 and


Conversely, if the radius 
 
 
 
  of the observation point is less than the radius 
 
 
 
  of the line charge, we may factor out 
 
 
 
  and expand the logarithms in powers of 
 
 




which may be written as



where the interior multipole moments are defined as




 and


General cylindrical multipole moments
The generalization to an arbitrary distribution of line charges 
 
 
 
  is straightforward. The functional form is the same



and the moments can be written









Note that the 
 
 
 
  represents the line charge per unit area in the 
 
 
 
  plane.
Interior cylindrical multipole moments
Similarly, the interior cylindrical multipole expansion has the functional form



where the moments are defined









Interaction energies of cylindrical multipoles
A simple formula for the interaction energy of cylindrical multipoles (charge density 1) with a second charge density can be derived. Let 
 
 
 
  be the second charge density, and define 
 
 
 
  as its integral over z



The electrostatic energy is given by the integral of the charge multiplied by the potential due to the cylindrical multipoles



If the cylindrical multipoles are exterior, this equation becomes









where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the cylindrical multipole moments of charge distribution 1. This energy formula can be reduced to a remarkably simple form



where 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the interior cylindrical multipoles of the second charge density.
The analogous formula holds if charge density 1 is composed of interior cylindrical multipoles



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the interior cylindrical multipole moments of charge distribution 1, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the exterior cylindrical multipoles of the second charge density.
As an example, these formulae could be used to determine the interaction energy of a small protein in the electrostatic field of a double-stranded DNA molecule; the latter is relatively straight and bears a constant linear charge density due to the phosphate groups of its backbone.
See also

Potential theory
Multipole moments
Multipole expansion
Axial multipole moments
Spherical multipole moments

"
Category:Electromagnetism Category:Potential theory


