


External ray




External ray

An external ray is a curve that runs from infinity toward a Julia or Mandelbrot set.1 This curve is only sometimes a half-line ( ray ) but is called ray because it is an image of a ray.
External rays are used in complex analysis, particularly in complex dynamics and geometric function theory.
History
External rays were introduced in Douady and Hubbard's study of the Mandelbrot set
Notation
External rays of (connected) Julia sets on dynamical plane are often called dynamic rays.
External rays of the Mandelbrot set (and similar one-dimensional connectedness loci) on parameter plane are called parameter rays.
Polynomials
===Dynamical plane = z-plane === External rays are associated to a compact, full, connected subset 
 
 
 
  of the complex plane as :

the images of radial rays under the Riemann map of the complement of 
 
 

the gradient lines of the Green's function of 
 
 

field lines of Douady-Hubbard potential
an integral curve of the gradient vector field of the Green's function on neighborhood of infinity2

External rays together with equipotential lines of Douady-Hubbard potential ( level sets) form a new polar coordinate system for exterior ( complement ) of 
 
 
 
 .
In other words the external rays define vertical foliation which is orthogonal to horizontal foliation defined by the level sets of potential.3
Uniformization
Let 
 
 
 
  be the mapping from the complement (exterior) of the closed unit disk

 
  to the complement of the filled Julia set

 
 .



and Boettcher map4(function) 
 
 
 
 , which is uniformizing map of basin of attraction of infinity, because it conjugates complement of the filled Julia set

 
  and the complement (exterior) of the closed unit disk



where :


 
  denotes the extended complex plane
Boettcher map 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism :




where :




 
  is a Boettcher coordinate
Formal definition of dynamic ray
(Figure)
polar coordinate system and Psi_c for c=-2

The external ray of angle 
 
 
 
  noted as 
 
 
 
 is:

the image under 
 
 
 
  of straight lines 
 
 






set of points of exterior of filled-in Julia set with the same external angle 
 
 





Properities
External ray for periodic angle 
 
 
 
  satisfies :



and its landing point 
 
 
 
  :5



===Parameter plane = c-plane ===
Uniformization
  Let 
 
 
 
  be the mapping from the complement (exterior) of the closed unit disk

 
  to the complement of the Mandelbrot set

 
 .



and Boettcher map (function) 
 
 
 
 , which is uniformizing map6 of complement of Mandelbrot set, because it conjugates complement of the Mandelbrot set

 
  and the complement (exterior) of the closed unit disk



it can be normalized so that :


7
where :


 
  denotes the extended complex plane
Jungreis function 
 
 
 
  is the inverse of uniformizing map :



In the case of complex quadratic polynomial one can compute this map using Laurent series about infinity89



where






Formal definition of parameter ray
The external ray of angle 
 
 
 
  is:

the image under 
 
 
 
  of straight lines 
 
 






set of points of exterior of Mandelbrot set with the same external angle 
 
 
10




Definition of 
 
 

Douady and Hubbard define:



so external angle of point 
 
 
 
  of parameter plane is equal to external angle of point 
 
 
 
  of dynamical plane
External angle
Angle 
 
 
 
  is named external angle ( argument ).11
Principal value of external angles are measured in turns modulo 1
1 turn = 360 degrees = 2 * Pi radians
Compare different types of angles :

external ( point of set's exterior )
internal ( point of component's interior )
plain ( argument of complex number )






external angle

internal angle

plain angle





parameter plane















dynamic plane














Computation of external argument

argument of Böttcher coordinate as an external argument12








kneading sequence as a binary expansion of external argument131415

Transcendental maps
For transcendental maps ( for example exponential ) infinity is not a fixed point but an essential singularity and there is no Boettcher isomorphism.1617
Here dynamic ray is defined as a curve :

connecting a point in an escaping set and infinity 
lying in an escaping set

Images
Dynamic rays
File:JuliaRay 1 3.png|Julia set for 
 
 
 
  with 2 external ray landing on repelling fixed point alpha File:JuliaRay3.png|Julia set and 3 external rays landing on fixed point 
 
 
File:Dynamic internal and external rays .svg|Dynamic external rays landing on repelling period 3 cycle and 3 internal rays landing on fixed point 
 
 
File:Julia-p9.png|Julia set with external rays landing on period 3 orbit File:Parabolic rays landing on fixed point.ogv|Rays landing on parabolic fixed point for periods 2-40
Parameter rays
Mandelbrot set for complex quadratic polynomial with parameter rays of root points
Image:Man1.jpg|External rays for angles of the form : n / ( 21 - 1) (0/1; 1/1) landing on the point c= 1/4, which is cusp of main cardioid ( period 1 component) Image:Man2period.jpg|External rays for angles of the form : n / ( 22 - 1) (1/3, 2/3) landing on the point c= - 3/4, which is root point of period 2 component Image:Man3period.jpg|External rays for angles of the form : n / ( 23 - 1) (1/7,2/7) (3/7,4/7) landing on the point c= -1.75 = -7/4 (5/7,6/7) landing on the root points of period 3 components. Image:Man4period.jpg|External rays for angles of form : n / ( 24 - 1) (1/15,2/15) (3/15, 4/15) (6/15, 9/15) landing on the root point c= -5/4 (7/15, 8/15) (11/15,12/15) (13/15, 14/15) landing on the root points of period 4 components. Image:Man5period.jpg| External rays for angles of form : n / ( 25 - 1) landing on the root points of period 5 components
Image:Mandel ie 1 3.jpg|internal ray of main cardioid of angle 1/3: starts from center of main cardioid c=0, ends in the root point of period 3 component, which is the landing point of parameter (external) rays of angles 1/7 and 2/7 Image:Iray.png|Internal ray for angle 1/3 of main cardioid made by conformal map from unit circle
File:Smiley mini Mandelbrot set with external rays.png| Mini Mandelbrot set with period 134 and 2 external rays File:Part of parameter plane with external 5 rays landing on the Mandelbrot set.png File:One arm spiral - part of Mandelbrot set.png File:Mini Mandelbrot set period=68 with external rays.png
Parameter space of the complex exponential family f(z)=exp(z)+c. Eight parameter rays landing at this parameter are drawn in black.
(Figure)
Parameter plane of the complex exponential family f(z)=exp(z)+c with 8 external ( parameter) rays

Programs that can draw external rays

Mandel - program by Wolf Jung written in C++ using Qt with source code available under the GNU General Public License
Java applets by Evgeny Demidov ( code of mndlbrot::turn function by Wolf Jung has been ported to Java ) with free source code
OTIS by Tomoki KAWAHIRA - Java applet without source code
Spider XView program by Yuval Fisher
YABMP by Prof. Eugene Zaustinsky for DOS without source code
DH_Drawer by Arnaud Chéritat written for Windows 95 without source code
Linas Vepstas C programs for Linux console with source code
Program Julia by Curtis T. McMullen written in C and Linux commands for C shell console with source code
mjwinq program by Matjaz Erat written in delphi/windows without source code ( For the external rays it uses the methods from quad.c in julia.tar by Curtis T McMullen)
RatioField by Gert Buschmann, for windows with Pascal source code for Dev-Pascal 1.9.2 (with Free Pascal compiler )
Mandelbrot program by Milan Va, written in Delphi with source code
Power MANDELZOOM by Robert Munafo
ruff by Claude Heiland-Allen

See also

external rays of Misiurewicz point
Orbit portrait
Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings
Prouhet-Thue-Morse constant
Carathéodory's theorem
Field lines of Julia sets

References

Lennart Carleson and Theodore W. Gamelin, Complex Dynamics, Springer 1993
Adrien Douady and John H. Hubbard, Etude dynamique des polynômes complexes, Prépublications mathémathiques d'Orsay 2/4 (1984 / 1985)
John W. Milnor, Periodic Orbits, External Rays and the Mandelbrot Set: An Expository Account; Géométrie complexe et systèmes dynamiques (Orsay, 1995), Astérisque No. 261 (2000), 277–333. (First appeared as a Stony Brook IMS Preprint in 1999, available as arXiV:math.DS/9905169.)
John Milnor, Dynamics in One Complex Variable, Third Edition, Princeton University Press, 2006, ISBN 0-691-12488-4
Wolf Jung : Homeomorphisms on Edges of the Mandelbrot Set. Ph.D. thesis of 2002

External links

Hubbard Douady Potential, Field Lines by Inigo Quilez
Drawing Mc by Jungreis Algorithm
Internal rays of components of Mandelbrot set
John Hubbard's presentation, The Beauty and Complexity of the Mandelbrot Set, part 3.1
videos by ImpoliteFruit


"
Category:Complex numbers Category:Fractals Category:Polynomials Category:Articles containing video clips



J. Kiwi : Rational rays and critical portraits of complex polynomials. Ph. D. Thesis SUNY at Stony Brook (1997); IMS Preprint #1997/15.
Yunping Jing : Local connectivity of the Mandelbrot set at certain infinitely renormalizable points Complex Dynamics and Related Topics, New Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 2004, The International Press, 236-264
POLYNOMIAL BASINS OF INFINITY LAURA DEMARCO AND KEVIN M. PILGRIM
How to draw external rays by Wolf Jung
Tessellation and Lyubich-Minsky laminations associated with quadratic maps I: Pinching semiconjugacies Tomoki Kawahira
Irwin Jungreis: The uniformization of the complement of the Mandelbrot set. Duke Math. J. Volume 52, Number 4 (1985), 935-938.
Adrien Douady, John Hubbard, Etudes dynamique des polynomes complexes I & II, Publ. Math. Orsay. (1984-85) (The Orsay notes)
Computing the Laurent series of the map Psi: C-D to C-M. Bielefeld, B.; Fisher, Y.; Haeseler, F. V. Adv. in Appl. Math. 14 (1993), no. 1, 25--38,
Weisstein, Eric W. "Mandelbrot Set." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource
An algorithm to draw external rays of the Mandelbrot set by Tomoki Kawahira
http://www.mrob.com/pub/muency/externalangle.html External angle at Mu-ency by Robert Munafo
Computation of the external argument by Wolf Jung
A. DOUADY, Algorithms for computing angles in the Mandelbrot set (Chaotic Dynamics and Fractals, ed. Barnsley and Demko, Acad. Press, 1986, pp. 155-168).
Adrien Douady, John H. Hubbard: Exploring the Mandelbrot set. The Orsay Notes. page 58
Exploding the Dark Heart of Chaos by Chris King from Mathematics Department of University of Auckland
Topological Dynamics of Entire Functions by Helena Mihaljevic-Brandt
Dynamic rays of entire functions and their landing behaviour by Helena Mihaljevic-Brandt




