


Axial multipole moments




Axial multipole moments

Axial multipole moments are a series expansion of the electric potential of a charge distribution localized close to the origin along one Cartesian axis, denoted here as the z-axis. However, the axial multipole expansion can also be applied to any potential or field that varies inversely with the distance to the source, i.e., as 
 
 
 
 . For clarity, we first illustrate the expansion for a single point charge, then generalize to an arbitrary charge density 
 
 
 
  localized to the z-axis.
(Figure)
Figure 1: Point charge on the z axis; Definitions for axial multipole expansion

Axial multipole moments of a point charge
The electric potential of a point charge q located on the z-axis at 
 
 
 
  (Fig. 1) equals



If the radius r of the observation point is greater than a, we may factor out 
 
 
 
  and expand the square root in powers of 
 
 
 
  using Legendre polynomials



where the axial multipole moments

 
  contain everything specific to a given charge distribution; the other parts of the electric potential depend only on the coordinates of the observation point P. Special cases include the axial monopole moment 
 
 
 
 , the axial dipole moment 
 
 
 
  and the axial quadrupole moment 
 
 
 
 . This illustrates the general theorem that the lowest non-zero multipole moment is independent of the origin of the coordinate system, but higher multipole multipole moments are not (in general).
Conversely, if the radius r is less than a, we may factor out 
 
 
 
  and expand in powers of 
 
 
 
  using Legendre polynomials


 
  where the interior axial multipole moments

 
  contain everything specific to a given charge distribution; the other parts depend only on the coordinates of the observation point P.
General axial multipole moments
To get the general axial multipole moments, we replace the point charge of the previous section with an infinitesimal charge element 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  represents the charge density at position 
 
 
 
  on the z-axis. If the radius r of the observation point P is greater than the largest 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is significant (denoted 
 
 
 
 ), the electric potential may be written



where the axial multipole moments 
 
 
 
  are defined



Special cases include the axial monopole moment (=total charge)


 
 ,
the axial dipole moment 
 
 
 
 , and the axial quadrupole moment 
 
 
 
 . Each successive term in the expansion varies inversely with a greater power of 
 
 
 
 , e.g., the monopole potential varies as 
 
 
 
 , the dipole potential varies as 
 
 
 
 , the quadrupole potential varies as 
 
 
 
 , etc. Thus, at large distances (
 
 
 
 ), the potential is well-approximated by the leading nonzero multipole term.
The lowest non-zero axial multipole moment is invariant under a shift b in origin, but higher moments generally depend on the choice of origin. The shifted multipole moments 
 
 
 
  would be



Expanding the polynomial under the integral


 
  leads to the equation


 
  If the lower moments 
 
 
 
  are zero, then 
 
 
 
 . The same equation shows that multipole moments higher than the first non-zero moment do depend on the choice of origin (in general).
Interior axial multipole moments
Conversely, if the radius r is smaller than the smallest 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is significant (denoted 
 
 
 
 ), the electric potential may be written



where the interior axial multipole moments 
 
 
 
  are defined



Special cases include the interior axial monopole moment (
 
 
 
  the total charge)


 
 ,
the interior axial dipole moment 
 
 
 
 , etc. Each successive term in the expansion varies with a greater power of 
 
 
 
 , e.g., the interior monopole potential varies as 
 
 
 
 , the dipole potential varies as 
 
 
 
 , etc. At short distances (
 
 
 
 
 ), the potential is well-approximated by the leading nonzero interior multipole term.
See also

Potential theory
Multipole moments
Multipole expansion
Spherical multipole moments
Cylindrical multipole moments
Solid harmonics
Laplace expansion

References


External links
"
Category:Electromagnetism Category:Potential theory


