


Remez algorithm




Remez algorithm

The Remez algorithm or Remez exchange algorithm, published by Evgeny Yakovlevich Remez in 1934,1 is an iterative algorithm used to find simple approximations to functions, specifically, approximations by functions in a Chebyshev space that are the best in the uniform norm L∞ sense.
A typical example of a Chebyshev space is the subspace of Chebyshev polynomials of order n in the space of real continuous functions on an interval, C[a, b]. The polynomial of best approximation within a given subspace is defined to be the one that minimizes the maximum absolute difference between the polynomial and the function. In this case, the form of the solution is precised by the equioscillation theorem.
Procedure
The Remez algorithm starts with the function f to be approximated and a set X of 
 
 
 
  sample points 
 
 
 
  in the approximation interval, usually the Chebyshev nodes linearly mapped to the interval. The steps are:

Solve the linear system of equations



 
  (where 
 
 
 
 ),

for the unknowns 
 
 
 
  and E.
 


Use the 
 
 
 
  as coefficients to form a polynomial 
 
 
 
 .
Find the set M of points of local maximum error 
 
 
 
 .
If the errors at every 
 
 
 
  are of equal magnitude and alternate in sign, then 
 
 
 
  is the minimax approximation polynomial. If not, replace X with M and repeat the steps above.

The result is called the polynomial of best approximation, the Chebyshev approximation, or the minimax approximation.
A review of technicalities in implementing the Remez algorithm is given by W. Fraser.2
On the choice of initialization
The Chebyshev nodes are a common choice for the initial approximation because of their role in the theory of polynomial interpolation. For the initialization of the optimization problem for function f by the Lagrange interpolant Ln(f), it can be shown that this initial approximation is bounded by



with the norm or Lebesgue constant of the Lagrange interpolation operator Ln of the nodes (t1, ..., tn + 1) being



T being the zeros of the Chebyshev polynomials, and the Lebesgue functions being



Theodore A. Kilgore,3 Carl de Boor, and Allan Pinkus4 proved that there exists a unique ti for each Ln, although not known explicitly for (ordinary) polynomials. Similarly, 
 
 
 
 , and the optimality of a choice of nodes can be expressed as 
 
 

For Chebyshev nodes, which provides a suboptimal, but analytically explicit choice, the asymptotic behavior is known as5



(γ being the Euler-Mascheroni constant) with


 
  for 
 
 

and upper bound6



Lev Brutman7 obtained the bound for 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  being the zeros of the expanded Chebyshev polynomials:



Rüdiger Günttner8 obtained from a sharper estimate for 
 
 




Detailed discussion
This section provides more information on the steps outlined above. In this section, the index i runs from 0 to n+1.
Step 1: Given 
 
 
 
 , solve the linear system of n+2 equations


 
  (where 
 
 
 
 ),

for the unknowns 
 
 
 
  and E.
 

It should be clear that 
 
 
 
  in this equation makes sense only if the nodes 
 
 
 
  are ordered, either strictly increasing or strictly decreasing. Then this linear system has a unique solution. (As is well known, not every linear system has a solution.) Also, the solution can be obtained with only 
 
 
 
  arithmetic operations while a standard solver from the library would take 
 
 
 
  operations. Here is the simple proof:
Compute the standard n-th degree interpolant 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  at the first n+1 nodes and also the standard n-th degree interpolant 
 
 
 
  to the ordinates 
 
 



 
  To this end, use each time Newton's interpolation formula with the divided differences of order 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  arithmetic operations.
The polynomial 
 
 
 
  has its i-th zero between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and thus no further zeroes between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the same sign 
 
 
 
 .
The linear combination 
 
 
 
  is also a polynomial of degree n and


 
  This is the same as the equation above for 
 
 
 
  and for any choice of E. The same equation for i = n+1 is


 
  and needs special reasoning: solved for the variable E, it is the definition of E:


 
  As mentioned above, the two terms in the denominator have same sign: E and thus 
 
 
 
  are always well-defined.
The error at the given n+2 ordered nodes is positive and negative in turn because



The theorem of de La Vallée Poussin states that under this condition no polynomial of degree n exists with error less than E. Indeed, if such a polynomial existed, call it 
 
 
 
 , then the difference 
 
 
 
  would still be positive/negative at the n+2 nodes 
 
 
 
  and therefore have at least n+1 zeros which is impossible for a polynomial of degree n. Thus, this E is a lower bound for the minimum error which can be achieved with polynomials of degree n.
Step 2 changes the notation from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Step 3 improves upon the input nodes 
 
 
 
  and their errors 
 
 
 
  as follows.
In each P-region, the current node 
 
 
 
  is replaced with the local maximizer 
 
 
 
  and in each N-region 
 
 
 
  is replaced with the local minimizer. (Expect 
 
 
 
  at A, the 
 
 
 
  near 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  at B.) No high precision is required here, the standard line search with a couple of quadratic fits should suffice. (See 9)
Let 
 
 
 
 . Each amplitude 
 
 
 
  is greater than or equal to E. The Theorem of de La Vallée Poussin and its proof also apply to 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  as the new lower bound for the best error possible with polynomials of degree n.
Moreover, 
 
 
 
  comes in handy as an obvious upper bound for that best possible error.
Step 4: With 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as lower and upper bound for the best possible approximation error, one has a reliable stopping criterion: repeat the steps until 
 
 
 
  is sufficiently small or no longer decreases. These bounds indicate the progress.
Variants
Sometimes more than one sample point is replaced at the same time with the locations of nearby maximum absolute differences.
Sometimes relative error is used to measure the difference between the approximation and the function, especially if the approximation will be used to compute the function on a computer which uses floating point arithmetic.
See also

Approximation theory

Notes
External links

Intro to DSP


"
Category:Polynomials Category:Approximation theory Category:Numerical analysis



E. Ya. Remez, "Sur la détermination des polynômes d'approximation de degré donnée", Comm. Soc. Math. Kharkov 10, 41 (1934);
 "Sur un procédé convergent d'approximations successives pour déterminer les polynômes d'approximation, Compt. Rend. Acad. Sc. 198, 2063 (1934);
 "Sur le calcul effectiv des polynômes d'approximation des Tschebyscheff", Compt. Rend. Acade. Sc. 199, 337 (1934).↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
T. Rivlin, "The Lebesgue constants for polynomial interpolation", in Proceedings of the Int. Conf. on Functional Analysis and Its Application, edited by H. G. Garnier et al. (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1974), p. 422; The Chebyshev polynomials (Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1974).↩
↩
↩
David G. Luenberger: Introduction to Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company 1973.↩




