


Zero-lift drag coefficient




Zero-lift drag coefficient

In aerodynamics, the zero-lift drag coefficient

 
  is a dimensionless parameter which relates an aircraft's zero-lift drag force to its size, speed, and flying altitude.
Mathematically, zero-lift drag coefficient is defined as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the total drag coefficient for a given power, speed, and altitude, and 
 
 
 
  is the lift-induced drag coefficient at the same conditions. Thus, zero-lift drag coefficient is reflective of parasitic drag which makes it very useful in understanding how "clean" or streamlined an aircraft's aerodynamics are. For example, a Sopwith Camel biplane of World War I which had many wires and bracing struts as well as fixed landing gear, had a zero-lift drag coefficient of approximately 0.0378. Compare a 
 
 
 
  value of 0.0161 for the streamlined P-51 Mustang of World War II1 which compares very favorably even with the best modern aircraft.
The drag at zero-lift can be more easily conceptualized as the drag area (

) which is simply the product of zero-lift drag coefficient and aircraft's wing area (
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the wing area). Parasitic drag experienced by an aircraft with a given drag area is approximately equal to the drag of a flat square disk with the same area which is held perpendicular to the direction of flight. The Sopwith Camel has a drag area of , compared to  for the P-51. Both aircraft have a similar wing area, again reflecting the Mustang's superior aerodynamics in spite of much larger size.2 In another comparison with the Camel, a very large but streamlined aircraft such as the Lockheed Constellation has a considerably smaller zero-lift drag coefficient (0.0211 vs. 0.0378) in spite of having a much larger drag area (34.82 ft² vs. 8.73 ft²).
Furthermore, an aircraft's maximum speed is proportional to the cube root of the ratio of power to drag area, that is:


 
 .3
Estimating zero-lift drag4
As noted earlier, 
 
 
 
 .
The total drag coefficient can be estimated as:


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the propulsive efficiency, P is engine power in horsepower, 
 
 
 
  sea-level air density in slugs/cubic foot, 
 
 
 
  is the atmospheric density ratio for an altitude other than sea level, S is the aircraft's wing area in square feet, and V is the aircraft's speed in miles per hour. Substituting 0.002378 for 
 
 
 
 , the equation is simplified to:


 
 .
The induced drag coefficient can be estimated as:


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the lift coefficient, A is the aspect ratio, and 
 
 
 
  is the aircraft's efficiency factor.
Substituting for 
 
 
 
  gives:


 
 ,
where W/S is the wing loading in lb/ft².
References
"
Category:Aerodynamics











