


Position operator




Position operator

In quantum mechanics, the position operator is the operator that corresponds to the position observable of a particle. The eigenvalue of the operator is the position vector of the particle.1
Introduction
In one dimension, the square modulus of the wave function, 
 
 
 
 , represents the probability density of finding the particle at position 
 
 
 
 . Hence the expected value of a measurement of the position of the particle is



Accordingly, the quantum mechanical  operator corresponding to position is 
 
 
 
 , where



Eigenstates
The eigenfunctions of the position operator, represented in position basis, are dirac delta functions. To show this, suppose 
 
 
 
  is an eigenstate of the position operator with eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 . We write the eigenvalue equation in position coordinates,



recalling that 
 
 
 
  simply multiplies the function by 
 
 
 
  in position representation. Since 
 
 
 
  is a variable while 
 
 
 
  is a constant, 
 
 
 
  must be zero everywhere except at 
 
 
 
 . The normalized solution to this is



Although such a state is physically unrealizable and, strictly speaking, not a function, it can be thought of as an "ideal state" whose position is known exactly (any measurement of the position always returns the eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 ). Hence, by the uncertainty principle, nothing is known about the momentum of such a state.
Three dimensions
The generalisation to three dimensions is straightforward. The wavefunction is now 
 
 
 
  and the expectation value of the position is



where the integral is taken over all space. The position operator is



Momentum space
In momentum space, the position operator in one dimension is



Formalism
Consider, for example, the case of a spinless particle moving in one spatial dimension (i.e. in a line). The state space for such a particle is L2(R), the Hilbert space of complex-valued and square-integrable (with respect to the Lebesgue measure) functions on the real line. The position operator, Q, is then defined by:23



with domain



Since all continuous functions with compact support lie in D(Q), Q is densely defined. Q, being simply multiplication by x, is a self adjoint operator, thus satisfying the requirement of a quantum mechanical observable. Immediately from the definition we can deduce that the spectrum consists of the entire real line and that Q has purely continuous spectrum, therefore no discrete eigenvalues. The three-dimensional case is defined analogously. We shall keep the one-dimensional assumption in the following discussion.
Measurement
As with any quantum mechanical observable, in order to discuss measurement, we need to calculate the spectral resolution of Q:



Since Q is just multiplication by x, its spectral resolution is simple. For a Borel subset B of the real line, let 
 
 
 
  denote the indicator function of B. We see that the projection-valued measure ΩQ is given by



i.e. ΩQ is multiplication by the indicator function of B. Therefore, if the system is prepared in state ψ, then the probability of the measured position of the particle being in a Borel set B is



where μ is the Lebesgue measure. After the measurement, the wave function collapses to either



or


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Hilbert space norm on L2(R).
See also

Position and momentum space
Momentum operator

References
"
Category:Quantum mechanics



↩
↩
↩




