


Prüfer group




Prüfer group

 In mathematics, specifically in group theory, the Prüfer p-group or the p-quasicyclic group or p∞-group, Z(p∞), for a prime number p is the unique p-group in which every element has p different p-th roots. The group is named after Heinz Prüfer. It is a countable abelian group which helps taxonomize infinite abelian groups.
Constructions of Z(p∞)
The Prüfer p-group may be identified with the subgroup of the circle group, U(1), consisting of all pn-th roots of unity as n ranges over all non-negative integers:


 
  The group operation here is the multiplication of complex numbers.
Alternatively, the Prüfer p-group may be seen as the Sylow p-subgroup of the quotient group Q/Z, consisting of those elements whose order is a power of p:


 
  (where Z[1/p] denotes the group of all rational numbers whose denominator is a power of p, using addition of rational numbers as group operation).
We can also write


 
  where Qp denotes the additive group of p-adic numbers and Zp is the subgroup of p-adic integers.
There is a presentation


 
  Here, the group operation in Z(p∞) is written as multiplication.
Properties
The Prüfer p-groups for all primes p are the only infinite groups whose subgroups are totally ordered by inclusion:


 
  (Here 
 
 
 
  is a cyclic subgroup of Z(p∞) with pn elements; it contains precisely those elements of Z(p∞) whose order divides pn and corresponds to the set of pn-th roots of unity.) This sequence of inclusions expresses the Prüfer p-group as the direct limit of its finite subgroups. As there is no maximal subgroup of a Prüfer p-group, it is its own Frattini subgroup.
Given this list of subgroups, it is clear that the Prüfer p-groups are indecomposable (cannot be written as a direct sum of proper subgroups). More is true: the Prüfer p-groups are subdirectly irreducible. An abelian group is subdirectly irreducible if and only if it is isomorphic to a finite cyclic p-group or to a Prüfer group.
The Prüfer p-group is the unique infinite p-group which is locally cyclic (every finite set of elements generates a cyclic group). As seen above, all proper subgroups of Z(p∞) are finite. The Prüfer p-groups are the only infinite abelian groups with this property.1
The Prüfer p-groups are divisible. They play an important role in the classification of divisible groups; along with the rational numbers they are the simplest divisible groups. More precisely: an abelian group is divisible if and only if it is the direct sum of a (possibly infinite) number of copies of Q and (possibly infinite) numbers of copies of Z(p∞) for every prime p. The numbers of copies of Q and Z(p∞) that are used in this direct sum determine the divisible group up to isomorphism.2
As an abelian group (that is, as a Z-module), Z(p∞) is Artinian but not Noetherian.3 It can thus be used as a counterexample against the idea that every Artinian module is Noetherian (whereas every Artinian ring is Noetherian).
The endomorphism ring of Z(p∞) is isomorphic to the ring of p-adic integers Zp.4
In the theory of locally compact topological groups the Prüfer p-group (endowed with the discrete topology) is the Pontryagin dual of the compact group of p-adic integers, and the group of p-adic integers is the Pontryagin dual of the Prüfer p-group.5
See also

p-adic integers, which can be defined as the inverse limit of the finite subgroups of the Prüfer p-group.
Dyadic rational, rational numbers of the form a/2b. The Prüfer 2-group can be viewed as the dyadic rationals modulo 1.

Notes
References






"
Category:Abelian group theory Category:Infinite group theory Category:P-groups



See Vil'yams (2001)↩
See Kaplansky (1965)↩
See also Jacobson (2009), p. 102, ex. 2.↩
See Vil'yams (2001)↩
D. L. Armacost and W. L. Armacost,"On p-thetic groups", Pacific J. Math., 41, no. 2 (1972), 295–301↩




