


Quasi-bialgebra




Quasi-bialgebra

In mathematics, quasi-bialgebras are a generalization of bialgebras: they were first defined by the Ukrainian mathematician Vladimir Drinfeld in 1990. A quasi-bialgebra differs from a bialgebra by having coassociativity replaced by an invertible element 
 
 
 
  which controls the non-coassociativity. One of their key properties is that the corresponding category of modules forms a tensor category.
Definition
A quasi-bialgebra 
 
 
 
  is an algebra

 
  over a field

 
  equipped with morphisms of algebras






along with invertible elements 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  such that the following identities hold:












Where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called the comultiplication and counit, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called the right and left unit constraints (resp.), and 
 
 
 
  is sometimes called the Drinfeld associator.1 This definition is constructed so that the category 
 
 
 
  is a tensor category under the usual vector space tensor product, and in fact this can be taken as the definition instead of the list of above identities.2 Since many of the quasi-bialgebras that appear "in nature" have trivial unit constraints, ie. 
 
 
 
  the definition may sometimes be given with this assumed.3 Note that a bialgebra is just a quasi-bialgebra with trivial unit and associativity constraints
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Braided Quasi-Bialgebras
A braided quasi-bialgebra (also called a quasi-triangular quasi-bialgebra) is a quasi-bialgebra whose corresponding tensor category 
 
 
 
  is braided. Equivalently, by analogy with braided bialgebras, we can construct a notion of a universal R-matrix which controls the non-cocommutativity of a quasi-bialgebra. The definition is the same as in the braided bialgebra case except for additional complications in the formulas caused by adding in the associator.
Proposition: A quasi-bialgebra 
 
 
 
  is braided if it has a universal R-matrix, ie an invertible element 
 
 
 
  such that the following 3 identities hold:









Where, for every 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the monomial with 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
 th spot, where any omitted numbers correspond to the identity in that spot. Finally we extend this by linearity to all of 
 
 
 
 .4
Again, similar to the braided bialgebra case, this universal R-matrix satisfies (a non-associative version of) the Yang-Baxter equation:


5
Twisting
Given a quasi-bialgebra, further quasi-bialgebras can be generated by twisting (from now on we will assume 
 
 
 
 ) .
If 
 
 
 
  is a quasi-bialgebra and 
 
 
 
  is an invertible element such that 
 
 
 
 , set






Then, the set 
 
 
 
  is also a quasi-bialgebra obtained by twisting 
 
 
 
  by F, which is called a twist or gauge transformation.6 If 
 
 
 
  was a braided quasi-bialgebra with universal R-matrix 
 
 
 
  , then so is 
 
 
 
  with universal R-matrix 
 
 
 
  (using the notation from the above section).7 However, the twist of a bialgebra is only in general a quasi-bialgebra. Twistings fulfill many expected properties. For example, twisting by 
 
 
 
  and then 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to twisting by 
 
 
 
 , and twisting by 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  recovers the original quasi-bialgebra.
Twistings have the important property that they induce categorical equivalences on the tensor category of modules:
Theorem: Let 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  be quasi-bialgebras, let 
 
 
 
  be the twisting of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 , and let there exist an isomorphism
 
 
 
 . Then the induced tensor functor 
 
 
 
  is a tensor category equivalence between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Where 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, if 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism of braided quasi-bialgebras, then the above induced functor is a braided tensor category equivalence.8
Usage
Quasi-bialgebras form the basis of the study of quasi-Hopf algebras and further to the study of Drinfeld twists and the representations in terms of F-matrices associated with finite-dimensional irreducible representations of quantum affine algebra. F-matrices can be used to factorize the corresponding R-matrix.This leads to applications in statistical mechanics, as quantum affine algebras, and their representations give rise to solutions of the Yang-Baxter equation, a solvability condition for various statistical models, allowing characteristics of the model to be deduced from its corresponding quantum affine algebra. The study of F-matrices has been applied to models such as the Heisenberg XXZ model in the framework of the Algebraic Bethe ansatz.
See also

Bialgebra
Hopf algebra
Quasi-Hopf algebra

References


Further reading

Vladimir Drinfeld, Quasi-Hopf algebras, Leningrad Math J. 1 (1989), 1419-1457
J.M. Maillet and J. Sanchez de Santos, Drinfeld Twists and Algebraic Bethe Ansatz, Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. (2) Vol. 201, 2000

"
Category:Coalgebras Category:Non-associative algebras



C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 369-376 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩
C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 368 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩
C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 370 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩
C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 371 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩
C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 372 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩
C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 373 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩
C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 376 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩
C. Kassel. "Quantum Groups". Graduate Texts in Mathematics Pg. 375,376 Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387943706↩




