


Structure factor




Structure factor

In condensed matter physics and crystallography, the static structure factor (or structure factor for short) is a mathematical description of how a material scatters incident radiation. The structure factor is a particularly useful tool in the interpretation of interference patterns obtained in X-ray, electron and neutron diffraction experiments.
The static structure factor is measured without resolving the energy of scattered photons/electrons/neutrons. Energy-resolved measurements yield the dynamic structure factor.
Derivation
Let us consider a scalar (real) quantity 
 
 
 
  defined in a volume 
 
 
 
 ; it may correspond, for instance, to a mass or charge distribution or to the refractive index of an inhomogeneous medium. If the scalar function is assumed to be integrable, we can define its Fourier transform

 
 . Expressing the field 
 
 
 
  in terms of the spatial frequency

 
  instead of the point position 
 
 
 
  is very useful, for instance, when interpreting scattering experiments. Indeed, in the Born approximation (weak interaction between the field and the medium), the amplitude of the signal corresponding to the scattering vector 
 
 
 
  is proportional to 
 
 
 
 . Very often, only the intensity of the scattered signal 
 
 
 
  is detectable, so that 
 
 
 
 .
If the system under study is composed of a number 
 
 
 
  of identical constituents (atoms, molecules, colloidal particles, etc.) it is very convenient to explicitly capture the variation in 
 
 
 
  due to the morphology of the individual particles using an auxiliary function 
 
 
 
 , such that:
with 
 
 
 
  the particle positions. In the second equality, the field is decomposed as the convolution product 
 
 
 
  of the function 
 
 
 
 , describing the "form" of the particles, with a sum of Dirac delta functions depending only on their positions. Using the property that the Fourier transform of a convolution product is simply the product of the Fourier transforms of the two factors, we have 
 
 
 
 , such that:
\right ) \times \left ( \sum_{k=1}^{N} \mathrm{e}^{i \mathbf{q} \mathbf{R}_{k}} \right )= \left | f(\mathbf{q}) \right |^2 \sum_{jk} \mathrm{e}^{-i \mathbf{q} (\mathbf{R}_j - \mathbf{R}_k)}.|2}}
In general, the particle positions are not fixed and the measurement takes place over a finite exposure time and with a macroscopic sample (much larger than the interparticle distance). The experimentally accessible intensity is thus an averaged one 
 
 
 
 ; we need not specify whether 
 
 
 
  denotes a time or ensemble average. We can finally write:
thus defining the structure factor 
Perfect crystals
In a crystal, the constitutive particles are arranged periodically, forming a lattice. In the following, we will consider that all particles are identical (so the above separation in factor and structure factors () holds). We also assume that all atoms have an identical environment (i.e. they form a Bravais lattice). The general case of lattice with a basis (see below) is not fundamentally different.
If the lattice is infinite and completely regular, the system is a perfect crystal. In addition, we will neglect all thermal motion, so that there is no need for averaging in (). As in (), we can write:


 
 .
The structure factor is simply the squared modulus of the Fourier transform of the lattice, and it is itself a periodic arrangement of points, known as the reciprocal lattice.
One dimension
(Figure)
Structure factor of a periodic chain, for different particle numbers 
 
 
 
 .

The reciprocal lattice is easily constructed in one dimension: for particles on a line with a period 
 
 
 
 , the atom positions 
 
 
 
  (for simplicity, we consider that 
 
 
 
  is odd). The sum of the phase factors is a simple geometric series and the structure factor becomes:


 
 .
This function is shown in the Figure below for different values of 
 
 
 
 .
Based on this expression for 
 
 
 
 
 , one can draw several conclusions: the reciprocal lattice has a spacing 
 
 
 
 ; the intensity of the maxima increases with the number of particles 
 
 
 
  (this is apparent from the Figure and can be shown by estimating the limit 
 
 
 
  using, for instance, L'Hôpital's rule); the intensity at the midpoint 
 
 
 
  (by direct evaluation); the peak width also decreases like 
 
 
 
 
 . In the large 
 
 
 
  limit, the peaks become infinitely sharp Dirac delta functions.
Two dimensions
(Figure)
Diagram of scattering by a square (planar) lattice. The incident and outgoing beam are shown, as well as the relation between their wave vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and the scattering vector 
 
 
 
 .

In two dimensions, there are only five Bravais lattices. The corresponding reciprocal lattices have the same symmetry as the direct lattice. The Figure shows the construction of one vector of the reciprocal lattice and its relation with a scattering experiment.
A parallel beam, with wave vector 
 
 
 
 
  is incident on a square lattice of parameter 
 
 
 
 . The scattered wave is detected at a certain angle, which defines the wave vector of the outgoing beam, 
 
 
 
  (under the assumption of elastic scattering, 
 
 
 
 ). One can equally define the scattering vector 
 
 
 
  and construct the harmonic pattern 
 
 
 
 
 . In the depicted example, the spacing of this pattern coincides to the distance between particle rows
 
 
 
 , so that contributions to the scattering from all particles are in phase (constructive interference). Thus, the total signal in direction 
 
 
 
  is strong, and 
 
 
 
  belongs to the reciprocal lattice. It is easily shown that this configuration fulfills Bragg's law.
Three dimensions
Lattice with a basis
To compute structure factors for a specific lattice, compute the sum above over the atoms in the unit cell. Since crystals are often described in terms of their Miller indices, it is useful to examine a specific structure factor in terms of these.
'''Body-centered cubic (BCC) '''
As a convention, the body-centered cubic system is described in terms of a simple cubic lattice with primitive vectors 
 
 
 
 , with a basis consisting of 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding reciprocal lattice is also simple cubic with side 
 
 
 
 .
In a monatomic crystal, all the form factors 
 
 
 
  are the same. The intensity of a diffracted beam scattered with a vector 
 
 
 
  by a crystal plane with Miller indices 
 
 
 
 
  is then given by:



We then arrive at the following result for the structure factor for scattering from a plane 
 
 
 
 :



This result tells us that for a reflection to appear in a diffraction experiment involving a body-centered crystal, the sum of the Miller indices of the scattering plane must be even. If the sum of the Miller indices is odd, the intensity of the diffracted beam is reduced to zero due to destructive interference. This zero intensity for a group of diffracted beams is called a systematic absence. Since atomic form factors fall off with increasing diffraction angle corresponding to higher Miller indices, the most intense diffraction peak from a material with a BCC structure is typically the (110). The (110) plane is the most densely packed of BCC crystal structures and is therefore the lowest energy surface for a thin film to grow. Films of BCC materials like iron and tungsten therefore grow in a characteristic (110) orientation.
'''Face-centered cubic (FCC) '''
In the case of a monatomic FCC crystal, the atoms in the basis are at the origin 
 
 
 
  with indices (0,0,0) and at the three face centers 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  with indices given by (1/2,1/2,0), (0,1/2,1/2), (1/2,0,1/2). An argument similar to the one above gives the expression



with the result



The most intense diffraction peak from a material that crystallizes in the FCC structure is typically the (111). Films of FCC materials like gold tend to grow in a (111) orientation with a triangular surface symmetry.
Diamond Crystal Structure
The Diamond cubic crystal structure occurs in diamond (carbon), most semiconductors and tin. The basis cell contains 8 atoms located at cell positions:










The Structure factor then takes on a form like this:



with the result

for mixed values (odds and even values combined) of h, k, and l, F2 will be 0


if the values are unmixed and...
 
h+k+l is odd then F=4f(1+i) or 4f(1-i), FF*=32f2
h+k+l is even and exactly divisible by 4 (satisfies h+k+l=4n) then F = 8f
h+k+l is even but not exactly divisible by 4(doesn't satisfy h+k+l=4n) then F = 0


Imperfect crystals
Although the perfect lattice is an extremely useful model, real crystals always exhibit imperfections, which can have profound effects on the structure and properties of the material. André Guinier 1 proposed a widely employed distinction between imperfections that preserve the long-range order of the crystal (disorder of the first kind) and those that destroy it (disorder of the second kind).
Disorder of the first kind
Disorder of the second kind
Liquids
In contrast with crystals, liquids have no long-range order (in particular, there is no regular lattice), so the structure factor does not exhibit sharp peaks. They do however show a certain degree of short-range order, depending on their density and on the strength of the interaction between particles. Liquids are isotropic, so that, after the averaging operation in Equation (), the structure factor only depends on the absolute magnitude of the scattering vector 
 
 
 
 . For further evaluation, it is convenient to separate the diagonal terms 
 
 
 
  in the double sum, whose phase is identically zero, and therefore each contribute a unit constant:
One can obtain an alternative expression for 
 
 
 
  in terms of the radial distribution function

 
 :2
g(r).|6}}
Ideal gas
In the limiting case of no interaction, the system is an ideal gas and the structure factor is completely featureless
 
 
 
 , because there is no correlation between the positions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  of different particles (they are independent random variables), so the off-diagonal terms in Equation () average to zero
 
 
 
 .
High-
 
 
 
  limit
Even for interacting particles, at high scattering vector the structure factor goes to 1. This result follows from Equation (), since 
 
 
 
  is the Fourier transform of the "regular" function 
 
 
 
  and thus goes to zero for high values of the argument 
 
 
 
 . This reasoning does not hold for a perfect crystal, where the distribution function exhibits infinitely sharp peaks.
Low-
 
 
 
  limit
In the low-
 
 
 
  limit, as the system is probed over large length scales, the structure factor contains thermodynamic information, being related to the isothermal compressibility

 
  of the liquid by the compressibility equation:


 
 .
Hard-sphere liquids
 In the hard sphere model, the particles are described as impenetrable spheres with radius 
 
 
 
 ; thus, their center-to-center distance 
 
 
 
  and they experience no interaction beyond this distance. Their interaction potential can be written as:



This model has an analytical solution3 in the Percus–Yevick approximation. Although highly simplified, it provides a good description for systems ranging from liquid metals4 to colloidal suspensions.5 In an illustration, the structure factor for a hard-sphere fluid is shown in the Figure, for volume fractions 
 
 
 
  from 1% to 40%.
Polymers
In polymer systems, the general definition () holds; the elementary constituents are now the monomers making up the chains. However, the structure factor being a measure of the correlation between particle positions, one can reasonably expect that this correlation will be different for monomers belonging to the same chain or to different chains.
Let us assume that the volume 
 
 
 
  contains 
 
 
 
  identical molecules, each composed of 
 
 
 
  monomers, such that 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  is also known as the degree of polymerization). We can rewrite () as:  where indices 
 
 
 
  label the different molecules and 
 
 
 
  the different monomers along each molecule. On the right-hand side we separated intramolecular (
 
 
 
 ) and intermolecular (
 
 
 
 ) terms. Using the equivalence of the chains, () can be simplified:6  where 
 
 
 
  is the single-chain structure factor.
See also

R-factor (crystallography)
Patterson function

Notes
References

Als-Nielsen, N. and McMorrow, D. (2011). Elements of Modern X-ray Physics (2nd edition). John Wiley & Sons.
Guinier, A. (1963). X-ray Diffraction. In Crystals, Imperfect Crystals, and Amorphous Bodies. W. H. Freeman and Co.
Chandler, D. (1987). Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics. Oxford University Press.
Hansen, J. P. and McDonald, I. R. (2005). Theory of Simple Liquids (3rd edition). Academic Press.
Teraoka, I. (2002). Polymer Solutions: An Introduction to Physical Properties. John Wiley & Sons.

External links

Structure Factor Tutorial located at the University of York.

"
Category:Crystallography



See Guinier, chapters 6-9
See Chandler, section 7.5.



See Teraoka, Section 2.4.4.




