


Pseudolikelihood




Pseudolikelihood

In statistical theory, a pseudolikelihood is an approximation to the joint probability distribution of a collection of random variables. The practical use of this is that it can provide an approximation to the likelihood function of a set of observed data which may either provide a computationally simpler problem for estimation, or may provide a way of obtaining explicit estimates of model parameters.
The pseudolikelihood approach was introduced by Julian Besag1 in the context of analysing data having spatial dependence.
Definition
Given a set of random variables 
 
 
 
  and a set 
 
 
 
  of dependencies between these random variables, where 
 
 
 
  implies 
 
 
 
  is conditionally independent of 
 
 
 
  given 
 
 
 
 's neighbors, the pseudolikelihood of 
 
 
 
  is



Here 
 
 
 
  is a vector of variables, 
 
 
 
  is a vector of values. The expression 
 
 
 
  above means that each variable 
 
 
 
  in the vector 
 
 
 
  has a corresponding value 
 
 
 
  in the vector 
 
 
 
 . The expression 
 
 
 
  is the probability that the vector of variables 
 
 
 
  has values equal to the vector 
 
 
 
 . Because situations can often be described using state variables ranging over a set of possible values, the expression 
 
 
 
  can therefore represent the probability of a certain state among all possible states allowed by the state variables.
The pseudo-log-likelihood is a similar measure derived from the above expression. Thus



One use of the pseudolikelihood measure is as an approximation for inference about a Markov or Bayesian network, as the pseudolikelihood of an assignment to 
 
 
 
  may often be computed more efficiently than the likelihood, particularly when the latter may require marginalization over a large number of variables.
Properties
Use of the pseudolikelihood in place of the true likelihood function in a maximum likelihood analysis can lead to good estimates, but a straightforward application of the usual likelihood techniques to derive information about estimation uncertainty, or for significance testing, would in general be incorrect.2
References
"
Category:Statistical inference



Besag, J. (1975) "Statistical Analysis of Non-Lattice Data." The Statistician, 24(3), 179–195
Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms, OUP. ISBN 0-19-920613-9




