


Hölder's theorem




Hölder's theorem

In mathematics, Hölder's theorem states that the gamma function does not satisfy any algebraic differential equation whose coefficients are rational functions. The result was first proved by Otto Hölder in 1887; several alternative proofs have subsequently been found.1
The theorem also generalizes to the q-gamma function.
Statement of the Theorem
There is no non-constant polynomial 
 
 
 
  such that



where 
 
 
 
  are functions of x, Γ(x) is the gamma function, and P is a polynomial in 
 
 
 
  with coefficients drawn from the ring of polynomials in x. That is,



where 
 
 
 
  indexes all possible terms of the polynomial and 
 
 
 
  are polynomials in x acting as coefficients of the polynomial P. The 
 
 
 
  may be constants or zero.
For example, if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where ν is a constant. All the other coefficients in the summation are zero. Then



is an algebraic differential equation which, in this example, has solutions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the Bessel functions of either the first or second kind. So



and therefore both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are differentially algebraic (also algebraically transcendental). Most of the familiar special functions of mathematical physics are differentially algebraic. All algebraic combinations of differentially algebraic functions are also differentially algebraic. Also, all compositions of differentially algebraic functions are differentially algebraic. Hölder's Theorem simply states that the gamma function, Γ(x) is not differentially algebraic and is, therefore, transcendentally transcendental.2
Proof
Assume the existence of P as described in the statement of the theorem, that is



with



Also, assume that P is of lowest possible order/degree. This means that all the coefficients 
 
 
 
  have no common factor of the form (x − γ) and so P is not divisible by any factor of (x − γ). It also means that P is not the product of any two polynomials of lower order/degree.



and so we can define a second polynomial, Q, defined by the transformation



and 
 
 
 
  is also an algebraic differential equation for Γ(x). This substitution forces the highest order/degree term of Q to be



where 
 
 
 
  are the exponents of the term of P with highest order/degree. This indicates that Q and P both have the same order/degree and an application of the Euclidean Algorithm to Q and P shows that P must divide Q. If not, there would be a remainder and that would mean P was not of minimal order/degree. Call R(x) the ratio between P and Q:



and consider the two leading terms, which must be equal:



Consider γ to be a zero of R(x) and 
 
 
 
 . Then substituting γ into



This last equality indicates that 
 
 
 
  is a factor of P, contradicting the assumption that P was of minimal order/degree. Therefore the only root of R(x) is 0 and we can take 
 
 
 
 , although we will not need to for this version of the proof. Therefore, with 
 
 




But if 
 
 
 
  then our earlier expression



tells us



for any natural number m. The only way this is possible is if P is divisible by 
 
 
 
  contradicting the assumption that P was of minimal order/degree. Therefore, no such P exists and Γ(x) is not differentially algebraic.34
References
"
Category:Gamma and related functions Category:Theorems in analysis



Bank, Steven B. & Kaufman, Robert "A Note on Hölder's Theorem Concerning the Gamma Function". Mathematische Annalen, vol 232, 1978.

Rubel, Lee A., "A Survey of Transcendentally Transcendental Functions", The American Mathematical Monthly 96:777-788 (November 1989) 
Boros, George; and Moll, Victor. Irresistible Integrals, Cambridge University Press, 2004, Cambridge Books Online,30 December 2011 




