


Stabilizer code




Stabilizer code

The theory of quantum error correction plays a prominent role in the practical realization and engineering of quantum computing and quantum communication devices. The first quantum error-correcting codes are strikingly similar to classical block codes in their operation and performance. Quantum error-correcting codes restore a noisy, decohered quantum state to a pure quantum state. A stabilizer quantum error-correcting code appends ancilla qubits to qubits that we want to protect. A unitary encoding circuit rotates the global state into a subspace of a larger Hilbert space. This highly entangled, encoded state corrects for local noisy errors. A quantum error-correcting code makes quantum computation and quantum communication practical by providing a way for a sender and receiver to simulate a noiseless qubit channel given a noisy qubit channel that has a particular error model.
The stabilizer theory of quantum error correction allows one to import some classical binary or quaternary codes for use as a quantum code. The only "catch" when importing is that the classical code must satisfy the dual-containing or self-orthogonality constraint. Researchers have found many examples of classical codes satisfying this constraint, but most classical codes do not. Nevertheless, it is still useful to import classical codes in this way (though, see how the entanglement-assisted stabilizer formalism overcomes this difficulty).
Mathematical background
The Stabilizer formalism exploits elements of the Pauli group

 
  in formulating quantum error-correcting codes. The set 
 
 
 
  consists of the Pauli operators:


 
  The above operators act on a single qubit---a state represented by a vector in a two-dimensional Hilbert space. Operators in 
 
 
 
  have eigenvalues

 
  and either commute or anti-commute. The set 
 
 
 
  consists of 
 
 
 
 -fold tensor products of Pauli operators:


 
  Elements of 
 
 
 
  act on a quantum register of 
 
 
 
  qubits. We occasionally omit tensor product symbols in what follows so that


 
  The 
 
 
 
 
 -fold Pauli group

 
  plays an important role for both the encoding circuit and the error-correction procedure of a quantum stabilizer code over 
 
 
 
  qubits.
Definition
Let us define an 
 
 
 
  stabilizer quantum error-correcting code to encode 
 
 
 
  logical qubits into 
 
 
 
 
  physical qubits. The rate of such a code is 
 
 
 
 . Its stabilizer 
 
 
 
  is an abelian subgroup of the 
 
 
 
 -fold Pauli group 
 
 

 
 . 
 
 
 
  does not contain the operator 
 
 
 
 . The simultaneous 
 
 
 
 -eigenspace of the operators constitutes the codespace. The codespace has dimension 
 
 
 
  so that we can encode 
 
 
 
 
  qubits into it. The stabilizer 
 
 
 
  has a minimal representation in terms of 
 
 
 
  independent generators



The generators are independent in the sense that none of them is a product of any other two (up to a global phase). The operators 
 
 
 
  function in the same way as a parity check matrix does for a classical linear block code.
Stabilizer error-correction conditions
One of the fundamental notions in quantum error correction theory is that it suffices to correct a discrete error set with support in the Pauli group

 
 . Suppose that the errors affecting an encoded quantum state are a subset 
 
 
 
  of the Pauli group

 
 :



An error 
 
 
 
  that affects an encoded quantum state either commutes or anticommutes with any particular element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . The error 
 
 
 
  is correctable if it anticommutes with an element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . An anticommuting error 
 
 
 
  is detectable by measuring each element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and computing a syndrome

 
  identifying 
 
 
 
 . The syndrome is a binary vector 
 
 
 
  with length 
 
 
 
  whose elements identify whether the error 
 
 
 
  commutes or anticommutes with each 
 
 
 
 . An error 
 
 
 
  that commutes with every element 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is correctable if and only if it is in 
 
 
 
 . It corrupts the encoded state if it commutes with every element of 
 
 
 
  but does not lie in 
 
 
 
 . So we compactly summarize the stabilizer error-correcting conditions: a stabilizer code can correct any errors 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  if



or



where 
 
 
 
  is the centralizer of 
 
 
 
 .
Relation between Pauli group and binary vectors
A simple but useful mapping exists between elements of 
 
 
 
  and the binary vector space

 
 . This mapping gives a simplification of quantum error correction theory. It represents quantum codes with binary vectors and binary operations rather than with Pauli operators and matrix operations respectively.
We first give the mapping for the one-qubit case. Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a set of equivalence classes of an operator

 
  that have the same phase:



Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of phase-free Pauli operators where 
 
 
 
 . Define the map 
 
 
 
  as



Suppose 
 
 
 
 . Let us employ the shorthand 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . For example, suppose 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 . The map 
 
 
 
  induces an isomorphism

 
  because addition of vectors in 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to multiplication of Pauli operators up to a global phase:



Let 
 
 
 
  denote the symplectic product between two elements 
 
 
 
 :


 
  The symplectic product 
 
 
 
  gives the commutation relations of elements of 
 
 
 
 :



The symplectic product and the mapping 
 
 
 
  thus give a useful way to phrase Pauli relations in terms of binary algebra. The extension of the above definitions and mapping 
 
 
 
  to multiple qubits is straightforward. Let 
 
 
 
  denote an arbitrary element of 
 
 
 
 . We can similarly define the phase-free 
 
 
 
 -qubit Pauli group 
 
 
 
  where



The group operation

 
  for the above equivalence class is as follows:


 
  The equivalence class 
 
 
 
  forms a commutative group under operation 
 
 
 
 . Consider the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector space


 
  It forms the commutative group 
 
 
 
  with operation 
 
 
 
  defined as binary vector addition. We employ the notation 
 
 
 
  to represent any vectors 
 
 
 
  respectively. Each vector 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  has elements 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively with similar representations for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The symplectic product

 
  of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is


 
  or


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Let us define a map 
 
 
 
  as follows:


 
  Let


 
  so that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  belong to the same equivalence class:


 
  The map 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism for the same reason given as the previous case:


 
  where 
 
 
 
 . The symplectic product captures the commutation relations of any operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 :


 
  The above binary representation and symplectic algebra are useful in making the relation between classical linear error correction and quantum error correction more explicit.
By comparing quantum error correcting codes in this language to symplectic vector spaces, we can see the following. A symplectic subspace corresponds to a direct sum of Pauli algebras (i.e., encoded qubits), while an isotropic subspace corresponds to a set of stabilizers.
Example of a stabilizer code
An example of a stabilizer code is the five qubit 
 
 
 
  stabilizer code. It encodes 
 
 
 
  logical qubit into 
 
 
 
  physical qubits and protects against an arbitrary single-qubit error. Its stabilizer consists of 
 
 
 
  Pauli operators:


 
  The above operators commute. Therefore the codespace is the simultaneous +1-eigenspace of the above operators. Suppose a single-qubit error occurs on the encoded quantum register. A single-qubit error is in the set 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes a Pauli error on qubit 
 
 
 
 . It is straightforward to verify that any arbitrary single-qubit error has a unique syndrome. The receiver corrects any single-qubit error by identifying the syndrome and applying a corrective operation.
References

D. Gottesman, "Stabilizer codes and quantum error correction," quant-ph/9705052, Caltech Ph.D. thesis. http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9705052
P. W. Shor, “Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. R2493–R2496, Oct 1995.
A. R. Calderbank and P. W. Shor, “Good quantum error-correcting codes exist,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1098–1105, Aug 1996. Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9512032
A. M. Steane, “Error correcting codes in quantum theory,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 77, no. 5, pp. 793–797, Jul 1996.
A. Calderbank, E. Rains, P. Shor, and N. Sloane, “Quantum error correction via codes over GF(4),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 1369–1387, 1998. Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9608006

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Quantum computing


