


List of Dutch inventions and discoveries




List of Dutch inventions and discoveries

The Netherlands, despite its comparatively modest size and population, had a considerable part in the making of the modern society.12345678 The Netherlands9 and its people have made numerous seminal contributions to the world's civilization,10111213141516 especially in art,1718192021 science,22232425 technology and engineering,262728 economics and finance,29303132333435363738 cartography and geography,3940 exploration and navigation,4142 law and jurisprudence,43 thought and philosophy,44454647 medicine,48 and agriculture.
During the Age of Discovery (the Dutch Golden Age in particular), using their expertise in doing business, cartography, shipbuilding, seafaring and navigation, the Dutch traveled to the far corners of the world, leaving their language embedded in the names of many places.4950 Dutch exploratory voyages revealed largely unknown landmasses to the civilized world and put their names on the world map. In the 16th and 17th centuries, Dutch-speaking cartographers51 helped lay the foundations for the birth and development of modern cartography (including nautical cartography and stellar cartography). The Dutch came to dominate the map making and map printing industry by virtue of their own travels, trade ventures, and widespread commercial networks.52 The Dutch initiated what we would call today the free flow of geographical information. As Dutch ships reached into the unknown corners of the globe, Dutch cartographers incorporated new discoveries into their work. Instead of using the information themselves secretly, they published it, so the maps multiplied freely. They were able to share their discoveries and ideas with the world because Dutch officials supported the freedom of press. The Dutch were the first (non-natives) to undisputedly discover, explore and map many unknown isolated areas of the world such as Svalbard, Australia,53 New Zealand, Tonga, Sakhalin,54 and Easter Island. In many cases the Dutch were the first Europeans the natives would encounter.55 Australia (originally known as New Holland), never became a permanent Dutch settlement,56 yet the Dutch were the first to undisputedly map its coastline. The Dutch navigators charted almost three-quarters of the Australian coastline, except the east coast. During the Age of Exploration, the Dutch explorers and cartographers were also the first to systematically observe and map (chart) the largely unknown far sounthern skies – the first significant addition to the topography of the sky since Ptolemy's time. Among the IAU's 88 modern constellations, there are 15 Dutch-created constellations, including 12 southern constellations.575859 In the sixth episode Travellers' Tales of the popular documentary TV series Cosmos (1980), American astronomer Carl Sagan, who also served as host, took a look at the Voyager missions to Jupiter and Saturn, and compared the excitement to the adventuring spirit of the early Dutch explorers who traveled unknown seas for the first time. Their discoveries led to further knowledge of previously unheard of wonders and riches, comparable to the invaluable data retrieved by the spacecraft.
Dutch-speaking people, in spite of their relatively small number, have a significant history of invention, innovation, discovery and exploration. The following list is composed of objects, (largely) unknown lands, breakthrough ideas/concepts, principles, phenomena, processes, methods, techniques, styles etc., that were discovered or invented (or pioneered) by people from the Netherlands and Dutch-speaking people from the former Southern Netherlands (Zuid-Nederlanders in Dutch). Until the fall of Antwerp (1585), the Dutch and Flemish were generally seen as one people.60 
Inventions and innovations
Arts and architecture
Movements and styles
De Stijl (Neo-Plasticism) (1917)
The De Stijl school proposed simplicity and abstraction, both in architecture and painting, by using only straight horizontal and vertical lines and rectangular forms. Furthermore, their formal vocabulary was limited to the primary colours, red, yellow, and blue and the three primary values, black, white and grey. De Stijl's principal members were painters Theo van Doesburg (1883–1931), Piet Mondrian (1872–1944), Vilmos Huszár (1884–1960), and Bart van der Leck (1876–1958) and architects Gerrit Rietveld (1888–1964), Robert van 't Hoff (1888–1979) and J.J.P. Oud (1890–1963).
Architecture
Brabantine Gothic architecture (1300s)
Brabantine Gothic, occasionally called Brabantian Gothic, is a significant variant of Gothic architecture that is typical for the Low Countries. It surfaced in the first half of the 14th century at Saint Rumbold's Cathedral in the City of Mechelen. The Brabantine Gothic style originated with the advent of the Duchy of Brabant and spread across the Burgundian Netherlands.
Netherlandish gabled architecture (1400s-1600s)
      The Dutch gable was a notable feature of the Dutch-Flemish Renaissance architecture (or Northern Mannerist architecture) that spread to northern Europe from the Low Countries, arriving in Britain during the latter part of the 16th century. Notable castles/buildings including Frederiksborg Castle, Rosenborg Castle, Kronborg Castle, Børsen, Riga's House of the Blackheads and Gdańsk's Green Gate were built in Dutch-Flemish Renaissance style with sweeping gables, sandstone decorations and copper-covered roofs. Later Dutch gables with flowing curves became absorbed into Baroque architecture. Examples of Dutch-gabled buildings can be found in historic cities across Europe such as Potsdam (Dutch Quarter), Friedrichstadt, Gdańsk and Gothenburg. The style spread beyond Europe, for example Barbados is well known for Dutch gables on its historic buildings. Dutch settlers in South Africa brought with them building styles from the Netherlands: Dutch gables, then adjusted to the Western Cape region where the style became known as Cape Dutch architecture. In the Americas and Northern Europe, the West End Collegiate Church (New York City, 1892), the Chicago Varnish Company Building (Chicago, 1895), Pont Street Dutch-style buildings (London, 1800s), Helsingør Station (Helsingør, 1891), and Gdańsk University of Technology's Main Building (Gdańsk, 1904) are typical examples of the Dutch Renaissance Revival (Neo-Renaissance) architecture in the late 19th century.
Netherlandish Mannerist architecture (Antwerp Mannerism) (1500s)
Antwerp Mannerism is the name given to the style of a largely anonymous group of painters from Antwerp in the beginning of the 16th century. The style bore no direct relation to Renaissance or Italian Mannerism, but the name suggests a peculiarity that was a reaction to the classic style of the early Netherlandish painting. Antwerp Mannerism may also be used to describe the style of architecture, which is loosely Mannerist, developed in Antwerp by about 1540, which was then influential all over Northern Europe. The Green Gate (Brama Zielona) in Gdańsk, Poland, is a building which is inspired by the Antwerp City Hall. It was built between 1568 and 1571 by Regnier van Amsterdam and Hans Kramer to serve as the formal residence of the Polish monarchs when visiting Gdańsk.
Cape Dutch architecture (1650s)
Cape Dutch architecture is an architectural style found in the Western Cape of South Africa. The style was prominent in the early days (17th century) of the Cape Colony, and the name derives from the fact that the initial settlers of the Cape were primarily Dutch. The style has roots in medieval Netherlands, Germany, France and Indonesia. Houses in this style have a distinctive and recognisable design, with a prominent feature being the grand, ornately rounded gables, reminiscent of features in townhouses of Amsterdam built in the Dutch style.
Amsterdam School (Dutch Expressionist architecture) (1910s)
The Amsterdam School (Dutch: Amsterdamse School) flourished from 1910 through about 1930 in the Netherlands. The Amsterdam School movement is part of international Expressionist architecture, sometimes linked to German Brick Expressionism.
Rietveld Schröder House (De Stijl architecture) (1924)
(Figure)
The exterior of the Rietveld Schröder House. The Rietveld Schröder House (Rietveld Schröderhuis) is considered one of the icons of the Modern architecture. With its radical approach to design and the use of space, the Rietveld Schröderhuis occupies a seminal position in the development of architecture in the modern age.

The Rietveld Schröder House or Schröder House (Rietveld Schröderhuis in Dutch) in Utrecht was built in 1924 by Dutch architect Gerrit Rietveld. It became a listed monument in 1976 and a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2000. The Rietveld Schröder House constitutes both inside and outside a radical break with tradition, offering little distinction between interior and exterior space. The rectilinear lines and planes flow from outside to inside, with the same colour palette and surfaces. Inside is a dynamic, changeable open zone rather than a static accumulation of rooms. The house is one of the best known examples of De Stijl architecture and arguably the only true De Stijl building.616263646566676869707172
Van Nelle Factory (1925–1931)
The Van Nelle factory was built between 1925 and 1931. Its most striking feature is its huge glass façades. The factory was designed on the premise that a modern, transparent and healthy working environment in green surroundings would be good both for production and for workers' welfare. The complex is the result of the radical application of a number of cultural and technical concepts dating from the early twentieth century. This led to a new, functional approach to architecture that enjoyed mass appeal right from the start. The factory had a huge impact on the development of modern architecture in Europe and elsewhere. However, it is not just its architectural style, but rather its response to the social challenges of the day which makes the Van Nelle factory special. Its glass façade, with its large openable windows and advanced ventilation system, is quite unique, even though similar factories are to be found elsewhere.73 The Van Nelle Factory is a Dutch national monument (Rijksmonument) and since 2014 has the status of UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Justification of Outstanding Universal Value was presented in 2013 to the UNESCO World Heritage Committee.
The factory complex, a collection of interconnected buildings, is one of the highlights of twentieth-century industrial architecture. Soon after it was built, prominent architects described the factory as ‘the most beautiful spectacle of our modern age that I know’ (Le Corbusier, 1932) and ‘a poem in steel and glass’ (Robertson and Yerbury, 1930).747576 A delicate grid of glass and concrete, the two parts of the Van Nelle complex are connected by dynamic, angular bridges. It influenced factory design worldwide and now houses creative industries and art fairs.7778
Furniture
Dutch door (1600s)
(Figure)
A Dutch door with the top half open, in South Africa

The Dutch door (also known as stable door or half door) is a type of door divided horizontally in such a fashion that the bottom half may remain shut while the top half opens. The initial purpose of this door was to keep animals out of farmhouses, while keeping children inside, yet allowing light and air to filter through the open top. This type of door was common in the Netherlands in the seventeenth century and appears in Dutch paintings of the period. They were commonly found in Dutch areas of New York and New Jersey (before the American Revolution) and in South Africa.79
Red and Blue Chair (1917)
(Figure)
A Rietveld joint, also called a Cartesian node in furniture-making, is an overlapping joint of three battens in the three orthogonal directions. It was a prominent feature in the Red and Blue Chair that was designed by Gerrit Rietveld in 1917. Rietveld joints are inextricably linked with the early 20th century Dutch artistic movement called De Stijl (of which Gerrit Rietveld was a member).

The Red and Blue Chair was designed in 1917 by Gerrit Rietveld. It represents one of the first explorations by the De Stijl art movement in three dimensions. It features several Rietveld joints.
Zig-Zag Chair (1934)
The Zig-Zag Chair was designed by Rietveld in 1934. It is a minimalist design without legs, made by 4 flat wooden tiles that are merged in a Z-shape using Dovetail joints. It was designed for the Rietveld Schröder House in Utrecht.
Visual arts
Foundations of modern oil painting (1400s)
(Figure)
Signature of Jan van Eyck. Jan Van Eyck is often credited as the first master of oil painting.

Although oil paint was first used for Buddhist paintings by Indian and Chinese painters sometime between the fifth and tenth centuries, it did not gain notoriety until the 15th century. Its practice may have migrated westward during the Middle Ages. Oil paint eventually became the principal medium used for creating artworks as its advantages became widely known. The transition began with Early Netherlandish painting in northern Europe, and by the height of the Renaissance oil painting techniques had almost completely replaced tempera paints in the majority of Europe. Early Netherlandish painting (Jan van Eyck in particular) in the 15th century was the first to make oil the default painting medium, and to explore the use of layers and glazes, followed by the rest of Northern Europe, and only then Italy.80818283 Early works were still panel paintings on wood, but around the end of the 15th century canvas became more popular, as it was cheaper, easier to transport, and allowed larger works.
Glaze (painting technique) (1400s)
Glazing is a technique employed by painters since the invention of modern oil painting. Early Netherlandish painters in the 15th century were the first to make oil the usual painting medium, and explore the use of layers and glazes, followed by the rest of Northern Europe, and only then Italy.84
Proto-Realism (1400s–1600s)
Two aspects of realism were rooted in at least two centuries of Dutch tradition: conspicuous textural imitation and a penchant for ordinary and exaggeratedly comic scenes. Two hundred years before the rise of literary realism, Dutch painters had already made an art of the everyday – pictures that served as a compelling model for the later novelists. By the mid-1800s, 17th-century Dutch painting figured virtually everywhere in the British and French fiction we esteem today as the vanguard of realism.
Proto-Surrealism (1470s–1510s)
Hieronymus Bosch is considered one of the prime examples of Pre-Surrealism. The surrealists relied most on his insights. In the 20th century, Bosch's paintings (e.g. The Garden of Earthly Delights, The Haywain, The Temptation of St. Anthony and The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things) were cited by the Surrealists as precursors to their own visions.
Modern still-life painting (1500s–1600s)
Still-life painting as an independent genre or specialty first flourished in the Netherlands in the last quarter of the 16th century, and the English term derives from stilleven: still life, which is a calque, while Romance languages (as well as Greek, Polish, Russian and Turkish) tend to use terms meaning dead nature.
Naturalistic landscape painting (1500s–1600s)
 The term "landscape" derives from the Dutch word landschap, which originally meant "region, tract of land" but acquired the artistic connotation, "a picture depicting scenery on land" in the early 1500s. After the fall of the Roman Empire, the tradition of depicting pure landscapes declined and the landscape was seen only as a setting for religious and figural scenes. This tradition continued until the 16th century when artists began to view the landscape as a subject in its own right. The Dutch Golden Age painting of the 17th century saw the dramatic growth of landscape painting, in which many artists specialized, and the development of extremely subtle realist techniques for depicting light and weather.
Genre painting (1500s)
The Flemish Renaissance painter Pieter Brueghel the Elder chose peasants and their activities as the subject of many paintings. Genre painting flourished in Northern Europe in his wake. Adriaen van Ostade, David Teniers, Aelbert Cuyp, Jan Steen, Johannes Vermeer and Pieter de Hooch were among many painters specializing in genre subjects in the Netherlands during the 17th century. The generally small scale of these artists' paintings was appropriate for their display in the homes of middle class purchasers.
Marine painting (1600s)
 Marine painting began in keeping with medieval Christian art tradition. Such works portrayed the sea only from a bird's eye view, and everything, even the waves, was organized and symmetrical. The viewpoint, symmetry and overall order of these early paintings underlined the organization of the heavenly cosmos from which the earth was viewed. Later Dutch artists such as Hendrick Cornelisz Vroom, Cornelius Claesz, Abraham Storck, Jan Porcellis, Simon de Vlieger, Willem van de Velde the Elder, Willem van de Velde the Younger and Ludolf Bakhuizen developed new methods for painting, often from a horizontal point of view, with a lower horizon and more focus on realism than symmetry.8586
Vanitas (1600s)
The term vanitas is most often associated with still life paintings that were popular in seventeenth-century Dutch art, produced by the artists such as Pieter Claesz. Common vanitas symbols included skulls (a reminder of the certainty of death); rotten fruit (decay); bubbles, (brevity of life and suddenness of death); smoke, watches, and hourglasses, (the brevity of life); and musical instruments (the brevity and ephemeral nature of life). Fruit, flowers and butterflies can be interpreted in the same way, while a peeled lemon, as well as the typical accompanying seafood was, like life, visually attractive but with a bitter flavor.
Civil group portraiture (1600s)
Group portraits were produced in great numbers during the Baroque period, particularly in the Netherlands. Unlike in the rest of Europe, Dutch artists received no commissions from the Calvinist Church which had forbidden such images or from the aristocracy which was virtually non-existent. Instead, commissions came from civic and businesses associations. Dutch painter Frans Hals used fluid brush strokes of vivid color to enliven his group portraits, including those of the civil guard to which he belonged. Rembrandt benefitted greatly from such commissions and from the general appreciation of art by bourgeois clients, who supported portraiture as well as still-life and landscape painting. Notably, the world's first significant art and dealer markets flourished in Holland at that time.
Tronie (1600s)
 In the 17th century, Dutch painters (especially Frans Hals, Rembrandt, Jan Lievens and Johannes Vermeer) began to create uncommissioned paintings called tronies that focused on the features and/or expressions of people who were not intended to be identifiable. They were conceived more for art's sake than to satisfy conventions. The tronie was a distinctive type of painting, combining elements of the portrait, history, and genre painting. This was usually a half-length of a single figure which concentrated on capturing an unusual mood or expression. The actual identity of the model was not supposed to be important, but they might represent a historical figure and be in exotic or historic costume. In contrast to portraits, "tronies" were painted for the open market. They differ from figurative paintings and religious figures in that they are not restricted to a moral or narrative context. It is, rather, much more an exploration of the spectrum of human physiognomy and expression and the reflection of conceptions of character that are intrinsic to psychology’s pre-history.
Rembrandt lighting (1600s)
 Rembrandt lighting is a lighting technique that is used in studio portrait photography. It can be achieved using one light and a reflector, or two lights, and is popular because it is capable of producing images which appear both natural and compelling with a minimum of equipment. Rembrandt lighting is characterized by an illuminated triangle under the eye of the subject, on the less illuminated side of the face. It is named for the Dutch painter Rembrandt, who often used this type of lighting in his portrait paintings.
Mezzotint (1642)
The first known mezzotint was done in Amsterdam in 1642 by Utrecht-born German artist Ludwig von Siegen. He lived in Amsterdam from 1641 to about 1644, when he was supposedly influenced by Rembrandt.8788
Aquatint (1650s)
The painter and printmaker Jan van de Velde is often credited to be the inventor of the aquatint technique, in Amsterdam around 1650.89
Pronkstilleven (1650s)
Pronkstilleven (pronk still life or ostentatious still life) is a type of banquet piece whose distinguishing feature is a quality of ostentation and splendor. These still lifes usually depict one or more especially precious objects. Although the term is a post-17th century invention, this type is characteristic of the second half of the seventeenth century. It was developed in the 1640s in Antwerp from where it spread quickly to the Dutch Republic. Flemish artists such as Frans Snyders and Adriaen van Utrecht started to paint still lifes that emphasized abundance by depicting a diversity of objects, fruits, flowers and dead game, often together with living people and animals. The style was soon adopted by artists from the Dutch Republic.90 A leading Dutch representative was Jan Davidsz. de Heem, who spent a long period of his active career in Antwerp and was one of the founders of the style in Holland.91 92 Other leading representatives in the Dutch Republic were Abraham van Beyeren, Willem Claeszoon Heda and Willem Kalf.93
Proto-Expressionism (1880s)
Vincent van Gogh's work is most often associated with Post-Impressionism, but his innovative style had a vast influence on 20th-century art and established what would later be known as Expressionism, also greatly influencing fauvism and early abstractionism. His impact on German and Austrian Expressionists was especially profound. "Van Gogh was father to us all," the German Expressionist painter Max Pechstein proclaimed in 1901, when Van Gogh's vibrant oils were first shown in Germany and triggered the artistic reformation, a decade after his suicide in obscurity in France. In his final letter to Theo, Van Gogh stated that, as he did not have any children, he viewed his paintings as his progeny. Reflecting on this, the British art historian Simon Schama concluded that he "did have a child of course, Expressionism, and many, many heirs."
M. C. Escher's graphic arts (1920s–1960s)
Dutch graphic artist Maurits Cornelis Escher, usually referred to as M. C. Escher, is known for his often mathematically inspired woodcuts, lithographs, and mezzotints. These feature impossible constructions, explorations of infinity, architecture and tessellations. His special way of thinking and rich graphic work has had a continuous influence in science and art, as well as permeating popular culture. His ideas have been used in fields as diverse as psychology, philosophy, logic, crystallography and topology. His art is based on mathematical principles like tessellations, spherical geometry, the Möbius strip, unusual perspectives, visual paradoxes and illusions, different kinds of symmetries and impossible objects. Gödel, Escher, Bach by Douglas Hofstadter discusses the ideas of self-reference and strange loops, drawing on a wide range of artistic and scientific work, including Escher's art and the music of J. S. Bach, to illustrate ideas behind Gödel's incompleteness theorems.
Miffy (Nijntje) (1955)
Miffy (Nijntje) is a small female rabbit in a series of picture books drawn and written by Dutch artist Dick Bruna.
Music
Franco-Flemish School (Netherlandish School) (1400s-1500s)
In music, the Franco-Flemish School or more precisely the Netherlandish School refers to the style of polyphonic vocal music composition in the Burgundian Netherlands in the 15th and early 16th centuries, and to the composers who wrote it.
Venetian School (Venetian polychoral style) (1500s)
The Venetian School of polychoral music was founded by the Netherlandish composer Adrian Willaert.
Hardcore (electronic dance music genre) (1990s)
Hardcore or hardcore techno is a subgenre of electronic dance music originating in Europe from the emergent raves in the 1990s. It was initially designed at Rotterdam in Netherlands, derived from techno.94
 Hardstyle (electronic dance music genre) (1990s-2000s)
Hardstyle is an electronic dance genre mixing influences from hardtechno and hardcore. Hardstyle was influenced by gabber. Hardstyle has its origins in the Netherlands where artists like DJ Zany, Lady Dana, DJ Isaac, DJ Pavo, DJ Luna and The Prophet, who produced hardcore, started experimenting while playing their hardcore records.
Agriculture
Holstein Friesian cattle (100s BC)
 Holsteins or Holstein-Friesians are a breed of cattle known today as the world's highest-production dairy animals. Originating in Europe, Holstein-Friesians were bred in the two north Holland provinces of North Holland and Friesland, and Schleswig-Holstein in what became Germany. The animals were the regional cattle of the Frisians and the Saxons. The Dutch breeders bred and oversaw the development of the breed with the goal of obtaining animals that could best use grass, the area's most abundant resource. Its color pattern came from artificial selection by the breeders.95 The origins of the breed can be traced to the black cows and white cows of the Batavians and Frisians - migrant tribes who settled the coastal Rhine region more than two thousand years ago. Over time, these two kinds of cows were selectively bred together with the aim of developing an animal that would make the best use of limited land by yielding generous quantities of both milk and meat. The result was the efficient, high-producing black-and-white dairy cow we know today as the Holstein Friesian.
Brussels sprout (1200s)
Forerunners to modern Brussels sprouts were likely cultivated in ancient Rome. Brussels sprouts as we now know them were grown possibly as early as the 13th century in the Low Countries (may have originated in Brussels). The first written reference dates to 1587. During the 16th century, they enjoyed a popularity in the Southern Netherlands that eventually spread throughout the cooler parts of Northern Europe.
Orange-coloured carrot (1500s)
 
Through history, carrots weren’t always orange. They were black, purple, white, brown, red and yellow. Probably orange too, but this was not the dominant colour. Orange-coloured carrots appeared in the Netherlands in the 16th century.96 Dutch farmers in Hoorn bred the color. They succeeded by cross-breeding pale yellow with red carrots. It is more likely that Dutch horticulturists actually found an orange rooted mutant variety and then worked on its development through selective breeding to make the plant consistent. Through successive hybridisation the orange colour intensified. Improved strains resulted in three main varieties red, yellow and deep gold. This was developed to become the dominant species across the world, a sweet orange. Before the Dutch bred the sweet, orange-coloured carrot, the carrot had a less sweet (bitter) taste than the ones we know today. The colour choice may have been made to gain favour with the House of Orange, who led the Dutch Revolt against the Spanish Empire and later became the Dutch Royal family.979899100101102103104105106107108 Beta-Carotene, found in orange carrots is converted into vitamin A in the body by all animals except cats.
Belle de Boskoop (apple) (1856)
Belle de Boskoop is an apple cultivar which, as its name suggests, originated in Boskoop, where it began as a chance seedling in 1856. There are many variants: Boskoop red, yellow or green. This rustic apple is firm, tart and fragrant. Greenish-gray tinged with red, the apple stands up well to cooking. Generally Boskoop varieties are very high in acid content and can contain more than four times the vitamin C of 'Granny Smith' or 'Golden Delicious'.109
Karmijn de Sonnaville (apple) (1949)
Karmijn de Sonnaville is a variety of apple bred by Piet de Sonnaville, working in Wageningen in 1949. It is a cross of Cox's Orange Pippin and Jonathan, and was first grown commercially beginning in 1971. It is high both in sugars (including some sucrose) and acidity. It is a triploid, and hence needs good pollination, and can be difficult to grow. It also suffers from fruit russet, which can be severe. In Manhart’s book, “apples for the 21st century”, Karmijn de Sonnaville is tipped as a possible success for the future. Karmijn de Sonnaville is not widely grown in large quantities, but in Ireland, at The Apple Farm,  it is grown for fresh sale and juice-making, for which the variety is well suited.
Elstar (apple) (1950s)
Elstar apple is an apple cultivar that was first developed in the Netherlands in the 1950s by crossing Golden Delicious and Ingrid Marie apples. It quickly became popular, especially in Europe and was first introduced to America in 1972.110 It remains popular in Continental Europe. The Elstar is a medium-sized apple whose skin is mostly red with yellow showing. The flesh is white, and has a soft, crispy texture. It may be used for cooking and is especially good for making apple sauce. In general, however, it is used in desserts due to its sweet flavour.
Groasis Waterboxx (2010)
The Groasis Waterboxx is a device designed to help grow trees in dry areas. It was developed by former flower exporter Pieter Hoff, and won Popular Science's "Green Tech Best of What's New" Innovation of the year award for 2010.
Cartography and geography
Method for determining longitude using a clock (1530)
The Dutch-Frisian geographer Gemma Frisius was the first to propose the use of a chronometer to determine longitude in 1530. In his book On the Principles of Astronomy and Cosmography (1530), Frisius explains for the first time how to use a very accurate clock to determine longitude.111 The problem was that in Frisius’ day, no clock was sufficiently precise to use his method. In 1761, the British clock-builder John Harrison constructed the first marine chronometer, which allowed the method developed by Frisius.
Triangulation as a surveying method (foundations of modern surveying) (1533 & 1615)
Triangulation had first emerged as a map-making method in the mid sixteenth century when the Dutch-Frisian mathematician Gemma Frisius set out the idea in his Libellus de locorum describendorum ratione (Booklet concerning a way of describing places).112113114115116117 Dutch cartographer Jacob van Deventer was among the first to make systematic use of triangulation, the technique whose theory was described by Gemma Frisius in his 1533 book.
The modern systematic use of triangulation networks stems from the work of the Dutch mathematician Willebrord Snell (born Willebrord Snel van Royen), who in 1615 surveyed the distance from Alkmaar to Bergen op Zoom, approximately 70 miles (110 kilometres), using a chain of quadrangles containing 33 triangles in all.118119120 The two towns were separated by one degree on the meridian, so from his measurement he was able to calculate a value for the circumference of the earth – a feat celebrated in the title of his book Eratosthenes Batavus (The Dutch Eratosthenes), published in 1617. Snell's methods were taken up by Jean Picard who in 1669–70 surveyed one degree of latitude along the Paris Meridian using a chain of thirteen triangles stretching north from Paris to the clocktower of Sourdon, near Amiens.
Mercator projection (1569)
(Figure)
The 1569 Mercator map of the world (Nova et Aucta Orbis Terrae Descriptio ad Usum Navigantium Emendate Accommodata).

The Mercator projection is a cylindrical map projection presented by the Flemish geographer and cartographer Gerardus Mercator in 1569. It became the standard map projection for nautical purposes because of its ability to represent lines of constant course, known as rhumb lines or loxodromes, as straight segments which conserve the angles with the meridians.121
First true (modern) atlas (1570)
(Figure)
World map Theatrum Orbis Terrarum by Ortelius (1570). The period of late 16th and much of the 17th century (approximately 1570-1672) has been called the Golden Age of Dutch Cartography. The cartographers/publishers of Antwerp and Amsterdam, especially, were leaders in supplying maps and charts for all of Western Europe.

Flemish geographer and cartographer Abraham Ortelius generally recognized as the creator of the world's first modern atlas, the Theatrum Orbis Terrarum (Theatre of the World). Ortelius's Theatrum Orbis Terrarum is considered the first true atlas in the modern sense: a collection of uniform map sheets and sustaining text bound to form a book for which copper printing plates were specifically engraved. It is sometimes referred to as the summary of sixteenth-century cartography.122123124125
First printed atlas of nautical charts (1584)
 The first printed atlas of nautical charts (De Spieghel der Zeevaerdt or The Mirror of Navigation / The Mariner's Mirror) was produced by Lucas Janszoon Waghenaer in Leiden. This atlas was the first attempt to systematically codify nautical maps. This chart-book combined an atlas of nautical charts and sailing directions with instructions for navigation on the western and north-western coastal waters of Europe. It was the first of its kind in the history of maritime cartography, and was an immediate success. The English translation of Waghenaer's work was published in 1588 and became so popular that any volume of sea charts soon became known as a "waggoner", the Anglicized form of Waghenaer's surname.126127128129130131132
Concept of atlas (1595)
Gerardus Mercator was the first to coin the word atlas to describe a bound collection of maps through his own collection entitled "Atlas sive Cosmographicae meditationes de fabrica mvndi et fabricati figvra". He coined this name after the Greek god who held the earth in his arms.133134
First systematic charting of the far southern skies (southern constellations) (1595-97)
In the golden age of Dutch cartography and exploration (approximately 1570–1722), the Dutch-speaking peoples made the seminal contributions to the natural history, cartography, geography and ethnography. Flanders-based cartographers such as Gerardus Mercator and Abraham Ortelius helped lay the foundations for the modern cartography. In the area of celestial cartography, the Dutch Republic's explorers and cartographers like Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser, Frederick de Houtman, Petrus Plancius and Jodocus Hondius were the pioneers in first systematic charting/mapping of largely unknown southern hemisphere skies in the late 16th century.
The constellations around the South Pole were not observable from north of the equator, by Babylonians, Greeks, Chinese or Arabs. The modern constellations in this region were defined during the Age of Exploration, notably by Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman at the end of sixteenth century. These twelve Dutch-created southern constellations represented flora and fauna of the East Indies and Madagascar. They were depicted by Johann Bayer in his star atlas Uranometria of 1603.135 Several more were created by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in his star catalogue, published in 1756.136 By the end of the Ming Dynasty, Xu Guangqi introduced 23 asterisms of the southern sky based on the knowledge of western star charts.137 These asterisms have since been incorporated into the traditional Chinese star maps. Among the IAU's 88 modern constellations, there are 15 Dutch-created constellations (including Apus, Camelopardalis, Chamaeleon, Columba, Dorado, Grus, Hydrus, Indus, Monoceros, Musca, Pavo, Phoenix, Triangulum Australe, Tucana and Volans).
Continental drift hypothesis (1596)
The speculation that continents might have 'drifted' was first put forward by Abraham Ortelius in 1596. The concept was independently and more fully developed by Alfred Wegener in 1912. Because Wegener's publications were widely available in German and English and because he adduced geological support for the idea, he is credited by most geologists as the first to recognize the possibility of continental drift. During the 1960s geophysical and geological evidence for seafloor spreading at mid-oceanic ridges established continental drift as the standard theory or continental origin and an ongoing global mechanism.
Chemicals and materials
Bow dye (1630)
While making a coloured liquid for a thermometer, Cornelis Drebbel dropped a flask of Aqua regia on a tin window sill, and discovered that stannous chloride makes the color of carmine much brighter and more durable. Though Drebbel himself never made much from his work, his daughters Anna and Catharina and his sons-in-law Abraham and Johannes Sibertus Kuffler set up a successful dye works. One was set up in 1643 in Bow, London, and the resulting color was called bow dye.
Dyneema (1979)
Dutch chemical company DSM invented and patented the Dyneema in 1979. Dyneema fibres have been in commercial production since 1990 at their plant at Heerlen. These fibers are manufactured by means of a gel-spinning process that combines extreme strength with incredible softness. Dyneema fibres, based on ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene (UHMWPE), is used in many applications in markets such as life protection, shipping, fishing, offshore, sailing, medical and textiles.
Communication and multimedia
Compact cassette (1962)
(Figure)
Compact Cassette

In 1962 Philips invented the compact audio cassette medium for audio storage, introducing it in Europe in August 1963 (at the Berlin Radio Show) and in the United States (under the Norelco brand) in November 1964, with the trademark name Compact Cassette.138139140141142
Laserdisc (1969)
Laserdisc technology, using a transparent disc,143 was invented by David Paul Gregg in 1958 (and patented in 1961 and 1990).144 By 1969, Philips developed a videodisc in reflective mode, which has great advantages over the transparent mode. MCA and Philips decided to join forces. They first publicly demonstrated the videodisc in 1972. Laserdisc entered the market in Atlanta, on 15 December 1978, two years after the VHS VCR and four years before the CD, which is based on Laserdisc technology. Philips produced the players and MCA made the discs.
Compact disc (1979)
(Figure)
Compact Disc

The compact disc was jointly developed by Philips (Joop Sinjou) and Sony (Toshitada Doi). In the early 1970s, Philips' researchers started experiments with "audio-only" optical discs, and at the end of the 1970s, Philips, Sony, and other companies presented prototypes of digital audio discs.
Bluetooth (1990s)
Bluetooth, a low-energy, peer-to-peer wireless technology was originally developed by Dutch electrical engineer Jaap Haartsen and Swedish engineer Sven Mattisson in the 1990s, working at Ericsson in Lund, Sweden. It became a global standard of short distance wireless connection.
Wi-fi (1990s)
In 1991, NCR Corporation/AT&T; Corporation invented the precursor to 802.11 in Nieuwegein. Dutch electrical engineer Vic Hayes chaired IEEE 802.11 committee for 10 years, which was set up in 1990 to establish a wireless networking standard. He has been called the father of Wi-Fi (the brand name for products using IEEE 802.11 standards) for his work on IEEE 802.11 (802.11a & 802.11b) standard in 1997.
DVD (1995)
The DVD optical disc storage format was invented and developed by Philips and Sony in 1995.
Ambilight (2002)
Ambilight, short for "ambient lighting", is a lighting system for televisions developed by Philips in 2002.
Blu-ray (2006)
Philips and Sony in 1997 and 2006 respectively, launched the Blu-ray video recording/playback standard.
Computer science and information technology
Dijkstra's algorithm (1956)
Dijkstra's algorithm, conceived by Dutch computer scientist Edsger Dijkstra in 1956 and published in 1959, is a graph search algorithm that solves the single-source shortest path problem for a graph with non-negative edge path costs, producing a shortest path tree. Dijkstra's algorithm is so powerful that it not only finds the shortest path from a chosen source to a given destination, it finds all of the shortest paths from the source to all destinations. This algorithm is often used in routing and as a subroutine in other graph algorithms.
Dijkstra's algorithm is considered as one of the most popular algorithms in computer science. It is also widely used in the fields of artificial intelligence, operational research/operations research, network routing, network analysis, and transportation engineering.
Foundations of distributed computing (1960s)
Through his fundamental contributions Edsger Dijkstra helped shape the field of computer science. His groundbreaking contributions ranged from the engineering side of computer science to the theoretical one and covered several areas including compiler construction, operating systems, distributed systems, sequential and concurrent programming, software engineering, and graph algorithms. Many of his papers, often just a few pages long, are the source of whole new research areas. Several concepts that are now completely standard in computer science were first identified by Dijkstra and/or bear names coined by him.145146
Edsger Dijkstra's foundational work on concurrency, semaphores, mutual exclusion, deadlock, finding shortest paths in graphs, fault-tolerance, self-stabilization, among many other contributions comprises many of the pillars upon which the field of distributed computing is built. The Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing (sponsored jointly by the ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing and the EATCS International Symposium on Distributed Computing) is given for outstanding papers on the principles of distributed computing, whose significance and impact on the theory and/or practice of distributed computing has been evident for at least a decade.
Foundations of concurrent programming (1960s)
The academic study of concurrent programming (concurrent algorithms in particular) started in the 1960s, with Edsger Dijkstra (1965) credited with being the first paper in this field, identifying and solving mutual exclusion.147 A pioneer in the field of concurrent computing, Per Brinch Hansen considers Dijkstra's Cooperating Sequential Processes (1965) to be the first classic paper in concurrent programming. As Brinch Hansen notes: ‘Here Dijkstra lays the conceptual foundation for abstract concurrent programming.’148
Shunting-yard algorithm (1960)
In computer science, the shunting-yard algorithm is a method for parsing mathematical expressions specified in infix notation. It can be used to produce output in Reverse Polish notation (RPN) or as an abstract syntax tree (AST). The algorithm was invented by Edsger Dijkstra and named the "shunting yard" algorithm because its operation resembles that of a railroad shunting yard. Dijkstra first described the Shunting Yard Algorithm in the Mathematisch Centrum report.
Schoonschip (early computer algebra system) (1963)
In 1963/64, during an extended stay at SLAC, Dutch theoretical physicist Martinus Veltman designed the computer program Schoonschip for symbolic manipulation of mathematical equations, which is now considered the very first computer algebra system.
Mutual exclusion (mutex) (1965)
In computer science, mutual exclusion refers to the requirement of ensuring that no two concurrent processes are in their critical section at the same time; it is a basic requirement in concurrency control, to prevent race conditions. The requirement of mutual exclusion was first identified and solved by Edsger W. Dijkstra in his seminal 1965 paper titled Solution of a problem in concurrent programming control,149150 and is credited as the first topic in the study of concurrent algorithms.151
Semaphore (programming) (1965)
The semaphore concept was invented by Dijkstra in 1965 and the concept has found widespread use in a variety of operating systems.
Sleeping barber problem (1965)
In computer science, the sleeping barber problem is a classic inter-process communication and synchronization problem between multiple operating system processes. The problem is analogous to that of keeping a barber working when there are customers, resting when there are none and doing so in an orderly manner. The Sleeping Barber Problem was introduced by Edsger Dijkstra in 1965.152
Banker's algorithm (deadlock prevention algorithm) (1965)
The Banker's algorithm is a resource allocation and deadlock avoidance algorithm developed by Edsger Dijkstra that tests for safety by simulating the allocation of predetermined maximum possible amounts of all resources, and then makes an "s-state" check to test for possible deadlock conditions for all other pending activities, before deciding whether allocation should be allowed to continue. The algorithm was developed in the design process for the THE operating system and originally described (in Dutch) in EWD108.153 The name is by analogy with the way that bankers account for liquidity constraints.
Dining philosophers problem (1965)
In computer science, the dining philosophers problem is an example problem often used in concurrent algorithm design to illustrate synchronization issues and techniques for resolving them. It was originally formulated in 1965 by Edsger Dijkstra as a student exam exercise, presented in terms of computers competing for access to tape drive peripherals. Soon after, Tony Hoare gave the problem its present formulation.154155156
Dekker's algorithm (1965)
Dekker's algorithm is the first known correct solution to the mutual exclusion problem in concurrent programming. Dijkstra attributed the solution to Dutch mathematician Theodorus Dekker in his manuscript on cooperating sequential processes. It allows two threads to share a single-use resource without conflict, using only shared memory for communication. Dekker's algorithm is the first published software-only, two-process mutual exclusion algorithm.
THE multiprogramming system (1968)
The THE multiprogramming system was a computer operating system designed by a team led by Edsger W. Dijkstra, described in monographs in 1965-66157 and published in 1968.158
Van Wijngaarden grammar (1968)
Van Wijngaarden grammar (also vW-grammar or W-grammar) is a two-level grammar that provides a technique to define potentially infinite context-free grammars in a finite number of rules. The formalism was invented by Adriaan van Wijngaarden to rigorously define some syntactic restrictions that previously had to be formulated in natural language, despite their formal content. Typical applications are the treatment of gender and number in natural language syntax and the well-definedness of identifiers in programming languages. The technique was used and developed in the definition of the programming language ALGOL 68. It is an example of the larger class of affix grammars.
Structured programming (1968)
In 1968, computer programming was in a state of crisis. Dijkstra was one of a small group of academics and industrial programmers who advocated a new programming style to improve the quality of programs. Dijkstra coined the phrase "structured programming" and during the 1970s this became the new programming orthodoxy.
EPROM (1971)
An EPROM or erasable programmable read only memory, is a type of memory chip that retains its data when its power supply is switched off. Development of the EPROM memory cell started with investigation of faulty integrated circuits where the gate connections of transistors had broken. Stored charge on these isolated gates changed their properties. The EPROM was invented by the Amsterdam-born Israeli electrical engineer Dov Frohman in 1971, who was awarded US patent 3660819159 in 1972.
Self-stabilization (1974)
Self-stabilization is a concept of fault-tolerance in distributed computing. A distributed system that is self-stabilizing will end up in a correct state no matter what state it is initialized with. That correct state is reached after a finite number of execution steps. Many years after the seminal paper of Edsger Dijkstra in 1974, this concept remains important as it presents an important foundation for self-managing computer systems and fault-tolerant systems. Self-stabilization became its own area of study in distributed systems research, and Dijkstra set the stage for the next generation of computer scientists such as Leslie Lamport, Nancy Lynch, and Shlomi Dolev. As a result, Dijkstra's paper received the 2002 ACM PODC Influential-Paper Award (later renamed as Dijkstra Prize or Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing since 2003).160
Predicate transformer semantics (1975)
Predicate transformer semantics were introduced by Dijkstra in his seminal paper "Guarded commands, nondeterminacy and formal derivation of programs".
Guarded Command Language (1975)
The Guarded Command Language (GCL) is a language defined by Edsger Dijkstra for predicate transformer semantics.161 It combines programming concepts in a compact way, before the program is written in some practical programming language.
Van Emde Boas tree (VEB tree) (1975)
A Van Emde Boas tree (or Van Emde Boas priority queue, also known as a vEB tree, is a tree data structure which implements an associative array with m-bit integer keys. The vEB tree was invented by a team led by Dutch computer scientist  in 1975.162
ABC (programming language) (1980s)
ABC is an imperative general-purpose programming language and programming environment developed at CWI, Netherlands by Leo Geurts, Lambert Meertens, and Steven Pemberton. It is interactive, structured, high-level, and intended to be used instead of BASIC, Pascal, or AWK. It is not meant to be a systems-programming language but is intended for teaching or prototyping.
The language had a major influence on the design of the Python programming language (as a counterexample); Guido van Rossum, who developed Python, previously worked for several years on the ABC system in the early 1980s.163164
Dijkstra-Scholten algorithm (1980)
The Dijkstra–Scholten algorithm (named after Edsger W. Dijkstra and Carel S. Scholten) is an algorithm for detecting termination in a distributed system.165166 The algorithm was proposed by Dijkstra and Scholten in 1980.167
Smoothsort (1981)
Smoothsort168 is a comparison-based sorting algorithm. It is a variation of heapsort developed by Edsger Dijkstra in 1981. Like heapsort, smoothsort's upper bound is O(n log n). The advantage of smoothsort is that it comes closer to O(n) time if the input is already sorted to some degree, whereas heapsort averages O(n log n) regardless of the initial sorted state.
Amsterdam Compiler Kit (1983)
The Amsterdam Compiler Kit (ACK) is a fast, lightweight and retargetable compiler suite and toolchain developed by Andrew Tanenbaum and Ceriel Jacobs at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam. It is MINIX's native toolchain. The ACK was originally closed-source software (that allowed binaries to be distributed for MINIX as a special case), but in April 2003 it was released under an open source BSD license. It has frontends for programming languages C, Pascal, Modula-2, Occam, and BASIC. The ACK's notability stems from the fact that in the early 1980s it was one of the first portable compilation systems designed to support multiple source languages and target platforms.169170
Eight-to-fourteen modulation (1985)
EFM (Eight-to-Fourteen Modulation) was invented by Dutch electrical engineer Kees A. Schouhamer Immink in 1985. EFM is a data encoding technique – formally, a channel code – used by CDs, laserdiscs and pre-Hi-MD MiniDiscs.
MINIX (1987)
MINIX (from "mini-Unix") is a Unix-like computer operating system based on a microkernel architecture. Early versions of MINIX were created by Andrew S. Tanenbaum for educational purposes. Starting with MINIX 3, the primary aim of development shifted from education to the creation of a highly reliable and self-healing microkernel OS. MINIX is now developed as open-source software. MINIX was first released in 1987, with its complete source code made available to universities for study in courses and research. It has been free and open source software since it was re-licensed under the BSD license in April 2000. Tanenbaum created MINIX at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam to exemplify the principles conveyed in his textbook, Operating Systems: Design and Implementation (1987), that Linus Torvalds described as "the book that launched me to new heights".
The design principles Tanenbaum applied to MINIX greatly influenced the design decisions Linus Torvalds applied in the creation of the Linux kernel. Torvalds used and appreciated MINIX, but his design deviated from the MINIX architecture in significant ways, most notably by employing a monolithic kernel instead of a microkernel. This was famously disapproved of by Tanenbaum in the Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate. Early Linux kernel development was done on a MINIX host system, which led to Linux inheriting various features from MINIX, such as the MINIX file system. When Linus Torvalds first started writing his Linux operating system kernel (1991), he was working on a machine running MINIX, so the initial releases based a lot of functionality on MINIX subsystems.171 Until the April 1992 introduction of the extended file system, Linux used the MINIX file system.172
Amoeba (operating system) (1989)
Amoeba is a distributed operating system developed by Andrew S. Tanenbaum and others at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam. The aim of the Amoeba project was to build a timesharing system that makes an entire network of computers appear to the user as a single machine. The Python programming language was originally developed for this platform.173
Python (programming language) (1989)
Python is a widely used general-purpose, high-level programming language.174175 Its design philosophy emphasizes code readability, and its syntax allows programmers to express concepts in fewer lines of code than would be possible in languages such as C++ or Java.176177 The language provides constructs intended to enable clear programs on both a small and large scale. Python supports multiple programming paradigms, including object-oriented, imperative and functional programming or procedural styles. It features a dynamic type system and automatic memory management and has a large and comprehensive standard library.
Python was conceived in the late 1980s and its implementation was started in December 1989 by Guido van Rossum at CWI in the Netherlands as a successor to the ABC language (itself inspired by SETL) capable of exception handling and interfacing with the Amoeba operating system. Van Rossum is Python's principal author, and his continuing central role in deciding the direction of Python is reflected in the title given to him by the Python community, benevolent dictator for life (BDFL).
Since 2008, Python has consistently ranked in the top eight most popular programming languages as measured by the TIOBE Programming Community Index. It is the third most popular language whose grammatical syntax is not predominantly based on C, e.g. C++, C#, Objective-C, Java. Python does borrow heavily, however, from the expression and statement syntax of C, making it easier for programmers to transition between languages.
An empirical study found that, for a programming problem involving string manipulation and search in a dictionary, scripting languages such as Python were more productive than conventional languages such as C and Java. Memory consumption was often "better than Java and not much worse than C or C++". Large organizations that make use of Python include Google, Yahoo!, CERN, NASA, and some smaller ones like ILM, and ITA.
Vim (text editor) (1991)
Vim is a text editor written by the Dutch free software programmer Bram Moolenaar and first released publicly in 1991. Based on the Vi editor common to Unix-like systems, Vim carefully separated the user interface from editing functions. This allowed it to be used both from a command line interface and as a standalone application in a graphical user interface.
Blender (1995)
 Blender is a professional free and open-source 3D computer graphics software product used for creating animated films, visual effects, art, 3D printed models, interactive 3D applications and video games. Blender's features include 3D modeling, UV unwrapping, texturing, raster graphics editing, rigging and skinning, fluid and smoke simulation, particle simulation, soft body simulation, sculpting, animating, match moving, camera tracking, rendering, video editing and compositing. Alongside the modelling features it also has an integrated game engine. Blender has been successfully used in the media industry in several parts of the world including Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Russia, Sweden, and the United States.
The Dutch animation studio Neo Geo and Not a Number Technologies (NaN) developed Blender as an in-house application, with the primary author being Ton Roosendaal. The name Blender was inspired by a song by Yello, from the album Baby.178 Roosendaal founded NaN in June 1998 to further develop and distribute the program. They initially distributed the program as shareware until NaN went bankrupt in 2002.
The creditors agreed to release Blender under the GNU General Public License, for a one-time payment of €100,000 (US$100,670 at the time). On July 18, 2002, Roosendaal started a Blender funding campaign to collect donations, and on September 7, 2002, announced that they had collected enough funds and would release the Blender source code. Today, Blender is free, open-source software and is—apart from the Blender Institute's two half-time and two full-time employees—developed by the community.179
The Blender Foundation initially reserved the right to use dual licensing, so that, in addition to GNU GPL, Blender would have been available also under the Blender License that did not require disclosing source code but required payments to the Blender Foundation. However, they never exercised this option and suspended it indefinitely in 2005.180 Currently, Blender is solely available under GNU GPL.
EFMPlus (1995)
EFMPlus is the channel code used in DVDs and SACDs, a more efficient successor to EFM used in CDs. It was created by Dutch electrical engineer Kees A. Schouhamer Immink, who also designed EFM. It is 6% less efficient than Toshiba's SD code, which resulted in a capacity of 4.7 gigabytes instead of SD's original 5 GB. The advantage of EFMPlus is its superior resilience against disc damage such as scratches and fingerprints.
Economics
Institutional foundations of modern corporation (first multinational, joint-stock, public limited company) (1602)
 The Dutch East India Company (Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, or VOC), founded in 1602, was the world’s first multinational, joint-stock,181 limited liability corporation182183184185186187188189 - as well as its first government-backed trading cartel.190191192193 It was the first company to issue shares of stock and what evolved into corporate bonds. The VOC was also the first company to actually issue stocks and bonds through a stock exchange.194195196197 In 1602, the VOC issued shares that were made tradable on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange. This invention enhanced the ability of joint-stock companies to attract capital from investors as they could now easily dispose their shares. The company was known throughout the world as the VOC thanks to its logo featuring those initials, which became the first global corporate brand. The company's monogram also became the first global logo.198
The seventeenth-century Dutch merchants laid the foundations for the birth and development of modern corporations that now operate in many countries around the world.199200 The Dutch merchants were also the pioneers in laying the basis for modern corporate governance.201 It was the VOC that invented the idea in 1606 of investing in the company rather than in a specific venture governed by the company.202 The VOC is generally viewed as the first modern corporation.203204 With its legal personhood, permanent capital with transferable shares, separation of ownership and management, and limited liability for both shareholders and managers (or The Heeren XVII, who served as the board of directors of the company), the Dutch East India Company (VOC) is generally considered a major institutional breakthrough.205 Motivated by international trade and the risks of venture capital, the VOC pioneered two of the most important riskmanagement innovations known, the implicit limited liability of shareholders and a secondary market for equity shares on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange.206207208209210211212213 The VOC marked a commercial breakthrough. It conducted semipermanent business ventures, instead of contracting with different shareholders for each undertaking. Other firms soon followed suit.214 The VOC's success inspired imitation across Europe—from Russia to Portugal.215 Unlike the competing British East India Company founded in 1600, the VOC allowed anyone to purchase stock in the trading at the open-air Amsterdam Bourse.216217 Within a few decades, the VOC proved itself to be the most powerful trading corporation in the seventeenth-century world and the model for the large-scale business enterprises that now dominate the global economy.218219 As Timothy Brook commented: "The Dutch East India Company—the VOC, as it is known—is to corporate capitalism what Benjamin Franklin's kite is to electronics: the beginning of something momentous that could not have been predicted at the time."220 The VOC's institutional innovations made large-scale trade feasible for the first time in history.221 These innovations allowed a single company to mobilize financial resources from a large number of investors and create ventures at a scale that had previously only been possible for monarchs.222 The key to the success of the VOC was that its ownership had been opened up to the general public. The VOC, for the very first time in history, enabled investors from all strata of the population to invest in a company that intended to continue to exist for many years. This enabled the vast sum of 6.5 million guilders to be raised. During its golden age, the VOC was the pioneering model for the modern corporations in corporate governance, entrepreneurship, performance, and profitability.
The Dutch East India Company (VOC) was the first permanently organized joint-stock company, with a permanent capital base (fixed capital stock).223224225226227228229 In 1602, the world's first official stock exchange (Amsterdam Stock Exchange or Amsterdam Bourse) was established by the VOC for dealings in its printed stocks and bonds. In the same year, The VOC undertook the world's first recorded IPO and, therefore, became the first public company to issue stock. It also played an integral role in modern history's first market crash. In 2010, a history student from Utrecht University, found the world’s oldest known ‘share’ during his thesis research in the Westfries Archief in Hoorn. It dates from 1606 and was issued by the VOC chamber of Enkhuizen.
The VOC is generally considered to be the world's first truly multinational corporation since it was the first transnational enterprise to issue stock. Some historians such as Timothy Brook and Russell Shorto consider the VOC as the first pioneering corporation in the first wave of globalization.230231 The VOC was the first multinational corporation to operate officially in different continents such as Europe, Asia and Africa. While the VOC mainly operated in what later became the Dutch East Indies (modern Indonesia), the company also had important operations elsewhere. It employed people from different continents and origins in the same functions and working environments. Although it was a Dutch company its employees included not only people from the Netherlands, but also many from Germany and from other countries as well. Besides the diverse north-west European workforce recruited by the VOC in the Dutch Republic, the VOC made extensive use of local Asian labour markets. As a result, the personnel of the various VOC offices in Asia consisted of European and Asian employees. Asian or Eurasian workers might be employed as sailors, soldiers, writers, carpenters, smiths, or as simple unskilled workers.232 At the height of its existence the VOC had 25,000 employees worked in Asia and 11,000 were en route.233 Also, while most of its shareholders were Dutch, about a quarter of the initial shareholders were Zuid-Nederlanders (people from an area that includes modern Belgium and Luxembourg) and there were also a few dozen Germans.234
 
The VOC is usually considered the world's first publicly traded company.235236237 The company was the first institutionalized trading company to have many of the attributes of the present public limited company.238239 In the first decades of the 17th century, the VOC was also the first recorded company ever to pay regular dividends, which averaged an annual 18% for almost 200 years (1602-1799).
The VOC was the first wholly recognized limited liability company.240241242243244245246 The VOC had two types of shareholders: the participanten, who could be seen as non-managing members, and the 76 bewindhebbers (later reduced to 60) who acted as managing directors. This was the usual set-up for Dutch joint-stock companies at the time. The innovation in the case of the VOC was, that the liability of not just the participanten, but also of the bewindhebbers was limited to the paid-in capital (usually, bewindhebbers had unlimited liability). The VOC therefore was a limited liability company. Also, the capital would be permanent during the lifetime of the company. As a consequence, investors that wished to liquidate their interest in the interim could only do this by selling their share to others on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange.247 Confusion of confusions, a 1688 dialogue by the Sephardi Jew Joseph de la Vega analyzed the workings of this one-stock exchange.
In terms of creating a corporate identity for example, the VOC had its own logo, which it placed on all kinds of objects—official documents bore the VOC monogram seal, its packaged crates of goods were branded with the same, its property—cannons to pewter to porcelain, all were variously monogrammed.248 The VOC's monogram became the best-known company trademark of the early modern period, possibly in fact the first globally recognized corporate logo.249
First megacorporation (1602)
(Figure)
A coin (duit) minted in 1744 by the VOC.

The Dutch East India Company was arguably the first megacorporation, possessing quasi-governmental powers, including the ability to wage war, imprison and execute convicts, negotiate treaties, coin money and establish colonies. Many economic and political historians consider the Dutch East India Company as the most valuable, powerful and influential corporation in the world history.
The VOC existed for almost 200 years from its founding in 1602, when the States-General of the Netherlands granted it a 21-year monopoly over Dutch operations in Asia until its demise in 1796. During those two centuries (between 1602 and 1796), the VOC sent almost a million Europeans to work in the Asia trade on 4,785 ships, and netted for their efforts more than 2.5 million tons of Asian trade goods. By contrast, the rest of Europe combined sent only 882,412 people from 1500 to 1795, and the fleet of the English (later British) East India Company, the VOC's nearest competitor, was a distant second to its total traffic with 2,690 ships and a mere one-fifth the tonnage of goods carried by the VOC. The VOC enjoyed huge profits from its spice monopoly through most of the 17th century.250
Considered to be the largest corporation in history,251 the VOC was even larger than some countries. By 1669, the VOC was the richest private company the world had ever seen, with over 150 merchant ships, 40 warships, 50,000 employees, a private army of 10,000 soldiers, and a dividend payment of 40% on the original investment.252253254255
The VOC had considerable influences on the history of some countries and territories such as New Netherland, Indonesia, Australia, South Africa, Taiwan and Japan. The VOC trade post on Dejima, an artificial island off the coast of Nagasaki, was for more than two hundred years the only place where Europeans were permitted to trade with Japan. Rangaku (literally "Dutch Learning", and by extension "Western Learning") is a body of knowledge developed by Japan through its contacts with the Dutch enclave of Dejima, which allowed Japan to keep abreast of Western technology and medicine in the period when the country was closed to foreigners, 1641–1853, because of the Tokugawa shogunate’s policy of national isolation (sakoku).256257
In terms of world history of geography and exploration, the VOC can be credited with putting most of Australia's coast (then Nova Hollandia and other names) on the world map, between 1606 and 1756.258 The VOC's exploratory voyages such as those led by Willem Janszoon (Duyfken), Henry Hudson (Halve Maen) and Abel Tasman revealed vast new territories to Europeans.
Dutch auction (1600s)
A Dutch auction is also known as an open descending price auction. Named after the famous auctions of Dutch tulip bulbs in the 17th century, it is based on a pricing system devised by Nobel Prize–winning economist William Vickrey. In the traditional Dutch auction, the auctioneer begins with a high asking price which is lowered until some participant is willing to accept the auctioneer's price. The winning participant pays the last announced price. Dutch auction is also sometimes used to describe online auctions where several identical goods are sold simultaneously to an equal number of high bidders. In addition to cut flower sales in the Netherlands, Dutch auctions have also been used for perishable commodities such as fish and tobacco.
First modern art market (1600s)
The Dutch Republic was the birthplace of the first modern art market (open art market or free art market). The seventeenth-century Dutch were the pioneering arts marketers, successfully combining art and commerce together as we would recognise it today.259 Until the 17th century, commissioning works of art was largely the preserve of the church, monarchs and aristocrats. The emergence of a powerful and wealthy middle class in Holland, though, produced a radical change in patronage as the new Dutch bourgeoisie bought art. For the first time, the direction of art was shaped by relatively broadly-based demand rather than religious dogma or royal whim, and the result was a market which today's dealers and collectors would find familiar. With the creation of the first large-scale open art market, prosperous Dutch merchants, artisans, and civil servants bought paintings and prints in unprecedented numbers. Foreign visitors were astonished that even modest members of Dutch society such as farmers and bakers owned multiple works of art. Dutch 17th-century art saw the rise of new subjects, as landscapes, still lifes, and scenes of daily life replaced formerly dominant religious images and scenes from classical mythology.260
Concept of corporate governance (1600s)
The seventeenth-century Dutch businessmen were the pioneers in laying the basis for modern corporate governance. Isaac Le Maire, an Amsterdam businessman and a sizeable shareholder of the VOC, became the first recorded investor to actually consider the corporate governance's problems. In 1609, he complained of the VOC's shoddy corporate governance. On January 24, 1609, Le Maire filed a petition against the VOC, marking the first recorded expression of shareholder activism. In what is the first recorded corporate governance dispute, Le Maire formally charged that the directors (the VOC's board of directors – the Heeren XVII) sought to “retain another’s money for longer or use it ways other than the latter wishes” and petitioned for the liquidation of the VOC in accordance with standard business practice.261262263 Initially the largest single shareholder in the VOC and a bewindhebber sitting on the board of governors, Le Maire apparently attempted to divert the firm’s profits to himself by undertaking 14 expeditions under his own accounts instead of those of the company. Since his large shareholdings were not accompanied by greater voting power, Le Maire was soon ousted by other governors in 1605 on charges of embezzlement, and was forced to sign an agreement not to compete with the VOC. Having retained stock in the company following this incident, in 1609 Le Maire would become the author of what is celebrated as “the first recorded expression of investor advocacy” in history.264265266
The first shareholder revolt happened in 1622, among Dutch East India Company (VOC) investors who complained that the company account books had been “smeared with bacon” so that they might be “eaten by dogs.” The investors demanded a “reeckeninge,” a proper financial audit.267 The 1622 campaign by the shareholders of the VOC is a testimony of genesis of CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) in which shareholders staged protests by distributing pamphlets and complaining about management self enrichment and secrecy.268
Modern concept of foreign direct investment (1600s)
The construction in 1619 of a train-oil factory on Smeerenburg in the Spitsbergen islands by the Noordsche Compagnie, and the acquisition in 1626 of Manhattan Island by the Dutch West India Company are referred to as the earliest cases of outward foreign direct investment (FDI) in Dutch and world history. Throughout the seventeenth century, the Dutch East India Company (VOC) and the Dutch West India Company (GWIC/WIC) also began to create trading settlements around the globe. Their trading activities generated enormous wealth, making the Dutch Republic one of the most prosperous countries of that time. The Dutch Republic's extensive arms trade occasioned an episode in the industrial development of early-modern Sweden, where arms merchants like Louis de Geer and the Trip brothers, invested in iron mines and iron works, another early example of outward foreign direct investment.
First modern market-oriented economy (1600s)
It was in the Dutch Republic that some important industries (economic sectors) such as shipbuilding, shipping, printing and publishing were developed on a large-scale export-driven model for the first time in history. The ship building district of Zaan, near Amsterdam, became the first industrialized area in the world,269 with around 900 industrial windmills at the end of the 17th century, but there were industrialized towns and cities on a smaller scale also. Other industries that saw significant growth were papermaking, sugar refining, printing, the linen industry (with spin-offs in vegetable oils, like flax and rape oil), and industries that used the cheap peat fuel, like brewing and ceramics (brickworks, pottery and clay-pipe making).
The Dutch shipbuilding industry was of modern dimensions, inclining strongly toward standardised, repetitive methods. It was highly mechanized and used many labor-saving devices-wind-powered sawmills, powered feeders for saw, block and tackles, great cranes to move heavy timbers-all of which increased productivity.270 Dutch shipbuilding benefited from various design innovations which increased carrying capacity and cut costs.271272273274275276 Dutch warships were the best in the world and their merchant fleet was equally outstanding. The size of the Dutch merchant fleet in the 1670s probably exceeded the combined fleets of England, France, Spain, Portugal, and Germany. The Dutch Republic dominated herring fishing in the North Sea, cod fishing off Iceland and whaling at Spitsbergen in the Arctic.277 By the last quarter of the seventeenth century, Dutch shipping dominated the world's carrying trade, growing tenfold between 1500 and 1700 (Wallerstein 1980:46)278 “By seventeenth century standards,” Richard Unger affirms, Dutch shipbuilding “was a massive industry and larger than any shipbuilding industry which had preceded it.”279 During his undercover visit to the Dutch Republic as part of the Grand Embassy mission (1697-1698), Peter the Great wanted to learn more about the Dutch shipbuilding industry. He studied shipbuilding and carpentry in Zaandam and Amsterdam. Through the agency of Nicolaas Witsen, cartographer, mayor of Amsterdam and expert on Russia, he worked at the Dutch East India Company (VOC) shipyard. In order to modernise the Imperial Russia, Peter introduced these Dutch crafts and skills in his home country and in particular in the newly founded capital of his Russian empire Saint Petersburg.280281282
In the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, the Dutch-speaking peoples came to dominate not only the print trade (having replaced the Italians), but also the map making and map printing industry by virtue of their own travels, trade ventures, and widespread commercial networks. The Dutch initiated what we would call today the free flow of geographical information. The Ducth publishing centers of Antwerp and Amsterdam would eclipse the former centers of cartographic activity. During the seventeenth century, the Dutch publishing industry was arguably the largest and most sophisticated in Europe. The Netherlands had developed into the 'publishing house of Europe', thanks to an extensive trade in printed matter that chiefly comprised the mass reprinting of foreign publications. The privilege system played an essential role in this large-scale publication of printed matter. While the system had long been maintained in France as a tool for censorship, in the Netherlands it tended to be exploited by the publishers as an effective instrument for monopolising the market. The Dutch publishing industry flourished in the liberal political climate, where progressive ideas could appear in print without a problem.283284285 By the middle of the seventeenth century the United Provinces had become the undisputed centre of the European book trade, producing a larger assortment of books and other printed material than anywhere else in Europe. Dutch publishing was successful internationally in two ways. Firstly, the Dutch monopolised the trade in publications. Secondly, the Dutch printed a large part of the total European book production. Many exiles and freethinkers chose to move to the United Provinces. The Dutch Republic became a mass producer of illegal pamphlets and forbidden books.286287
First capitalist nation-state (foundations of modern capitalism) (1600s)
  Economic historians consider the Netherlands as the first predominantly capitalist nation.288289290291292293294295296297298 The development of European capitalism began among the city-states of Italy, Flanders, and the Baltic. It spread to the European interstate system, eventually resulting in the world's first capitalist nation-state, the Dutch Republic of the seventeenth century.299 The Dutch were the first to develop capitalism on a nationwide scale (as opposed to earlier city states). They also played a pioneering role in the emergence of the capitalist world-system.300 Simon Schama aptly titled his work The Embarrassment of Riches, capturing the astonishing novelty and success of the commercial revolution in the Dutch Republic. The Dutch, it seems, more than anyone in the West since the palmy days of ancient Rome, had more money than they knew what to do with. They discovered, unlike the Romans, that the best use of money was to make more money. They invested it, mostly in overseas ventures, utilizing the innovation of the joint-stock company in which private investors could purchase shares, the most famous being the Dutch East India Company.301 Wherever Dutch capital went, there urban features were developed, economic activities expanded, new industries established, new jobs created, trading companies operated, swamps drained, mines opened, forests exploited, canals constructed, mills turned, and ships were built. The Dutch were pioneering venture capitalists who raised the commercial and industrial potential of underdeveloped lands whose resources they exploited. This paved the way to the Dutch Republic's prosperity, as it can pave the way to prosperity elsewhere.302303304 The United Provinces of the Netherlands were the land in which the capitalist spirit for the first time attained its fullest maturity.305306307 Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations (1776) includes dozens of references to the Dutch Republic's capitalist economic model.308 Karl Marx described the Dutch Republic or Holland as “the model capitalist nation of the seventeenth century”, which was in “the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist production”. He concluded that “the total capital of the Republic was probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put together”.309310311312313314 As John Steele Gordon (1999) commented “The Dutch invented modern capitalism in the early seventeenth century. Although many of the basic concepts had first appeared in Italy during the Renaissance, the Dutch, especially the citizens of the city of Amsterdam, were the real innovators. They transformed banking, stock exchanges, credit, insurance, and limited-liability corporations into a coherent financial and commercial system.” They brought these techniques/institutions together and established them on a secure basis in a merchant economy organized around a common for-profit motive.315 In Early modern Europe it featured the wealthiest trading city (Amsterdam) and the first full-time stock exchange. The traders created insurance and retirement funds, along with less benign phenomena, such as the boom-bust cycle, the world's first asset-inflation bubble, the Tulip mania of 1636–1637. But the bursting of the tulip bubble did not end Dutch economic hegemony. Tulipmania was followed by a century of Dutch leadership in almost every branch of global commerce, finance, and manufacturing. It was in the Netherlands that the early techniques of stock-market manipulation were developed, such as short selling (selling stock one doesn't own, in hopes of a fall in price), bear raids (where insiders conspire to sell a stock short until the outsiders panic and sell out their holdings, allowing the insiders to close their shorts profitably), syndicates (where a group manipulates a stock price by buying and selling among themselves), and corners (where a person or syndicate secretly acquires the entire floating supply of a commodity, forcing all who need to buy the commodity to do so at their price).316 The seventeenth-century Dutch merchants were pioneering venture capitalists at the dawn of modern capitalism.317318319 Motivated by international trade and the risks of venture capital, the Dutch United East India Company pioneered two of the most important riskmanagement innovations known, the implicit limited liability of shareholders and a secondary market for equity shares on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange.320 As Timothy Brook commented “the Dutch East India Company—the VOC, as it is known—is to corporate capitalism what Benjamin Franklin's kite is to electronics: the beginning of something momentous that could not have been predicted at the time.”321 World-systems theorists (including Immanuel Wallerstein and Giovanni Arrighi) often consider the economic primacy of the Dutch Republic in the 17th century as the first capitalist hegemony322323324325326327328329 in world history (followed by hegemonies of the United Kingdom in the 19th century and the United States in the 20th century).
First modern economic miracle (1585–1714)
The Dutch economic transition from a possession of the Holy Roman Empire in the 1590s to the foremost maritime and economic power in the world has been called the “Dutch Miracle” (or “Dutch Tiger”) by many economic historians, including K. W. Swart.330 Until the 1700s, the economy of the Dutch Republic was the most advanced and sophisticated ever seen in history.331 While Britain’s was the first economy to use fossil energy to produce goods for market, the most characteristic institutions of capitalism were invented in the Dutch Republic. The first modern economic miracle was that of the Dutch Republic (1585–1702).332333334335336 During their Golden Age, the provinces of the Northern Netherlands rose from almost total obscurity as the poor cousins of the industrious and heavily urbanised southern regions (Southern Netherlands) to become the world leader in economic success.337338339340341342343 On the surface, the Dutch Republic looked thoroughly modern in every sense. It expressed religious tolerance, had a flourishing market economy, was ruled by a representative government, and had an egalitarian social structure. The Dutch Republic drew power from its federalism and openness when royal absolutist centralization was the norm.344 During the 17th century, the Dutch population increased from an estimated 1.5 million to almost 2 million,345 with a population one-second that of England and Wales,346 one-quarter that of Spain, one-eighth that of France.347 More than 60 percent of Dutch people lived in cities, compared to about 10 percent in most other European countries at the end of the 17th century. The Dutch Republic, and especially the province of Holland, was a highly urbanized society, where city life and burgher values pervaded even the lives of people not living in the cities. The level of urbanisation in seventeenth century Netherlands was only attained in other European countries at the turn of the twentieth century. From about 1600 to 1720, the Dutch had the highest per capita income in the world - at least double that of neighbouring countries at the time.348349 Over the seventeenth century, the Dutch became the most literate people in Europe and possibly the world. The Dutch had the world's most generous (private) welfare system. “It is doubtful if England or any other country,” wrote Charles Wilson, “could rival the scores of almshouses for old men and women, the orphanages, hospitals, and schools maintained by private endowments from the pockets of the Dutch regent class.”350 In religion too the Netherlands stood out, being the most tolerant country in Europe, home to a wide variety of Christian denominations as well as Jews. The Dutch Republic was the first European state to practice religious toleration on a large scale. They also became the first state to articulate the notion that the government should leave people to their religious preferences. Also, from the very start, the Dutch Republic was a much more egalitarian country than any of the other countries of Europe. Trade and industry dominated economic life, whatever significance agriculture still may have had. Despite its lack of human and natural resources (except for water351 and wind power), the Dutch Republic dominated global market in many important industries352 such as shipbuilding, shipping, water engineering and management, printing, publishing, map making, lens-making, sugarcane refining, outward investment (outward/overseas direct investment),353 financial services,354 and international trade.355 The Dutch Republic had a commercial fleet that was larger than that of England, France, Germany, Portugal, and Spain combined. The United Provinces could build ships faster, cheaper, and better than any rival.356 France, Denmark, and Sweden outsourced their warship construction to the Dutch Republic.357 As Witold Rybczynski notes, the Dutch Republic or the United Provinces of the Netherlands was “a brand-new state, formed in 1609 after thirty years of rebellion against Spain. It was among the smallest countries in Europe. It had few natural resources — no mines, no forests — and what little land there was needed constant protection from the sea. But this “low” country surprisingly quickly established itself as a major power. In a short time it became the most advanced shipbuilding nation in the world and developed large naval, fishing, and merchant fleets. Its explorers founded colonies in Africa and Asia, as well as in America. The Netherlands introduced many financial innovations that made it a major economic force — and Amsterdam became the world center for international finance. Its manufacturing towns grew so quickly that by the middle of the century the Netherlands had supplanted France as the leading industrial nation of the world.”358359
Dynamic macroeconomic model (1936)
Dutch economist Jan Tinbergen developed the first national comprehensive macroeconomic model, which he first built for the Netherlands and after World War II later applied to the United States and the United Kingdom.
Fairtrade certification (1988)
The concept of fair trade has been around for over 40 years, but a formal labelling scheme emerged only in the 1980s. At the initiative of Mexican coffee farmers, the world's first Fairtrade labeling organisation, Stichting Max Havelaar, was launched in the Netherlands on 15 November 1988 by Nico Roozen, Frans van der Hoff and Dutch ecumenical development agency Solidaridad. It was branded "Max Havelaar" after a fictional Dutch character who opposed the exploitation of coffee pickers in Dutch colonies.
Finance
Concept of bourse (1200s)
An exchange, or bourse, is a highly organized market where (especially) tradable securities, commodities, foreign exchange, futures, and options contracts are sold and bought. The term bourse is derived from the 13th-century inn named Huis ter Beurze in Bruges, Low Countries, where traders and foreign merchants from across Europe conducted business in the late medieval period.360 The building, which was established by Robert van der Buerze as a hostelry, had operated from 1285. Its managers became famous for offering judicious financial advice to the traders and merchants who frequented the building. This service became known as the "Beurze Purse" which is the basis of bourse, meaning an organised place of exchange. Eventually the building became solely a place for trading in commodities. From the Dutch-speaking cities of the Low Countries, the term ‘beurs' spread to other European states such as France, Italy, Spain, Germany, Denmark and Sweden where it was corrupted into 'bourse', 'borsa', 'bolsa', 'börse', 'børsen' and 'börsen'. In England, too, the term ‘Bourse’ was used between 1550 and 1775, eventually giving way to the term ‘Royal Exchange’.
Foundations of stock market (first official, fully-fledged stock exchange) (1602)
   The seventeenth-century Dutch merchants laid the foundations for modern stock market that now influences greatly the global economy. It was in the Dutch Republic that a fully-fledged stock market was established and developed for the first time in history.361 The Dutch merchants were also the pioneers in developing the basic techniques of stock trading. Although bond sales by municipalities and states can be traced to the thirteenth century, the origin of modern stock exchanges that specialize in creating and sustaining secondary markets in corporate securities goes back to the formation of the Dutch East India Company in the year 1602.362363364365 Dutch investors were the first to trade their shares at a regular stock exchange.366 The Amsterdam Stock Exchange is considered the oldest in the world. It was established in 1602 by the Dutch East India Company for dealings in its printed stocks and bonds. Here, the Dutch also pioneered stock futures, stock options, short selling, debt-equity swaps, merchant banking, bonds, unit trusts and other speculative instruments. Unlike the competing companies, the VOC allowed anyone (including housemaids) to purchase stock in the trading at the fully operational Amsterdam Bourse. The practice of naked short selling was also invented in the Dutch Republic. In 1609, Isaac Le Maire, an Amsterdam merchant and a sizeable shareholder of the Dutch East India Company (VOC), became the first recorded short seller in history. The first recorded ban on short selling also took place in the Dutch Republic in the same year. In the early 1600s, Dutch merchants invented the common stock — that of the VOC. Also, the Dutch experienced the first recorded stock market crash in history, the Tulip Mania of 1636-1637. Since 1602, stock market trading has come a long way. But basically, the concept and principle of stock market trading is still upheld and is still being implemented up to now.367368
In the sixteenth century, the overall economic supremacy of the Italian city-states gradually came to an end and the centre of financial activities in Europe shifted to the Low Countries, first to Bruges, and later to Antwerp and Amsterdam. They, too, became important centres of financial innovation. Among Bruges's wealthiest residents was the Van der Beurs family, inn-keepers who allegedly gave their name to the later bourse (Huis Ter Beurze in Dutch).369 From the Dutch-speaking cities of the Low Countries, the term ‘beurs' spread to other European states such as France, Italy, Spain, Germany, Denmark and Sweden where it was corrupted into 'bourse', 'borsa', 'bolsa', 'börse', 'børsen' and 'börsen'. In England, too, the term ‘Bourse’ was used between 1550 and 1775, eventually giving way to the term ‘Royal Exchange’. The concept of a stock market has been around for hundreds of years and there are examples of their early development across Europe, including the trading of government debt by brokers in twelfth-century France. But the sophisticated use of a stock market had their beginnings in the Low Countries.370 Dutch-speaking cities such as Bruges, Antwerp, and Amsterdam played a vital role in the birth and development of early stock exchanges.371 Antwerp Bourse (Handelsbeurs in Dutch) was built in 1531 and was the first public building used exclusively for financial and commodities trading.372 The first official, fully operational (fully-fledged) stock exchange is, however, recognised as being the Amsterdam Stock Exchange which was established in 1602.373374375376377378 The Amsterdam Stock Exchange is often considered as the first modern stock exchange. The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (a.k.a. Beurs van Hendrick de Keyser in Dutch) is also said to have been the first stock exchange to introduce continuous trade in the early 17th century. Edward Stringham has written extensively on the development of sophisticated contracts on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange in the seventeenth century, including short sale contracts.379 By the 1680s, the financial techniques used in the Amsterdam's financial markets (including stock trading, derivatives trading, and option trading) were as sophisticated as any practiced today.380381 It was in the Dutch Republic that the early techniques of stock-market manipulation were developed, such as short selling (selling stock one doesn't own, in hopes of a fall in price), bear raids (where insiders conspire to sell a stock short until the outsiders panic and sell out their holdings, allowing the insiders to close their shorts profitably), syndicates (where a group manipulates a stock price by buying and selling among themselves), and corners (where a person or syndicate secretly acquires the entire floating supply of a commodity, forcing all who need to buy the commodity to do so at their price).382
Joseph de la Vega, also known as Joseph Penso de la Vega and by other variations of his name, was an Amsterdam trader from a Spanish Jewish family and a prolific writer as well as a successful businessman in 17th-century Amsterdam. His 1688 book Confusion of Confusions explained the workings of the city's stock market. It was the earliest book about stock trading, taking the form of a dialogue between a merchant, a shareholder and a philosopher, the book described a market that was sophisticated but also prone to excesses, and de la Vega offered advice to his readers on such topics as the unpredictability of market shifts and the importance of patience in investment. The book has been described as the first precursor of modern behavioural finance, with its descriptions of investor decision-making still reflected in the way some investors operate today, and in 2001 was still rated by the Financial Times as one of the ten best investment book ever written.383
First fully functioning (fully-fledged) financial market (1600s)
The Dutch Republic (Amsterdam in particular) was the birthplace of the world's first fully functioning financial market, with the birth of a fully fledged capital market. Capital markets for debt and equity shares are used to raise long-term funds. New stocks and bonds are sold in primary markets (including initial public offerings) and secondary markets (including stock exchanges). While the Italian city-states produced the first transferable municipal bonds, they didn't develop the other ingredient necessary to produce a fully fledged capital market: corporate shareholders. The Dutch East India Company (VOC) became the first company to offer shares of stock to the general public. Dutch investors were the first to trade their shares at a regular stock exchange. In 1602 the Dutch East India Company (VOC) established an exchange in Amsterdam where the VOC stocks and bonds could be traded in a secondary market.384385 The buying and selling of the VOC's securities (including shares and bonds) became the basis of the first official stock market. The Dutch were also the first to use a fully-fledged capital market (including bond market and stock market) to finance companies (such as the VOC and the WIC). It was in seventeenth-century Amsterdam that the global securities market began to take on its modern form.
The fundamental change in taxation and borrowing that took place in the Dutch Republic in the late-sixteenth and early-seventeenth centuries is often referred to by economic historians as the financial revolution.386 It is viewed as the key to the economic growth and political power of the Dutch Republic in its seventeenth-century Golden Age. There is agreement with respect to the fact that this revolution predated the English financial revolution by almost a century. It is agreed that a significant public debt was created in the Dutch Republic long before it was created in England. Tracy (1985), 't Hart (1993), and others date the formation of a market for government bonds in the Dutch Republic a few decades before the formation of the VOC (1602).387 Many commercial and financial institutions new in seventeenth-century London, including the stock market, were based on models developed in Amsterdam earlier in the century. When William III of Orange acceded to the English throne in 1688, he introduced well-tried financial innovations from the Dutch Republic.388 A consolidated public debt was already created in Holland in mid-sixteenth century.389 Kuzminski (2013) notes, “The Dutch, in short, invented the first system of national public credit. For the first time in Europe and, it appears, world history, we find a credit system not dependent solely on the vicissitudes of private bankers like the Medici or the Fuggers and their unreliable private debtors, like the monarchs of Europe. Credit was now backed by publically guaranteed, more or less perpetual national institutions. The bourse and the bank of Amsterdam had behind them the imprimatur of the collective corporate backing of the provinces and towns.”390
Foundations of corporate finance (1600s)
What is now known as corporate finance has its modern roots in financial management policies of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) in the 17th century and some basic aspects of modern corporate finance began to appear in financial activities of Dutch businessmen in the early 1600s.
Initial public offering (1602)
The earliest form of a company which issued public shares was the publicani during the Roman Republic. In 1602, the Dutch East India Company (Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie or VOC) became the first modern company to issue shares to the public, thus launching the first modern initial public offering (IPO). The VOC held the first public offering of shares in history shortly after its founding.391392393 With this first recorded initial public offering (IPO), the VOC brought in 6,424,588 guilders and the company subsequently grew to become the first true transnational corporation in the world.
Institutional foundations of investment banking (1600s)
The Dutch were the pioneers in laying the basis for investment banking, allowing the risk of loans to be distributed among thousands of investors in the early seventeenth century.394
Institutional foundations of central banking (first central bank) (1609)
(Figure)
A painting by Pieter Saenredam of the old town hall in Amsterdam where the Wisselbank was founded in 1609. The Amsterdamsche Wisselbank (literally meaning “Amsterdam Exchange Bank”), the precursor to, if not the first modern central bank. The Wisselbank's innovations helped lay the foundations for the central banking system that now plays a vital role in the world's economy.

Prior to the 17th century most money was commodity money, typically gold or silver. However, promises to pay were widely circulated and accepted as value at least five hundred years earlier in both Europe and Asia. The Song Dynasty was the first to issue generally circulating paper currency, while the Yuan Dynasty was the first to use notes as the predominant circulating medium. In 1455, in an effort to control inflation, the succeeding Ming Dynasty ended the use of paper money and closed much of Chinese trade. The medieval European Knights Templar ran an early prototype of a central banking system, as their promises to pay were widely respected, and many regard their activities as having laid the basis for the modern banking system. As the first public bank to "offer accounts not directly convertible to coin", the Bank of Amsterdam (Amsterdamsche Wisselbank or literally Amsterdam Exchange Bank) established in 1609 is considered to be the precursor to modern central banks, if not the first true central bank.395396397398399400401402 The Wisselbank's innovations helped lay the foundations for the birth and development of modern central banking systems.403404405406407408409 There were earlier banks, especially in the Italian city-states, but the Wisselbank, with its public backing, provided for a scale of operations and stability hitherto unmatched. Along with a number of subsidiary local banks, it performed many of modern-day central banking functions.410 The model of the Wisselbank as a state bank was adapted throughout Europe, including the Bank of Sweden (1668) and the Bank of England (1694).411 It occupied a central position in the financial world of its day, providing an effective, efficient and trusted system for national and international payments. The establishment of the Wisselbank led to the introduction of the concept of bank money — the bank guilder. Lucien Gillard (2004) calls it the European guilder (le florin européen),412 and Adam Smith devotes many pages to explaining how the bank guilder works (Smith 1776: 446-455). Considered by many experts to be the first internationally dominant reserve currency of modern times, the Dutch guilder was the dominant currency during the 17th and 18th centuries. It was just replaced by British pound sterling in the 19th century and the US dollar took the lead just after World War Two and has held it until this day.413414415
Short selling (1609)
Financial innovation in Amsterdam took many forms. In 1609, investors led by Isaac Le Maire formed history's first bear syndicate to engage in short selling, but their coordinated trading had only a modest impact in driving down share prices, which tended to be robust throughout the 17th century.
Concept of dividend policy (1610)
In the first decades of the 17th century, the VOC was the first recorded company ever to pay regular dividends. To encourage investors to buy shares, a promise of an annual payment (called a dividend) was made. An investor would receive dividends instead interest and the investment was permanent in the form of shares in the company. Between 1600 and 1800 the Dutch East India Company (VOC) paid annual dividends worth around 18 percent of the value of the shares.
First European banknote (1661)
In 1656, King Charles X Gustav of Sweden signed two charters creating two private banks under the directorship of Johan Palmstruch (though before having been ennobled he was called Johan Wittmacher or Hans Wittmacher), a Riga-born merchant of Dutch origin. Palmstruch modeled the banks on those of Amsterdam where he had become a burgher. The first real European banknote was issued in 1661 by the Stockholms Banco of Johan Palmstruch, a private bank under state charter (precursor to the Sveriges Riksbank, the central bank of Sweden).
First book ever on stock trading (1688)
Joseph de la Vega, also known as Joseph Penso de la Vega, was an Amsterdam trader from a Spanish Jewish family and a prolific writer as well as a successful businessman. His 1688 book Confusion de Confusiones (Confusion of Confusions) explained the workings of the city's stock market. It was the earliest book about stock trading, taking the form of a dialogue between a merchant, a shareholder and a philosopher. The book described a market that was sophisticated but also prone to excesses, and de la Vega offered advice to his readers on such topics as the unpredictability of market shifts and the importance of patience in investment. The book has been described as the first precursor of modern behavioural finance, with its descriptions of investor decision-making still reflected in the way some investors operate today, and in 2001 was still rated by the Financial Times as one of the ten best investment book ever written.416
Concept of technical analysis (1688)
The principles of technical analysis are derived from hundreds of years of financial market data. These principles in a raw form have been studied since the seventeenth century.417 Some aspects of technical analysis began to appear in Joseph de la Vega's accounts of the Dutch markets in the late 17th century. In Asia, technical analysis is said to be a method developed by Homma Munehisa during the early 18th century which evolved into the use of candlestick techniques, and is today a technical analysis charting tool.418419
Concept of behavioral finance (1688)
Josseph de la Vega was in 1688 the first person to give an account of irrational behaviour in financial markets. His 1688 book Confusion of Confusions, has been described as the first precursor of modern behavioural finance, with its descriptions of investor decision-making still reflected in the way some investors operate today.
First modern model of a financial centre (1600s)
 In the seventeenth century (the Dutch Golden Age in particular), Amsterdam, despite its relatively modest size and population, was the first modern model of a global (international) financial centre that now operated in several countries around the world. During their Golden Age, the Dutch were responsible for three major institutional innovations in economic and financial history. The first major innovation was the foundation of the United East India Company/Dutch East India Company (a.k.a. Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie or VOC in Dutch), the world's first publicly traded company, in 1602.420 As the first listed company (the first company to be ever listed on an official stock exchange), the VOC was the first company to actually issue stock and bonds to the general public. The second major innovation was the creation of the world's first fully functioning financial market, with the birth of a fully fledged capital market (including the bond market and stock market). The establishment of Amsterdam Stock Exchange (1602) by the VOC, has long been recognized as the origin of modern stock exchanges that specialize in creating and sustaining secondary markets in the securities issued by corporations. The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (Beurs van Hendrick de Keyser in Dutch) was the world's first official stock exchange when it began trading the VOC's freely transferable securities (including bonds and shares of stock).421 The buying and selling of these securities became the basis of the first official stock market. The third major innovation was the establishment of the Bank of Amsterdam (Amsterdamsche Wisselbank in Dutch) in 1609, which led to the introduction of the concept of bank money. The Bank of Amsterdam was arguably the world's first central bank. Along with a number of subsidiary local banks, it performed many functions of central banking system. The uniqueness of the 17th-century Dutch society’s structure (such as highly bourgeois, entrepreneurial, republican, federal, liberal, tolerant, secularist, and egalitarian features) played an important role in the birth of these seminal institutional innovations.
In the 17th century and during most of the 18th century, Amsterdam had been the most influential (powerful) financial centre of the world.422423424 It was in Amsterdam that the important institutional innovations such as limited-liability joint-stock company, publicly traded company, transnational corporation, capital market (including bond market and stock market), central banking, investment banking, and investment fund (mutual fund) were systematically operated for the first time in history. Amsterdam – unlike its predecessors such as Bruges, Antwerp, Genoa, and Venice – controlled crucial resources and markets directly, sending its fleets to all quarters of the world.425426427 Some economic historians (including Jonathan Israel) have identified the Dutch Republic with the Amsterdam Entrepôt as the first true world entrepôt,428429 whose commercial calendar was organized around the return of the four great fleets from the Baltic, the Levant, the West Indies, and the East Indies.430
Foundations of modern financial system (1600s)
In the early 1600s, the Dutch revolutionized domestic and international finance by inventing common stock — that of the Dutch East India Company and founding a proto-central bank, the Wisselbank or Bank of Amsterdam. In 1609, the Dutch had already had a government bond market for some decades. Shortly thereafter, the Dutch Republic had in place, in one form or another, all of the key components of a modern financial system: formalized public credit, stable money, elements of a banking system, a central bank of sorts and securities markets. The Dutch Republic went on to become that century's leading economy.431
Concept of investment fund (1774)
The first investment fund has its roots back in 1774. A Dutch merchant named Adriaan van Ketwich formed a trust named Eendragt Maakt Magt. The name of Ketwich's fund translates to "unity creates strength". In response to the financial crisis of 1772-1773, Ketwich’s aim was to provide small investors an opportunity to diversify (Rouwenhorst & Goetzman, 2005). This investment scheme can be seen as the first near-mutual fund. In the years following, near-mutual funds evolved and become more diverse and complex.
Mutual fund (1774)
The first mutual funds were established in 1774 in the Netherlands. Amsterdam-based businessman Abraham van Ketwich (a.k.a. Adriaan van Ketwich) is often credited as the originator of the world's first mutual fund.432 The first mutual fund outside the Netherlands was the Foreign & Colonial Government Trust, which was established in London in 1868.
Foods and drinks
Gibbing (1300s)
Gibbing is the process of preparing salt herring (or soused herring), in which the gills and part of the gullet are removed from the fish, eliminating any bitter taste. The liver and pancreas are left in the fish during the salt-curing process because they release enzymes essential for flavor. The fish is then cured in a barrel with one part salt to 20 herring. Today many variations and local preferences exist on this process. The process of gibbing was invented by Willem Beuckelszoon433 (aka Willem Beuckelsz, William Buckels434 or William Buckelsson), a 14th-century Zealand Fisherman. The invention of this fish preservation technique led to the Dutch becoming a seafaring power.435 This invention created an export industry for salt herring that was monopolized by the Dutch.
Doughnut (1600s)
Many people believe it was the Dutch who invented doughnuts. A Dutch snack made from potatoes had a round shape like a ball, but, like Gregory's dough balls, needed a little longer time when fried to cook the inside thoroughly. These potato-balls developed into doughnuts when the Dutch finally made them into ring-shapes reduce frying time.
Gin (jenever) (1650)
(Figure)
A selection of bottled gins offered at a liquor store.

Gin is a spirit which derives its predominant flavour from juniper berries (Juniperus communis). From its earliest origins in the Middle Ages, gin has evolved over the course of a millennium from a herbal medicine to an object of commerce in the spirits industry. Gin was developed on the basis of the older Jenever, and become widely popular in Great Britain when William III of Orange, leader of the Dutch Republic, occupied the British throne with his wife Mary. Today, the gin category is one of the most popular and widely distributed range of spirits, and is represented by products of various origins, styles, and flavour profiles that all revolve around juniper as a common ingredient.
The Dutch physician Franciscus Sylvius is often credited with the invention of gin in the mid 17th century,436437 although the existence of genever is confirmed in Massinger's play The Duke of Milan (1623), when Dr. Sylvius would have been but nine years of age. It is further claimed that British soldiers who provided support in Antwerp against the Spanish in 1585, during the Eighty Years' War, were already drinking genever (jenever) for its calming effects before battle, from which the term Dutch Courage is believed to have originated.438 The earliest known written reference to genever appears in the 13th century encyclopaedic work Der Naturen Bloeme (Bruges), and the earliest printed genever recipe from 16th century work Een Constelijck Distileerboec (Antwerp).439
Stroopwafel (1780s)
A stroopwafel (also known as syrup waffle, treacle waffle or caramel waffle) is a waffle made from two thin layers of baked batter with a caramel-like syrup filling the middle. They were first made in Gouda in the 1780s. The traditional way to eat the stroopwafel is to place it atop of a drinking vessel with a hot beverage (coffee, tea or chocolate) inside that fits the diameter of the waffle. The heat from the rising steam warms the waffle and slightly softens the inside and makes the waffle soft on one side while still crispy on the other.
Cocoa powder (foundations of modern chocolate industry) (1828)
 In 1815, Dutch chemist Coenraad Van Houten introduced alkaline salts to chocolate, which reduced its bitterness. In the 1820s, Casparus van Houten, Sr. patented an inexpensive method for pressing the fat from roasted cocoa beans.440441442 He created a press to remove about half the natural fat (cacao butter) from chocolate liquor, which made chocolate both cheaper to produce and more consistent in quality. This innovation introduced the modern era of chocolate. Van Houten developed the first cocoa powder producing machine in the Netherlands.443 Van Houten's machine – a hydraulic press – reduced the cocoa butter content by nearly half. This created a "cake" that could be pulverized into cocoa powder, which was to become the basis of all chocolate products.444445446447448449450451452453454 The press separated the greasy cocoa butter from cacao seeds, leaving a purer chocolate powder behind. This powder, much like the instant cocoa powder used today, was easier to stir into milk and water. As a result, another very important discovery was made: solid chocolate. By using cocoa powder and low amounts of cocoa butter, it was then possible to manufacture chocolate bar. The term "chocolate" then came to mean solid chocolate, rather than hot chocolate.
Dutch-process chocolate (1828)
Dutch-processed chocolate or Dutched chocolate is chocolate that has been treated with an alkalizing agent to modify its color and give it a milder taste compared to "natural cocoa" extracted with the Broma process. It forms the basis for much of modern chocolate, and is used in ice cream, hot cocoa, and baking. The Dutch process was developed in the early 19th century by Dutch chocolate maker Coenraad Johannes van Houten, whose father Casparus is responsible for the development of the method of removing fat from cacao beans by hydraulic press around 1828, forming the basis for cocoa powder.455456
Law and jurisprudence
Doctrine of the Freedom of the Seas (foundations of the Law of the Sea/UNCLOS) (1609)
In 1609, Hugo Grotius, the Dutch jurist who is generally known as the father of modern international law, published his book Mare Liberum (The Free Sea), which first formulated the notion of freedom of the seas. He developed this idea into a legal principle.457 It is said to be 'the first, and classic, exposition of the doctrine of the freedom of the seas' which has been the essence and backbone of the modern law of the sea.458459 It is generally assumed that Grotius first propounded the principle of freedom of the seas, although all countries in the Indian Ocean and other Asian seas accepted the right of unobstructed navigation long before Grotius wrote his De Jure Praedae (On the Law of Spoils) in the year of 1604. His work sparked a debate in the seventeenth century over whether states could exclude the vessels of other states from certain waters. Grotius won this debate, as freedom of the seas became a universally recognized legal principle, associated with concepts such as communication, trade and peace. Grotius's notion of the freedom of the seas would persist until the mid-twentieth century, and it continues to be applied even to this day for much of the high seas, though the application of the concept and the scope of its reach is changing.
Secularized natural law (foundations of modern international law) (1625)
The publication of De jure belli ac pacis (On the Laws of War and Peace) by Hugo Grotius in 1625 had marked the emergence of international law as an 'autonomous legal science'.460461462 Grotius’s On the Law of War and Peace, published in 1625, is best known as the first systematic treatise on international law, but to thinkers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it seemed to set a new agenda in moral and political philosophy across the board. Grotius developed pivotal treatises on freedom of the seas, the law of spoils, the laws of war and peace and he created an autonomous place for international law as its own discipline. Jean Barbeyrac’s Historical and Critical Account of the Science of Morality, attached to his translation of Samuel von Pufendorf’s Law of Nature and Nations in 1706, praised Grotius as “the first who broke the ice” of “the Scholastic Philosophy; which [had] spread itself all over Europe” (1749: 67, 66).463 Grotius' truly distinctive contribution to jurisprudence and philosophy of law (public international law or law of nations in particular) was that he secularized natural law.464465466467468469470 Grotius had divorced natural law from theology and religion by grounding it solely in the social nature and natural reason of man.471472 When Grotius, considered by many to be the founder of modern natural law theory (or secular natural law), said that natural law would retain its validity 'even if God did not exist' (etiamsi daremus non esse Deum), he was making a clear break with the classical tradition of natural law.473474475476 Adam Smith, in lectures delivered in 1762 on the subject of moral philosophy and the law of nations, said that: “Jurisprudence is that science which inquires into the general principles which ought to be the foundation of laws of all nations. Grotius seems to have been the first who attempted to give the world anything like a regular system of natural jurisprudence, and his treatise, 'On the Laws of War and Peace, ' with all its imperfections, is perhaps at this day the most complete work on this subject.”477
Grotian conception of international society (1625)
The Grotian conception of international society became the most distinctive characteristic of the internationalist (or rationalist) tradition in international relations. This is why it is also called the Grotian tradition. According to it international politics takes place within international society in which states are bound not only by rules of prudence or expediency but also of morality and law. Grotius was arguably not the first to formulate such a doctrine. However, he was first to clearly define the idea of one society of states, governed not by force or warfare but by laws and mutual agreement to enforce those laws. As many international law scholars noted, the spirit of the Peace of Westphalia (1648) was preceded with the thoughts and ideas of Grotius. Thomas Franck observed: ‘Since the Reformation, the Peace of Westphalia, and the writings of Hugo Grotius, there has been an explicit assumption that the international system is an association of sovereign states.’478 As Hedley Bull declared: ‘The idea of international society which Grotius propounded was given concrete expression in the Peace of Westphalia’, affirming that ‘Grotius must be considered the intellectual father of this first general peace settlement of modern times’.479
Cannon shot rule (1702)
By the end of the seventeenth century, support was growing for some limitation to the seaward extent of territorial waters. What emerged was the so-called "cannon shot rule", which acknowledged the idea that property rights could be acquired by physical occupation and in practice to the effective range of shore-based cannon: about three nautical miles. The rule was long associated with Cornelis van Bijnkershoek, a Dutch jurist who, especially in his De Dominio Maris Dissertatio (1702), advocated a middle ground between the extremes of Mare Liberum and John Selden's Mare Clausum, accepting both the freedom of states to navigate and exploit the resources the of the high seas and a right of coastal states to assert wide-ranging rights in a limited marine territory.
Permanent Court of Arbitration (1899)
The Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) is an international organization based in The Hague in the Netherlands. The court was established in 1899 as one of the acts of the first Hague Peace Conference, which makes it the oldest global institution for international dispute resolution.480 Its creation is set out under Articles 20 to 29 of the 1899 Hague Convention for the pacific settlement of international disputes, which was a result of the first Hague Peace Conference. The most concrete achievement of the Conference was the establishment of the PCA as the first institutionalized global mechanism for the settlement of disputes between states. The PCA encourages the resolution of disputes that involve states, state entities, intergovernmental organizations, and private parties by assisting in the establishment of arbitration tribunals and facilitating their work. The court offers a wide range of services for the resolution of international disputes which the parties concerned have expressly agreed to submit for resolution under its auspices. Dutch-Jew legal scholar Tobias Asser's role in the creation of the PCA at the first Hague Peace Conference (1899) earned him the Nobel Peace Prize in 1911.
International Opium Convention (1912)
The International Opium Convention, sometimes referred to as the Hague Convention of 1912, signed on 23 January 1912 at The Hague, was the first international drug control treaty and is the core of the international drug control system. The adoption of the Convention was a turning point in multilateralism, based on the recognition of the transnational nature of the drug problem and the principle of shared responsibility.481
Marriage equality (legalization of same-sex marriage) (2001)
Denmark was the first state to recognize a legal relationship for same-sex couples, establishing "registered partnerships" very much like marriage in 1989. In 2001, the Netherlands became the first nation in the world to grant same-sex marriages. The first laws enabling same-sex marriage in modern times were enacted during the first decade of the 21st century. , sixteen countries (Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark,482 France, Iceland, Netherlands,483 New Zealand,484 Norway, Portugal, Spain, South Africa, Sweden, United Kingdom,485 Uruguay) and several sub-national jurisdictions (parts of Mexico and the United States) allow same-sex couples to marry. Polls in various countries show that there is rising support for legally recognizing same-sex marriage across race, ethnicity, age, religion, political affiliation, and socioeconomic status.
Measurement
Pendulum clock (first high-precision clock) (1656)
  The first mechanical clocks, employing the verge escapement mechanism with a foliot or balance wheel timekeeper, were invented in Europe at around the start of the 14th century, and became the standard timekeeping device until the pendulum clock was invented in 1656. The pendulum clock remained the most accurate timekeeper until the 1930s, when quartz oscillators were invented, followed by atomic clocks after World War 2.486
A pendulum clock uses a pendulum's arc to mark intervals of time. From their invention until about 1930, the most accurate clocks were pendulum clocks. Pendulum clocks cannot operate on vehicles or ships at sea, because the accelerations disrupt the pendulum's motion, causing inaccuracies. The pendulum clock was invented by Christian Huygens, based on the pendulum introduced by Galileo Galilei. Although Galileo studied the pendulum as early as 1582, he never actually constructed a clock based on that design. Christiaan Huygens invented pendulum clock in 1656 and patented the following year. He contracted the construction of his clock designs to clockmaker Salomon Coster, who actually built the clock.
Huygens' invention of pendulum clock helped lay the foundations for the modern clockmaking industry. The longcase clock (also known as the grandfather clock) was created to house the pendulum and works by the English clockmaker William Clement in 1670 or 1671. It was also at this time that clock cases began to be made of wood and clock faces to utilize enamel as well as hand-painted ceramics. In 1670, William Clement created the anchor escapement,487 an improvement over Huygens' crown escapement. Clement also introduced the pendulum suspension spring in 1671. The concentric minute hand was added to the clock by Daniel Quare, a London clock-maker and others, and the second hand was first introduced. During the Industrial Revolution, daily life was organized around the home pendulum clock. Pendulum clocks remained the mechanism of choice for accurate timekeeping for centuries, with F. M. Fedchenko's observatory clocks produced from after World War II up to around 1960 marking the end of the pendulum era as a time standard. Pendulum clocks were more than simply utilitarian timekeepers; they were status symbols that expressed the wealth and culture of their owners. They evolved in a number of traditional styles, specific to different countries and times as well as their intended use. Case styles somewhat reflect the furniture styles popular during the period. Today, pendulum clocks remain popular for domestic, decorative and antique use.488489490491492493494495496497498
Concept of the standardization of the temperature scale (1665)
Various authors have credited the invention of the thermometer to Cornelis Drebbel, Robert Fludd, Galileo Galilei or Santorio Santorio. The thermometer was not a single invention, however, but a development. However, each inventor and each thermometer was unique—there was no standard scale. In 1665 Christiaan Huygens suggested using the melting and boiling points of water as standards.499500 The Fahrenheit scale is now usually defined by two fixed points: the temperature at which water freezes into ice is defined as 32 degrees Fahrenheit (°F), and the boiling point of water is defined to be 212 °F, a 180 degree separation, as defined at sea level and standard atmospheric pressure. In 1742, Swedish astronomer Anders Celsius created a temperature scale which was the reverse of the scale now known by the name "Celsius": 0 represented the boiling point of water, while 100 represented the freezing point of water. From 1744 until 1954, 0 °C was defined as the freezing point of water and 100 °C was defined as the boiling point of water, both at a pressure of one standard atmosphere with mercury being the working material.
Spiral-hairspring watch (first high-precision watch) (1675)
  The invention of the mainspring in the early 15th century allowed portable clocks to be built, evolving into the first pocketwatches by the 17th century, but these were not very accurate until the balance spring was added to the balance wheel in the mid 17th century. Some dispute remains as to whether British scientist Robert Hooke (his was a straight spring) or Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens was the actual inventor of the balance spring. Huygens was clearly the first to successfully implement a spiral balance spring in a portable timekeeper. This is significant because up to that point the pendulum was the most reliable.501502503504505506507508509510511512 This innovation increased watches' accuracy enormously, reducing error from perhaps several hours per day513 to perhaps 10 minutes per day,514 resulting in the addition of the minute hand to the face from around 1680 in Britain and 1700 in France.
Like the invention of pendulum clock, Huygens' spiral hairspring (balance spring) system of portable timekeepers, helped lay the foundations for the modern watchmaking industry. The application of the spiral balance spring for watches ushered in a new era of accuracy for portable timekeepers, similar to that which the pendulum had introduced for clocks. From its invention in 1675 by Christiaan Huygens, the spiral hairspring (balance spring) system for portable timekeepers, still used in mechanical watchmaking industry today.515516517518519
Mercury thermometer (first practical, accurate thermometer) (1714)
 Various authors have credited the invention of the thermometer to Cornelis Drebbel, Robert Fludd, Galileo Galilei or Santorio Santorio. The thermometer was not a single invention, however, but a development. Though Galileo is often said to be the inventor of the thermometer, what he produced were thermoscopes. The difference between a thermoscope and a thermometer is that the latter has a scale.520 The first person to put a scale on a thermoscope is variously said to be Francesco Sagredo521 or Santorio Santorio522 in about 1611 to 1613.
Before there was the thermometer, there was the earlier and closely related thermoscope, best described as a thermometer without a temperature scale. A thermoscope only showed the differences in temperatures, for example, it could show something was getting hotter. However, the thermoscope did not measure all the data that a thermometer could, for example an exact temperature in degrees. What can be considered the first modern thermometer, the mercury thermometer with a standardized scale, was invented by German-Dutch scientist Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (who had settled in Amsterdam in 1701) in 1714.523524525526527528529530 Fahrenheit invented the first truly accurate thermometer using mercury instead of alcohol and water mixtures. He began constructing his own thermometers in 1714, and it was in these that he used mercury for the first time. Previous thermometers, such as those constructed by Galileo and Guillaume Amontons, used combinations of alcohol and water; as the temperature rose, the alcohol would expand and the level within the thermometer would increase. These thermometers were not particularly accurate, however, since they were too easily thrown off by changing air pressure. The key to Fahrenheit's thermometer was a new method for cleaning mercury that enabled it to rise and fall within the tube without sticking to the sides. Mercury was an ideal substance for reading temperatures since it expanded at a more constant rate than alcohol and is able to be read at much higher and lower temperatures.
The traditional thermometer is a glass tube with a bulb at one end containing a liquid which expands in a uniform manner with temperature. The tube itself is narrow (capillary) and has calibration markings along it. The liquid is often mercury, but alcohol thermometers use a colored alcohol. The alcohol thermometer was the earliest, efficient, modern-style instrument of temperature measurement. Mercury-in-glass thermometers have been considered the most accurate liquid-filled types. However, mercury is a toxic heavy metal, and mercury has only been used in clinical thermometers if protected from breakage of the tube.
Fahrenheit scale (first standardized temperature scale) (1724)
 Various authors have credited the invention of the thermometer to Cornelis Drebbel, Robert Fludd, Galileo Galilei or Santorio Santorio. The thermometer was not a single invention, however, but a development. However, each inventor and each thermometer was unique—there was no standard scale. In 1665 Christiaan Huygens suggested using the melting and boiling points of water as standards, and in 1694 Carlo Renaldini proposed using them as fixed points on a universal scale. In 1701 Isaac Newton proposed a scale of 12 degrees between the melting point of ice and body temperature. Finally in 1724 Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit produced a temperature scale which now (slightly adjusted) bears his name. He could do this because he manufactured thermometers, using mercury (which has a high coefficient of expansion) for the first time and the quality of his production could provide a finer scale and greater reproducibility, leading to its general adoption. The Fahrenheit scale was the first widely used temperature scale. By the end of the 20th century, most countries used the Celsius scale rather than the Fahrenheit scale, though Canada retained it as a supplementary scale used alongside Celsius. Fahrenheit remains the official scale for Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, Belize, the Bahamas, Palau and the United States and associated territories.
Snellen chart (1862)
The Snellen chart is an eye chart used by eye care professionals and others to measure visual acuity. Snellen charts are named after Dutch ophthalmologist Hermann Snellen who developed the chart in 1862. Vision scientists now use a variation of this chart, designed by Ian Bailey and Jan Lovie.
String galvanometer (1902)
Previous to the string galvanometer, scientists used a machine called the capillary electrometer to measure the heart's electrical activity, but this device was unable to produce results at a diagnostic level. Dutch physiologist Willem Einthoven developed the string galvanometer in the early 20th century, publishing the first registration of its use to record an electrocardiogram in a Festschrift book in 1902. The first human electrocardiogram was recorded in 1887, however only in 1901 was a quantifiable result obtained from the string galvanometer.
Schilt photometer (1922)
In 1922, Dutch astronomer Jan Schilt invented the Schilt photometer, a device that measures the light output of stars and, indirectly, their distances.
Medicine
Clinical electrocardiography (first diagnostic electrocardiogram) (1902)
(Figure)
ECG as done by Willem Einthoven

In the 19th century it became clear that the heart generated electric currents. The first to systematically approach the heart from an electrical point-of-view was Augustus Waller, working in St Mary's Hospital in Paddington, London. In 1911 he saw little clinical application for his work. The breakthrough came when Einthoven, working in Leiden, used his more sensitive string galvanometer, than the capillary electrometer that Waller used. Einthoven assigned the letters P, Q, R, S and T to the various deflections that it measured and described the electrocardiographic features of a number of cardiovascular disorders. He was awarded the 1924 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for his discovery.531532533534535536537538
Einthoven's triangle (1902)
Einthoven's triangle is an imaginary formation of three limb leads in a triangle used in electrocardiography, formed by the two shoulders and the pubis.539 The shape forms an inverted equilateral triangle with the heart at the center that produces zero potential when the voltages are summed. It is named after Willem Einthoven, who theorized its existence.540
First European blood bank (1940)
When German bombers attacked The Hague in 1940 while Willem Johan Kolff was there, he organised the first blood bank in continental Europe.
Rotating drum dialysis machine (first practical artificial kidney) (1943)
(Figure)
Kolff's artificial kidney

An artificial kidney is a machine and its related devices which clean blood for patients who have an acute or chronic failure of their kidneys. The first artificial kidney was developed by Dutchman Willem Johan Kolff. The procedure of cleaning the blood by this means is called dialysis, a type of renal replacement therapy that is used to provide an artificial replacement for lost kidney function due to renal failure. It is a life support treatment and does not treat disease.541542543544545546547548549550551552553
Artificial heart (1957)
On 12 December 1957, Kolff implanted an artificial heart into a dog at Cleveland Clinic. The dog lived for 90 minutes. In 1967, Dr. Kolff left Cleveland Clinic to start the Division of Artificial Organs at the University of Utah and pursue his work on the artificial heart. Under his supervision, a team of surgeons, chemists, physicists and bioengineers developed an artificial heart and made it ready for industrial production. To help manage his many endeavors, Dr. Kolff assigned project managers. Each project was named after its manager. Graduate student Robert Jarvik was the project manager for the artificial heart, which was subsequently renamed the Jarvik-7. Based on lengthy animal trials, this first artificial heart was successfully implanted into the thorax of patient Barney Clark in December 1982. Clark survived 112 days with the device.
Military
Modern model of sea power (1585–1688)
The Dutch Republic has been considered by many political and military historians as the first modern (global) sea power.554555556557 The United Provinces of the Netherlands was the first state to possess the full triad of foreign commerce, forward bases and merchant and naval fleets. In the middle of the 17th century the Dutch navy was the most powerful navy in the world.558559 The Dutch Republic had a commercial fleet that was larger than that of England, France, Germany, Portugal, and Spain combined. According to Walter Russell Mead, the “modern version of sea power was invented by the Dutch. The system of global trade, investment, and military power the Dutch built in the seventeenth century was the envy and the wonder of the world at the time, and many of its basic features were adopted by the British and the Americans in subsequent years.”560561 When the Peter the Great determined to achieve sea power for Imperial Russia, he came to the Dutch Republic to learn about shipbuilding, seamanship and nautical sciences.562 During his stay in Holland (1697) the Tsar engaged, with the help of Russian and Dutch assistants, many skilled workers such as builders of locks, fortresses, shipwrights and seamen. They had to help him with his modernization of Russia. The best-known sailor who made the journey from the Dutch Republic to Russia was Norwegian-Dutch Cornelius Cruys. Cruys performed well in Russia and came be regarded as the architect of the Russian Navy. He became the first commander of the Russian Baltic Fleet and the vice admiral of the Imperial Russian Navy. Peter the Great designed his new capital on the model of Amsterdam and gave it a Dutch name, Sankt Pieter Burkh (later Germanized into St. Peterburg).563564 In St. Petersburg, there is an island which is still called Novaya Gollandiya (literally “New Holland”). The triangular man-made island took its name after a number of canals and shipbuilding facilities that rendered its appearance similar to Amsterdam. The Tsar chose to call his island “New Holland”, commemorating his enthusiasm for all things Dutch.565
House of Orange-Nassau's military reforms (1590s–1600s)
 The early modern Military Revolution began with reforms inaugurated by Prince Maurice of Nassau with his cousins Count Willem Lodewijk of Nassau-Dillenburg and Count John VII of Nassau during the 1590s.566567 Maurice developed a system of linear formations (linear tactics), discipline, drill and volley fire based on classical Roman methods that made his army more efficient and his command and control more effective. He also developed a 43-step drill for firing the musket that was included in an illustrated weapons manual by Jacob de Gheyn II in 1607 (Wapenhandelinghe or Exerise of Arms). This became known as the Dutch drill. It was widely read and emulated in the rest of Europe. Adopting and perfecting the techniques pioneered by Maurice of Nassau several decades earlier, Gustavus Adolphus repeatedly proved his techniques by defeating the armies of Spain (1630–1632), an empire with resources fantastically larger than Sweden's during the Thirty Years' War.568569570571572573574575576577578579 Descartes served for a while in the army of the Dutch military leader Prince Maurice of Orange-Nassau, and developed a fascination for practical technology. Maurice' s military innovations had considerable influences on Descartes' system of philosophy.580
Norden bombsight (1920s)
The Norden bombsight was designed by Carl Norden, a Dutch engineer educated in Switzerland who emigrated to the U.S. in 1904. In 1920, he started work on the Norden bombsight for the United States Navy. The first bombsight was produced in 1927. It was essentially an analog computer, and bombardiers were trained in great secrecy on how to use it. The device was used to drop bombs accurately from an aircraft, supposedly accurate enough to hit a 100-foot circle from an altitude of 21,000 feet—but under actual combat situations, such an accuracy was never achieved.
Submarine snorkel (1939)
A submarine snorkel is a device that allows a submarine to operate submerged while still taking in air from above the surface. It was invented by the Dutchman J.J. Wichers shortly before World War II and copied by the Germans during the war for use by U-Boats. Its common military name is snort.
Goalkeeper CIWS (1975)
Goalkeeper is a close-in weapon system (CIWS) still in use as of 2013. It is autonomous and completely automatic short-range defense of ships against highly maneuverable missiles, aircraft and fast maneuvering surface vessels. Once activated the system automatically performs the entire process from surveillance and detection to destruction, including selection of priority targets.
Musical instruments
Metronome (1812)
(Figure)
A mechanical wind-up metronome in motion

The first (mechanical) metronome was invented by Dietrich Nikolaus Winkel in Amsterdam in 1812, but named (patented) after Johann Maelzel, who took the idea and popularized it.581582583584585586587
Fokker organ (1950)
Dutch musician-physicist Adriaan Fokker designed and had built keyboard instruments capable of playing microtonal scales via a generalized keyboard. The best-known of these is his 31-tone equal-tempered organ, which was installed in Teylers Museum in Haarlem in 1951. It is commonly called the Fokker organ.
Kraakdoos (1960s)
The Kraakdoos or Cracklebox is a custom-made battery-powered noise-making electronic device. It is a small box with six metal contacts on top, which when pressed by fingers generates unusual sounds and tones. The human body becomes a part of the circuit and determines the range of sounds possible – different players generate different results. The concept was first conceived by Michel Waisvisz and Geert Hamelberg in the 1960s, and developed further in the 1970s when Waisvisz joined the STEIM foundation in Amsterdam.
Moodswinger (2006)
The Moodswinger is a twelve-string electric zither with an additional third bridge designed by Dutch luthier Yuri Landman. The rod functions as the third bridge and divides the strings into two sections to add overtones, creating a multiphonic sound.
Springtime (guitar) (2008)
The Springtime is an experimental electric guitar with seven strings and three outputs. Landman created the instrument in 2008.
Philosophy and social sciences
Neostoicism (1580s)
Neostoicism was a syncretic philosophical movement, joining Stoicism and Christianity. Neostoicism was founded by Dutch-Flemish humanist Justus Lipsius, who in 1584 presented its rules, expounded in his book De Constantia (On Constancy), as a dialogue between Lipsius and his friend Charles de Langhe. The eleven years (1579-1590) that Lipsius spent in Leiden (Leiden University) were the period of his greatest productivity. It was during this time that he wrote a series of works designed to revive ancient Stoicism in a form that would be compatible with Christianity. The most famous of these is De Constantia (1584). Neostoicism had a direct influence on many seventeenth and eighteenth-century writers including Montesquieu, Bossuet, Francis Bacon, Joseph Hall, Francisco de Quevedo and Juan de Vera y Figueroa.
Modern rationalism (1630s–1670s)
The rise of modern rationalism in the Dutch Republic, had a profound influence on the 17th-century philosophy. Descartes is often considered to be the first of the modern rationalists. Descartes himself had lived in the Dutch Republic for some twenty years (1628–1649) and served for a while in the army of the Dutch military leader Prince Maurice of Orange-Nassau. The Dutch Republic was the first country in which Descartes' rationalistic philosophy (Cartesianism) succeeded in replacing Aristotelianism as the academic orthodoxy. Fritz Berolzheimer considers Hugo Grotius the Descartes of legal philosophy and notes Grotian rationalism's influence on the 17th-century jurisprudence: "As the Cartesian "cogito ergo sum" became the point of departure of rationalistic philosophy, so the establishment of government and law upon reason made Hugo Grotius the founder of an independent and purely rationalistic system of natural law." In the late 1650s Leiden was a place where one could study Cartesian philosophy. Sometime between 1656 and 1661 it appears that Spinoza did some formal study of philosophy at the University of Leiden. Philosophy of Spinoza (Spinozism) was an systematic answer to Descartes' famous dualist theory that the body and spirit are separate.
Modern pantheism (1670s)
Pantheism was popularized in the modern era as both a theology and philosophy based on the work of the 17th-century Dutch Jew philosopher Baruch Spinoza, whose Ethics was an answer to Descartes' famous dualist theory that the body and spirit are separate. Spinoza is regarded as the chief source of modern pantheism. Spinoza held that the two are the same, and this monism is a fundamental quality of his philosophy. He was described as a "God-intoxicated man," and used the word God to describe the unity of all substance. Although the term pantheism was not coined until after his death, Spinoza is regarded as its most celebrated advocate.
Early liberalism (foundations of liberalism) (1600s)
"European liberalism", Isaiah Berlin wrote, "wears the appearance of a single coherent movement, little altered during almost three centuries, founded upon relatively simple foundations, laid by Locke or Grotius or even Spinoza; stretching back to Erasmus and Montaigne..."588
As Bertrand Russell noted in his A History of Western Philosophy (1945): "Descartes lived in Holland for twenty years (1629-49), except for a few brief visits to France and one to England, all on business. It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of Holland in the seventeenth century, as the one country where there was freedom of speculation. Hobbes had to have his books printed there; Locke took refuge there during the five worst years of reaction in England before 1688; Bayle (of the Dictionary) found it necessary to live there; and Spinoza would hardly have been allowed to do his work in any other country."589 Russell described early liberalism in Europe: "Early liberalism was a product of England and Holland, and had certain well-marked characteristics. It stood for religious toleration; it was Protestant, but of a latitudinarian rather than of a fanatical kind; it regarded the wars of religion as silly..."590
As Russell Shorto states: “Liberalism has many meanings, but in its classical sense it is a philosophy based on individual freedom. History has long taught that our modern sensibility comes from the eighteenth century Enlightenment. In recent decades, historians have seen the Dutch Enlightenment of the seventeenth century as the root of the wider Enlightenment.591592593594 And at the center of this sits the city of Amsterdam.”595 Amsterdam, to Shorto, was not only the first city in Europe to develop the cultural and political foundations of what we now call liberalism—a society focused on the concerns and comforts of individuals, run by individuals acting together, and tolerant of religion, ethnicity, or other differences—but also an exporter of these beliefs to the rest of Europe and the New World.596597598599
Cartesianism (1630s–1640s)
If Descartes is still considered the father of modern philosophy, Dutch Republic can be called its cradle. Cartesianism is the name given to the philosophical doctrine of René Descartes. Descartes is often regarded as the first thinker to emphasize the use of reason to develop the natural sciences. Cartesianism had been controversial for several years before 1656. Descartes himself had lived in the Dutch Republic for some twenty years (1628–1649). Descartes served for a while in the army of the Dutch military leader Prince Maurice of Orange-Nassau, and developed a fascination for practical technology. In the 1630s, while staying in the Dutch city Deventer, Descartes worked on a text which became published as Traite' de l'Homme (1664). Throughout his writing, he used words such as clock, automaton, and self—moving machine as interchangeable constructs. He postulated an account of the physical world that was thoroughly materialistic. His mechanical view of nature replaced the organism model which had been popular since the Renaissance.600 His Discours de la méthode (1637) was originally published at Leiden, and his Principia philosophiae (1644) appeared from the presses at Amsterdam. In the 1630s and 1640s, Descartes's ideas gained a foothold at the Dutch universities.601
Spinozism (1660s–1670s)
Spinozism is the monist philosophical system of the Dutch-Jewish philosopher Baruch Spinoza which defines "God" as a singular self-subsistent substance, with both matter and thought as its attributes.
Affect (philosophy) (1670s)
Affect (affectus or adfectus in Latin) is a concept used in the philosophy of Spinoza and elaborated by Henri Bergson, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari that emphasizes bodily experience. The term "affect" is central to what became known as the "affective turn" in the humanities and social sciences.
Mandeville's paradox (1714)
Mandeville's paradox is named after Bernard Mandeville, who shows that actions which may be qualified as vicious with regard to individuals have benefits for society as a whole. This is already clear from the subtitle of his most famous work, The Fable of The Bees: ‘Private Vices, Publick Benefits’. He states that "Fraud, Luxury, and Pride must live; Whilst we the Benefits receive.") (The Fable of the Bees, ‘The Moral’).
Mathematical intuitionism (1907–1908)
Mathematical intuitionism was founded by the Dutch mathematician and philosopher Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer. In the philosophy of mathematics, intuitionism, or neointuitionism (opposed to preintuitionism), is an approach where mathematics is considered to be purely the result of the constructive mental activity of humans rather than the discovery of fundamental principles claimed to exist in an objective reality. That is, logic and mathematics are not considered analytic activities wherein deep properties of objective reality are revealed and applied, but are instead considered the application of internally consistent methods used to realize more complex mental constructs, regardless of their possible independent existence in an objective reality.
Religion and ethics
Devotio Moderna (1370s–1390s)
Devotio Moderna, or Modern Devotion, was a movement for religious reform, calling for apostolic renewal through the rediscovery of genuine pious practices such as humility, obedience and simplicity of life. It began in the late fourteenth-century, largely through the work of Gerard Groote, and flourished in the Low Countries and Germany in the fifteenth century, but came to an end with the Protestant Reformation. Gerard Groote, father of the movement, founded the Brethren of the Common Life; after his death, disciples established a house of Augustinian Canons at Windesheim (near Zwolle, Holland). These two communities became the principal exponents of Devotio Moderna.
Devotio Moderna, an undogmatic form of piety which some historians have argued helped to pave the road for the Protestant Reformation, is most known today through its influence on Thomas à Kempis, the author of The Imitation of Christ a book which proved highly influential for centuries.
Mennonites (1536)
The Mennonites are a Christian group based around the church communities of Anabaptist denominations named after Menno Simons (1496–1561) of Friesland. Through his writings, Simons articulated and formalized the teachings of earlier Swiss founders. The teachings of the Mennonites were founded on their belief in both the mission and ministry of Jesus Christ, which they held to with great conviction despite persecution by various Roman Catholic and Protestant states.
Dutch Reformed Church (1571)
The Dutch Reformed Church (in Dutch: Nederlandse Hervormde Kerk or NHK) was a Reformed Christian denomination. It developed during the Protestant Reformation, with its base in what became known as the Roman Catholic Church. It was founded in the 1570s and lasted until 2004, the year it merged with the Reformed Churches in the Netherlands and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in the Kingdom of the Netherlands to form the Protestant Church in the Netherlands.
Arminianism (1620)
Arminianism is based on the theological ideas of Dutch Reformed theologian Jacobus Arminius (1560–1609) and his historic supporters known as the Remonstrants. His teachings held to the five solae of the Reformation, but they were distinct from the particular teachings of Martin Luther, Zwingli, John Calvin, and other Protestant Reformers. Arminius (Jacobus Hermanszoon) was a student of Beza (successor of Calvin) at the Theological University of Geneva.
Many Christian denominations have been influenced by Arminian views on the will of man being freed by grace prior to regeneration, notably the Baptists in the 16th century, the Methodists in the 18th century and the Seventh-day Adventist Church. John Wesley was influenced by Arminianism. Also, Arminianism was an important influence in Methodism, which developed out of the Wesleyan movement. Some assert that Universalists and Unitarians in the 18th and 19th centuries were theologically linked with Arminianism.
First synagogue to be established in the (Americas) New World (1636)
The first synagogue of the New World, Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue, is founded in Recife, Brazil by the Dutch Jews. The Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue in Recife, Brazil, erected in 1636, was the first synagogue erected in the Americas. Its foundations have been recently discovered, and the 20th-century buildings on the site have been altered to resemble a 17th-century Dutch synagogue.602
Jansenism (1640s)
Jansenism was a Catholic theological movement, primarily in France, that emphasized original sin, human depravity, the necessity of divine grace, and predestination. The movement originated from the posthumously published work (Augustinus) of the Dutch theologian Cornelius Jansen, who died in 1638. It was first popularized by Jansen's friend Abbot Jean Duvergier de Hauranne, of Saint-Cyran-en-Brenne Abbey, and after Duvergier's death in 1643, was led by Antoine Arnauld. Through the 17th and into the 18th centuries, Jansenism was a distinct movement within the Catholic Church. The theological centre of the movement was the convent of Port-Royal Abbey, Paris, which was a haven for writers including Duvergier, Arnauld, Pierre Nicole, Blaise Pascal, and Jean Racine.
First Jewish congregation to be established in (the United States) North America (1654)
Congregation Shearith Israel, the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue in the City of New Amsterdam, was founded in 1654, the first Jewish congregation to be established in North America. Its founders were twenty-three Jews, mostly of Spanish and Portuguese origin, who had been living in Recife, Brazil. When the Portuguese defeated the Dutch for control of Recife, and brought with them the Inquisition, the Jews of that area left. Some returned to Amsterdam, where they had originated. Others went to places in the Caribbean such as St. Thomas, Jamaica, Surinam and Curaçao, where they founded sister Sephardic congregations. One group of twenty-three Jews, after a series of unexpected events, landed in New Amsterdam. After being initially rebuffed by anti-Semitic Governor Peter Stuyvesant, Jews were given official permission to settle in the colony in 1655. These pioneers fought for their rights and won permission to remain. This marks the founding of the Congregation Shearith Israel.603
Scientific instruments
Microscope (compound microscope) (1590)
 In 1590 the Dutchmen Hans and Zacharias Janssen (father and son) invented the first compound microscope.604605606607608609610 It would have a single glass lens of short focal length for the objective lens and another single glass lens for the eyepiece or ocular. A resident of Delft, Anton van Leeuwenhoek, effectively launched high-power microscopy using single-lens, simple microscopes. With these initial instruments he discovered the world of micro-organisms. Modern microscopes are far more sophisticated, with multiple lens components in both objective and eyepiece assemblies. These multi-component lenses are designed to reduce aberrations, particularly chromatic aberration and spherical aberration. In modern microscopes the mirror is replaced by a lamp unit providing stable, controllable illumination.
Telescope (optical telescope) (1608)
 Hans Lippershey created and disseminated the first practical telescope.611612613614615616617618 Crude telescopes and spyglasses may have been created much earlier, but Lippershey is believed to be the first to apply for a patent for his design (a few weeks before Jacob Metius) and make it available for general use in 1608. He failed to receive a patent but was rewarded by the Dutch government for his design. A description of Lippershey's instrument quickly reached Galileo Galilei, who created a working unit in 1609, with which he made the observations found in his Sidereus Nuncius of 1610.
A legend holds that Lippershey's children actually discovered the telescope while playing with flawed lenses in their father's workshop.
Lippershey crater, on the Moon, bears his name.619
Huygens eyepiece (first compound eyepiece) (1670s)
Huygens eyepieces consist of two plano-convex lenses with the plane sides towards the eye separated by an air gap. The lenses are called the eye lens and the field lens. The focal plane is located between the two lenses. It was invented by Christiaan Huygens in the late 1660s and was the first compound (multi-lens) eyepiece.620621622623624 Huygens discovered that two air spaced lenses can be used to make an eyepiece with zero transverse chromatic aberration. These eyepieces work well with the very long focal length telescopes (in Huygens day they were used with single element long focal length non-achromatic refracting telescopes, including very long focal length aerial telescopes). This optical design is now considered obsolete since with today's shorter focal length telescopes the eyepiece suffers from short eye relief, high image distortion, chromatic aberration, and a very narrow apparent field of view. Since these eyepieces are cheap to make they can often be found on inexpensive telescopes and microscopes.625 Because Huygens eyepieces do not contain cement to hold the lens elements, telescope users sometimes use these eyepieces in the role of "solar projection", i.e. projecting an image of the Sun onto a screen. Other cemented eyepieces can be damaged by the intense, concentrated light of the Sun.
Van Leeuwenhoek microscope (1670s)
 Van Leeuwenhoek created at least 25 microscopes, of differing types, of which only nine survive. His simple microscopes were made of silver or copper frames, holding hand-ground lenses. Those that have survived are capable of magnification up to 275 times. It is suspected that Van Leeuwenhoek possessed units that could magnify up to 500 times. Using his handcrafted microscopes, he was the first to observe and describe single-celled organisms, which he originally referred to as animalcules, and which now referred to as micro-organisms or microbes.626627628629630631632
Cycloidal pendulum (1673)
The cycloid pendulum was invented by Christiaan Huygens in 1673. Its purpose is to eliminate the lack of isochronism of the ordinary simple pendulum. This is achieved by making the mass point move on a cycloid instead of a circular arc.633634635636637638639
Pyrometer (1739)
The pyrometer, invented by Pieter van Musschenbroek, is a temperature measuring device. A simple type uses a thermocouple placed either in a furnace or on the item to be measured. The voltage output of the thermocouple is read from a meter. Many different types of thermocouple arev available, for measuring temperatures from −200 °C to above 1500 °C.640
Leyden jar (first practical capacitor) (1745–1746)
(Figure)
A battery of four water-filled Leyden jars, Museum Boerhaave, Leiden. The Leyden jar was the first device capable of storing an electric charge.

A Leyden jar, or Leiden jar, is a device that "stores" static electricity between two electrodes on the inside and outside of a glass jar. It was the original form of a capacitor (originally known as a "condenser"). It was invented independently by German cleric Ewald Georg von Kleist on 11 October 1745 and by Dutch scientist Pieter van Musschenbroek of Leiden (Leyden) in 1745–1746. The invention was named for the city. The Leyden jar was used to conduct many early experiments in electricity, and its discovery was of fundamental importance in the study of electricity. Previously, researchers had to resort to insulated conductors of large dimensions to store a charge. The Leyden jar provided a much more compact alternative. Like many early electrical devices, there was no particular use for the Leyden jar at first, other than to allow scientists to do a greater variety of electrical experiments. Benjamin Franklin, for example, used a Leyden jar to store electricity from lightning in his famous kite experiment in 1752. By doing so he proved that lightning was really electricity.
The idea for the Leyden jar was discovered independently by two parties: German scientist and jurist Ewald Georg von Kleist, and Dutchmen Pieter van Musschenbroek and Andreas Cunaeus. These scientists developed the Leyden jar while working under a theory of electricity that saw electricity as a fluid, and hoped to develop the jar to "capture" this fluid. In 1744 von Kleist lined a glass jar with silver foil, and charged the foil with a friction machine. Kleist was convinced that a substantial electric charge could be collected when he received a significant shock from the device. The effects of this "Kleistian jar" were independently discovered around the same time by Dutch scientists Pieter van Musschenbroek and Cunaeus at the University of Leiden. Van Musschenbroek communicated on it with the French scientific community where it was called the Leyden jar.641642643644645646647
Eisinga Planetarium (1781)
The Eisinga Planetarium (Royal Eise Eisinga Planetarium) was built by Eise Eisinga in his home in Franeker, Friesland. It took Eisinga seven years to build his planetarium, completing it in 1781. The orrery still exists and is the world's oldest working planetarium.
Kipp's apparatus (1860)
Kipp's apparatus, also called a Kipp generator, is designed for preparation of small volumes of gases. It was invented around 1860 by Dutch pharmacist Petrus Jacobus Kipp and widely used in chemical laboratories and for demonstrations in schools into the second half of the 20th century.
Phase contrast microscope (1933)
 In optical microscopy many objects such as cell parts in protozoans, bacteria and sperm tails are essentially fully transparent unless stained (and therefore killed). The difference in densities and composition within these objects however often gives rise to changes in the phase of light passing through them, hence they are sometimes called "phase objects". Using the phase-contrast technique makes these structures visible and allows the study of living specimens. This phase contrast technique proved to be such an advancement in microscopy that Dutch physicist Frits Zernike was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1953.
Magnetic horn (1961)
The magnetic horn (also known as the Van der Meer horn) is a high-current, pulsed focusing device, invented by the Dutch physicist Simon van der Meer at CERN. It selects pions and focuses them into a sharp beam. Its original application was in the context of neutrino physics, where beams of pions have to be tightly focused. When the pions then decay into muons and neutrinos or antineutrinos, an equally well-focused neutrino beam is obtained. The muons were stopped in a wall of 3000 tons of iron and 1000 tons of concrete, leaving the neutrinos or antineutrinos to reach the Gargamelle bubble chamber.
Sports and games
Kolf (forerunner of modern golf) (1200s)
(Figure)
Kolf players on ice, Hendrick Avercamp's painting (1625)

A golf-like game (kolf in Dutch) is recorded as taking place on 26 February 1297, in a city called Loenen aan de Vecht, where the Dutch played a game with a stick and leather ball. The winner was whomever hit the ball with the least number of strokes into a target several hundred yards away. Some scholars argue that this game of putting a small ball in a hole in the ground using clubs was also played in 17th-century Netherlands and that this predates the game in Scotland.
Figure skating (prototype) (1400s–1600s)
(Figure)
St. Lidwina of Schiedam's fall when she was ice skating, wood drawing from the 1498 edition of John Brugman's Vita of Lidwina.

The Dutch played a significant role in the history of ice skating (including speed skating and figure skating). The first feature of ice skating in a work of art was made in the 15th century. The picture, depicted Saint Lidwina, patron saint of ice skaters, falling on the ice. Another important aspect is a man seen in the background, who is skating on one leg. This means that his skates must have had sharp edges similar to those found on modern ice skates. Until the 17th century, ice skating was mostly used for transportation. Some of the Stuarts (including King Charles II of England) who had fled to the Dutch Republic during the Cromwell Royal reign later returned to Britain, bringing with them the new sport. Upon his return to England in 1658, the King brought two innovations in ice skating – a pair of iron skates and the Dutch roll. The Dutch roll was the first form of a gliding or skating motion made possible by the iron skate's two edges. However, speed skating was the focus of the Dutch, while the English developed modern figure skating.
Speed skating (1400s–1600s)
(Figure)
Speed skating match on the Zuiderzee near Hindeloopen in 1828

Speed skating, which had developed in the Netherlands in the 17th century, was given a boost by the innovations in skate construction. Speed skating, or speedskating, is a competitive form of skating in which skaters race each other over a certain distance. Types of speed skating are long track speed skating, short track speed skating and marathon speed skating. In the modern Olympic Games, long-track speed skating is usually referred to as just "speed skating", while short-track speed skating is known as "short track".
Yachting (sport sailing) (1600s)
Sailing, also known as yachting, is a sport in which competitors race from point to point, or around a race course, in sail-powered boats. Yachting refers to recreational sailing or boating, the specific act of sailing or using other water vessels for sporting purposes. The invention of sailing is prehistoric, but the racing of sailing boats is believed to have started in the Netherlands some time in the 17th century. While living in the Dutch Republic, King Charles II of England fell in love with sailing and in 1660, took home the Dutch gifted 66-foot yacht he called Mary. The sport's popularity spread across the British Isles. The world's first yacht club was founded in Cork, Ireland in 1720.
International Skating Union (1892)
The International Skating Union (ISU) is the international governing body for competitive ice skating disciplines, including figure skating, synchronized skating, speed skating, and short track speed skating. It was founded in Scheveningen, Netherlands, in 1892, making it the oldest governing international winter sport federation648 and one of the oldest international sport federations.
The first official World Championships in Speed Skating (open to men only) directly under the auspices of the ISU were held in Amsterdam in 1893.
Korfball (1902)
Korfball (Korfbal in Dutch) is a mixed gender team sport, with similarities to netball and basketball. A team consists of eight players; four female and four male. A team also includes a coach. It was founded in the Netherlands in 1902 by Nico Broekhuysen.
Cruyff Turn (1974)
The Cruijff Turn (also known as Cruyff Turn), is a famous dribbling trick in football, was perfected by the Dutch football player Johan Cruijff for whom the evasive trick was named. To make this move, the player first looks to pass or cross the ball. However, instead of kicking it, he drags the ball behind his planted foot with the inside of his other foot, turns through 180 degrees and accelerates away. The trick was famously employed by Cruijff in the 1974 FIFA World Cup, first seen in the Dutch match against Sweden and soon widely copied.
Total Football (1970s)
The foundations for Total Football (Dutch: totaalvoetbal) were laid by Englishman Jack Reynolds who was the manager of AFC Ajax. Rinus Michels, who played under Reynolds, later became manager of Ajax and refined the concept into what is known today as "Total Football" (Totaalvoetbal in Dutch language), using it in his training for the Ajax Amsterdam squad and the Netherlands national football team in the 1970s.649650651652653654655 It was further refined by Stefan Kovacs after Michels left for FC Barcelona. Johan Cruyff was the system's most famous exponent. Due to Cruyff's style of play, he is still referred to as the total footballer.656 Its cornerstone was a focus on positional interchange. The invention of totaalvoetbal helped lay the foundations for the significant successes of Dutch football at both club and international level in the 1970s. During that decade, the Dutch football rose from almost total obscurity to become a powerhouse in world football.657 In an interview published in the 50th anniversary issue of World Soccer magazine, the captain of the Brazilian team that won the 1970 FIFA World Cup, Carlos Alberto, went on to say: “The only team I’ve seen that did things differently was Holland at the 1974 World Cup in Germany. Since then everything looks more or less the same to me…. Their ‘carousel’ style of play was amazing to watch and marvellous for the game.”658
Tiki-taka (1990s)
FC Barcelona and the Spanish national football team play a style of football known as Tiki-taka that has its roots in Total Football. Johan Cruyff founded Tiki-taka (commonly spelled tiqui-taca in Spanish) during his time as manager of FC Barcelona (1988–1996).659660661 The style was successfully adopted by the all-conquering Spain national football team (2008–2012) and Josep Guardiola's Barcelona team (2009–2011).662663664665666 Tiki-taka style differs from Total Football in that it focuses on ball movement rather than positional interchange.
Technology and engineering
First pound lock in Europe (1373)
  The Netherlands revived the construction of canals during the 13th–14th century that had generally been discontinued since the fall of the Roman Empire. They also contributed in the development of canal construction technology, such as introducing the first flash locks in Europe. The first pound lock in Europe was built by the Dutch in 1373 at Vreeswijk, where a canal from Utrecht joins the river Lek.667
Thermostat (automatic temperature regulator) (1620s)
(Figure)
Bimetallic thermostat for buildings. In the 1620s, Cornelius Drebbel invented a mercury thermostat to regulate the temperature of a chicken incubator. This is one of the first recorded modern feedback-controlled devices.

Around the 1620s, Cornelis Drebbel developed an automatic temperature control system for a furnace, motivated by his belief that base metals could be turned to gold by holding them at a precise constant temperature for long periods of time. He also used this temperature regulator in an incubator for hatching chickens.668669670671672673
Feedback control system (1620s)
Feedback control has been used for centuries to regulate engineered systems. In the 17th century, Drebbel invented one of the earliest devices to use feedback, an chicken incubator that used a damper controlled by a thermostat to maintain a constant temperature.
Magic lantern (first practical image projector; the forerunner of modern slide projector) (1659)
(Figure)
Magic lantern at the Wymondham Museum. The magic lantern (Laterna magica or Lanterna magica) was the forerunner of the modern slide projector.

The magic lantern is an optical device, an early type of image projector developed in the 17th century. People have been projecting images using concave mirrors and pin-hole cameras (camera obscura) since Roman times. But glass lens technology wasn't sufficiently developed to make advanced optical devices (such as telescope and microscope) until the 17th century. With pinhole cameras and camera obscura it was only possible to project an image of actual scene, such as an image of the sun, on a surface. The magic lantern on the other hand could project a painted image on a surface, and marks the point where cameras and projectors became two different kinds of devices. There has been some debate about who the original inventor of the magic lantern is, but the most widely accepted theory is that Christiaan Huygens developed the original device in the late 1650s.674675676677678679680 However, other sources give credit to the German priest Athanasius Kircher. He describes a device such as the magic lantern in his book Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae.681682 Huygens is credited because of his major innovation in lantern technology, which was the replacement of images etched on mirrors from earlier lanterns such as Kircher’s with images painted on glass. This is what paved the way for the use of colour and for double-layered slide projections (generally used to simulate movement).
The first allusion to a 'magic lantern' is by Huygens in the 1650s and he is generally credited with inventing it—though he didn't want to admit it, considering it frivolous. Huygens was the first to describe a fully functioning magic lantern, one he made, and wrote about it in a work in 1659. Huygens magic lantern has been described as the predecessor of today’s slide projector and the forerunner of the motion picture projector. Images were hand painted onto the glass slide until the mid-19th century when photographic slides were employed. Huygens introduced this curiosity to the Danish mathematician Thomas Walgenstein who realized its commercial value for entertainment and traveled through Europe—mostly France and Italy—demonstrating his machine to foreign princes and selling them replicas for their own amusement. The forerunner of the modern slide projector as well as moving pictures, magic lanterns retained their popularity for centuries and were also the first optical toy to be used for family entertainment in the home.
Fire hose (1673)
In Amsterdam, the Superintendent of the Fire Brigade, Jan van der Heyden, and his son Nicholaas took firefighting to its next step with the fashioning of the first fire hose in 1673.
Gunpowder engine (first practical rudimentary internal combustion piston engine) (1678-80)
 A gunpowder engine, also known as an explosion engine or Huygens' engine, is a type of internal combustion engine using gunpowder as its fuel. It was considered essentially as the first rudimentary internal combustion piston engine.683684685686687688689 The concept was first explored during the 1600s, most notably by the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens.690691692693694 In 1678 he outlined a gunpowder engine consisting of a vertical tube containing a piston. Gunpowder was inserted into the tube and lit through a small hole at the base, like a cannon. The expanding gasses would drive the piston up the tube until the reached a point near the top. Here, the piston uncovered holes in the tube that allowed any remaining hot gasses to escape. The weight of the piston and the vacuum formed by the cooling gasses in the now-closed cylinder drew the piston back into the tube, lifting a test mass to provide power.695 According to sources, a single example of this sort of engine was built in 1678 or 79 using a cannon as the cylinder. The cylinder was held down to a base where the gunpowder sat, making it a breech loading design. The gasses escaped via two leather tubes attached at the top of the barrel. When the piston reached them the gasses blew the tubes open, and when the pressure fell, gravity pulled the leather down causing the tubes droop to the side of the cylinder, sealing the holes.696 Huygens’ presented a paper on his invention in 1680, A New Motive Power by Means of Gunpowder and Air.697 By 1682, the device had successfully shown that a dram (1/16th of an ounce) of gunpowder, in a cylinder seven or eight feet high and fifteen or eighteen inches in diameter, could raise seven or eight boys (or about 1,100 pounds) into the air, who held the end of the rope.698
Hollander beater (1680s)
The Hollander beater is a machine developed by the Dutch in 1680 to produce pulp from cellulose-containing plant fibers. It replaced stamp mills for preparing pulp because the Hollander could produce in one day the same quantity of pulp that a stamp mill could produce in eight.
Gas lighting (1783)
In 1783, Maastricht-born chemist Jan Pieter Minckelers used coal gas for lighting and developed the first form of gas lighting.
Meat slicer (1898)
A meat slicer, also called a slicing machine, deli slicer or simply a slicer, is a tool used in butcher shops and delicatessens to slice meats and cheeses. The first meat slicer was invented by Wilhelm van Berkel (Wilhelmus Adrianus van Berkel) in Rotterdam in 1898.699700701 Older models of meat slicer may be operated by crank, while newer ones generally use an electric motor.702
Pentode (1926)
A pentode is an electronic device having five active electrodes. The term most commonly applies to a three-grid vacuum tube (thermionic valve), which was invented by the Dutchman Bernhard D.H. Tellegen in 1926.703704705706
Philishave (1939)
Philishave was the brand name for electric shavers manufactured by the Philips Domestic Appliances and Personal Care unit of Philips (in the US, the Norelco name is used). The Philishave shaver was invented by Philips engineer Alexandre Horowitz, who used rotating cutters instead of the reciprocating cutters that had been used in previous electric shavers.
Gyrator (1948)
A gyrator is a passive, linear, lossless, two-port electrical network element invented by Tellegen as a hypothetical fifth linear element after the resistor, capacitor, inductor and ideal transformer.707708709710
Traffic enforcement camera (1958)
Dutch company Gatsometer BV, founded by the 1950s rally driver Maurice Gatsonides, invented the first traffic enforcement camera. Gatsonides wished to better monitor his speed around the corners of a race track and came up with the device in order to improve his time around the circuit.711 The company developed the first radar for use with road traffic and is the world's largest supplier of speed-monitoring camera systems. Because of this, in some countries speed cameras are sometimes referred to as "Gatsos". They are also sometimes referred to as "photo radar", even though many of them do not use radar.
The first systems introduced in the late 1960s used film cameras, replaced by digital cameras beginning in the late 1990s.
Variomatic (1958)
Variomatic is the stepless, fully automatic transmission of the Dutch car manufacturer DAF, originally developed by Hub van Doorne. The Variomatic was introduced in 1958 (DAF 600), the first automatic gear box made in the Netherlands. It continues in use in motorscooters. Variomatic was the first commercially successful continuously variable transmissions (CVT).
Red light camera (1965)
A Red light camera is a traffic enforcement camera that captures an image of a vehicle that enters an intersection against a red traffic light. By automatically photographing such vehicles, the camera produces evidence that assists authorities in their enforcement of traffic laws. The first red light camera system was introduced in 1965, using tubes stretched across the road to detect the violation and trigger the camera. One of the first developers of these red light camera systems was Dutch company Gatsometer BV.
Stochastic cooling (1968)
Stochastic cooling is a form of particle beam cooling. It is used in some particle accelerators and storage rings to control the emission of particle beams. This process uses the electrical signals that the individual charged particles generate in a feedback loop to reduce the tendency of individual particles to move away from other particles in the beam. This technique was invented and applied at the Intersecting Storage Rings, and later the Super Proton Synchrotron, at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland by Dutch physicist Simon van der Meer. By increasing the particle density to close to the required energy, this technique improved the beam quality and, inter alia, brought the discovery of W and Z bosons within reach.
Clap skate (1980)
The clap skate (also called clapskates, slap skates, slapskates) is a type of ice skate used in speed skating. Clap skates were developed at the Faculty of Human Movement Sciences of the Vrije Universiteit of Amsterdam, led by Gerrit Jan van Ingen Schenau, although the idea is much older. van Ingen Schenau, who started work on a hinged speed skate in 1979, created his first prototype in 1980 and finished his PhD thesis on the subject in 1981 using the premise that a skater would benefit from extended movement keeping the blade on the ice, allowing the calf muscles more time to exert force.
Transportation
Ice skate improvements (1300s–1400s)
(Figure)
During the 13th and 14th century, wooden skates with metal blades were introduced by Dutch. These ice skates were made of steel, with sharpened edges on the bottom to aid movement. The construction of modern ice skates has stayed largely the same since then.

In the 14th century, the Dutch started using wooden platform skates with flat iron bottom runners. The skates were attached to the skater's shoes with leather straps and poles were used to propel the skater. Around 1500, the Dutch shifted to a narrow metal double edged blade, so the skater could now push and glide with his feet, eliminating the need for a pole.
Herring Buss (1400s)
A herring buss () was a type of seagoing fishing vessel, used by Dutch and Flemish herring fishermen in the 15th through early 19th centuries. The Buis was first adapted for use as a fishing vessel in the Netherlands, after the invention of gibbing made it possible to preserve herring at sea.712 This made longer voyages feasible, and hence enabled Dutch fishermen to follow the herring shoals far from the coasts. The first herring buss was probably built in Hoorn around 1415. The last one was built in Vlaardingen in 1841.
Yacht (1580s)
(Figure)
An 18th-century Dutch yacht owned by the Rotterdam chapter of the Dutch East India Company. This yacht has the gaff rig and leeboards of the period.

Originally defined as a light, fast sailing vessel used by the Dutch navy to pursue pirates and other transgressors around and into the shallow waters of the Low Countries. Later, yachts came to be perceived as luxury, or recreational vessels.
Fluyt (1500s)
(Figure)
Dutch fluyt, 1677

Fluyt, a type of sailing vessel originally designed as a dedicated cargo vessel. Originating from the Netherlands in the 16th century, the vessel was designed to facilitate transoceanic delivery with the maximum of space and crew efficiency. The inexpensive ship could be built in large numbers. This ship class was credited with enhancing Dutch competitiveness in international trade and was widely employed by the Dutch East India Company in the 17th and 18th centuries. The fluyt was a significant factor in the 17th century rise of the Dutch seaborne empire.713714715716717718
Wind-powered sawmill (1592)
(Figure)
De Salamander, a wind-driven sawmill in Leidschendam

Cornelis Corneliszoon was the inventor of the wind-powered sawmill.719720721722723 Prior to the invention of sawmills, boards were rived and planed, or more often sawn by two men with a whipsaw using saddleblocks to hold the log and a pit for the pitman who worked below and got the benefit of sawdust in his eyes. Sawing was slow and required strong and durable sawmen. The topsawer had to be the stronger of the two because the saw was pulled in turn by each man, and the lower had the advantage of gravity. The topsawyer also had to guide the saw to produce a plank of even thickness. This was often done by following a chalkline.
Early sawmills adapted the whipsaw to mechanical power, generally driven by a water wheel to speed up the process. The circular motion of the wheel was changed to back-and-forth motion of the saw blade by a pitman thus introducing a term used in many mechanical applications. A pitman is similar to a crankshaft used in reverse. A crankshaft converts back-and-forth motion to circular motion.
Generally only the saw was powered and the logs had to be loaded and moved by hand. An early improvement was the development of a movable carriage, also water powered, to steadily advance the log through the saw blade.
Schooner (prototype) (1600s)
A schooner is a type of sailing vessel with fore-and-aft sails on two or more masts, the foremast being no taller than the rear mast(s). Such vessels were first used by the Dutch in the 16th or 17th century (but may not have been called that at the time). Schooners first evolved from a variety of small two-masted gaff-rigged vessels used in the coast and estuaries of the Netherlands in the late 1600s. Most were working craft but some pleasure yachts with schooner rigs were built for wealthy merchants and Dutch nobility. Following arrival of the Dutch-born prince William III the Orange on the British throne, the British Royal Navy built a Royal yacht with a schooner rig in 1695, HMS Royal Transport. This vessel, captured in a detailed Admiralty model, is the earliest fully documented schooner.724 Royal Transport was quickly noted for its speed and ease of handling and mercantile vessels soon adopted the rig in Europe and in European colonies in North America. Schooners were immediately popular with colonial traders and fishermen in North America with the first documented reference to a schooner in America appearing in Boston port records in 1716.725 North American shipbuilders quickly developed a variety of schooner forms for trading, fishing and privateering. According to the language scholar Walter William Skeat, the term schooner comes from scoon, while the sch spelling comes from the later adoption of the Dutch spelling ("schoener"). Another study suggests that a Dutch expression praising ornate schooner yachts in the 1600s, "een schoone Schip", may have led to the term "schooner" being used by English speakers to describe the early versions of the schooner rig as it evolved in England and America.726
Land yacht (1600)
(Figure)
Land yachts designed by Simon Stevin in the year 1600

The Wind chariot or land yacht (Zeilwagen) was designed by Flemish-born mathematician & engineer Simon Stevin for Prince Maurice of Orange. Land yacht. It offered a carriage with sails, of which a little model was preserved in Scheveningen until 2012. Around the year 1600, Stevin, Maurice and twenty-six others used it on the beach between Scheveningen and Petten. The carriage was propelled solely by force of wind, and traveled faster than horse-drawn vehicles.
First verified practical (navigable) submarine (1620)
(Figure)
The Drebbel, the first navigable submarine.

Cornelius Drebbel was the inventor of the first navigable submarine,727728729730 while working for the British Royal Navy. Using William Bourne's design from 1578, he manufactured a steerable submarine with a leather-covered wooden frame. Between 1620 and 1624 Drebbel successfully built and tested two more, successively larger vessels. The third model had 6 oars and could carry 16 passengers. This model was demonstrated to King James I and several thousand Londoners. The submarine stayed submerged for three hours and could travel from Westminster to Greenwich and back, cruising at a depth of from . This submarine was tested many times in the Thames, but never used in battle.731732733734735736737738
In 2002, the British boatbuilder Mark Edwards built a wooden submarine based on the original 17th-century version by Drebbel. This was shown in the BBC TV programme Building the Impossible in November 2002. It is a scale working model of the original and was built using tools and construction methods common in 17th century boat building and was successfully tested under water with two rowers at Dorney Lake, diving beneath the surface and being rowed underwater for 10 minutes. Legal considerations prevented its use on the River Thames itself.
First ever car equipped with a six-cylinder engine, along with four-wheel drive (1903)
(Figure)
The 1903 Spyker 60 HP racing car was the world's first car with a six-cylinder engine as well as permanent four-wheel drive and four-wheel brakes.

Spyker is credited with building and racing the first ever four-wheel racing car in 1903. The first four-wheel-drive car, as well as hill-climb racer, with internal combustion engine, the Spyker 60 H.P., was presented in 1903 by Dutch brothers Jacobus and Hendrik-Jan Spijker of Amsterdam.739740741742743744745 The two-seat sports car, which was also the first ever car equipped with a six-cylinder engine, is now an exhibit in the Louwman Collection (the former Nationaal Automobiel Museum) at the Hague in The Netherlands.746747748749750
Others
First practical national anthem (Het Wilhelmus) (1574)
Wilhelmus van Nassouwe (Het Wilhelmus) is the national anthem of the Netherlands and is the oldest national anthem in the world. The anthem was first written down in 1574 (during the Dutch Revolt). The Japanese anthem, Kimigayo, has the oldest (9th century) lyrics, but a melody was only added in the late 19th century, making it a poem rather than an anthem for most of its lifespan. Although the Wilhelmus was not officially recognised as the Dutch national anthem until 1932, it has always been popular with parts of the Dutch population and resurfaced on several occasions in the course of Dutch history before gaining its present status.
Discoveries
Archaeology
Java Man (Homo erectus erectus) (1891)
 Java Man (Homo erectus erectus) is the name given to hominid fossils discovered in 1891 at Trinil – Ngawi Regency on the banks of the Solo River in East Java, Indonesia, one of the first known specimens of Homo erectus. Its discoverer, Dutch paleontologist Eugène Dubois, gave it the scientific name Pithecanthropus erectus, a name derived from Greek and Latin roots meaning upright ape-man.
Astronomy
Columba (constellation) (1592)
Columba is a small, faint constellation named in the late sixteenth century. Its name is Latin for dove. It is located just south of Canis Major and Lepus. Columba was named by Dutch astronomer Petrus Plancius in 1592 in order to differentiate the 'unformed stars' of the large constellation Canis Major. Plancius first depicted Columba on the small celestial planispheres of his large wall map of 1592. It is also shown on his smaller world map of 1594 and on early Dutch celestial globes.
Novaya Zemlya effect (1597)
The first person to record the Novaya Zemlya effect was Gerrit de Veer, a member of Willem Barentsz' ill-fated third expedition into the polar region. Novaya Zemlya, the archipelago where de Veer first observed the phenomenon, lends its name to the effect.
12 southern constellations (1597–1598)
Plancius defined 12 constellations created by Plancius from the observations of Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman.751752753754755756757
Apus is a faint constellation in the southern sky, first defined in the late 16th century. Its name means "no feet" in Greek, and it represents a bird-of-paradise (once believed to lack feet). It first appeared on a 35 cm diameter celestial globe published in 1597 (or 1598) in Amsterdam by Plancius with Jodocus Hondius.
Chamaeleon is named after the chameleon, a kind of lizard.
Dorado is now one of the 88 modern constellations. Dorado has been represented historically as a dolphinfish and a swordfish.
Grus is Latin for the crane, a species of bird. The stars that form Grus were originally considered part of Piscis Austrinus (the southern fish).
Hydrus' name means "male water snake".
Indus represents an Indian, a word that could refer at the time to any native of Asia or the Americas.
Musca is one of the minor southern constellations. It first appeared on a 35-cm diameter celestial globe published in 1597 (or 1598) in Amsterdam by Plancius and Hondius. The first depiction of this constellation in a celestial atlas was in Johann Bayer's Uranometria of 1603.
Pavo is Latin for peacock.
Phoenix is a minor southern constellation, named after the mythical phoenix. It was the largest of the twelve.
Triangulum Australe is Latin for "the southern triangle", which distinguishes it from Triangulum in the northern sky and is derived from the almost equilateral pattern of its three brightest stars. It was first depicted on a celestial globe as Triangulus Antarcticus by Plancius in 1589, and later with more accuracy and its current name by Johann Bayer in his 1603 Uranometria.
Tucana is Latin for the toucan, a South American bird.
Volans represents a flying fish; its name is a shortened form of its original name, Piscis Volans.
Camelopardalis (constellation) (1612–1613)
Camelopardalis was created by Plancius in 1613 to represent the animal Rebecca rode to marry Isaac in the Bible. One year later, Jakob Bartsch featured it in his atlas. Johannes Hevelius gave it the official name of "Camelopardus" or "Camelopardalis" because he saw the constellation's many faint stars as the spots of a giraffe.
Monoceros (constellation) (1612–1613)
Monoceros is a relatively modern creation. Its first certain appearance was on a globe created by Plancius in 1612 or 1613. It was later charted by Bartsch as Unicornus in his 1624 star chart.
Rings of Saturn (1655)
(Figure)
Christiaan Huygens was the first person to describe Saturn's rings as a disk surrounding Saturn

In 1655, Huygens became the first person to suggest that Saturn was surrounded by a ring, after Galileo's much less advanced telescope had failed to show rings. Galileo had reported the anomaly as possibly 3 planets instead of one.
Titan (Saturn's moon) (1655)
(Figure)
Titan was the first known moon of Saturn, discovered in 1655 by Christiaan Huygens.

In 1655, using a 50 power refracting telescope that he designed himself, Huygens discovered the first of Saturn's moons, Titan.
Kapteyn's Star (1897)
Kapteyn's Star is a class M1 red dwarf about 12.76 light years from Earth in the southern constellation Pictor, and the closest halo star to the Solar System. With a magnitude of nearly 9 it is visible through binoculars or a telescope. It had the highest proper motion of any star known until the discovery of Barnard's Star in 1916. Attention was first drawn to what is now known as Kapteyn's Star by the Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn, in 1897.
Discovery of evidence for galactic rotation (1904)
In 1904, studying the proper motions of stars, Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn reported that these were not random, as it was believed in that time; stars could be divided into two streams, moving in nearly opposite directions. It was later realized that Kapteyn's data had been the first evidence of the rotation of our Galaxy, which ultimately led to the finding of galactic rotation by Bertil Lindblad and Jan Oort.
Galactic halo (1924)
In 1924, Dutch astronomer Jan Oort discovered the galactic halo, a group of stars orbiting the Milky Way but outside the main disk.
Oort constants (1927)
The Oort constants (discovered by Jan Oort) 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are empirically derived parameters that characterize the local rotational properties of the Milky Way.
Evidence of dark matter (1932)
In 1932, Dutch astronomer Jan Oort became the first person to discover evidence of dark matter. Oort proposed the substance after measuring the motions of nearby stars in the Milky Way relative to the galactic plane. He found that the mass of the galactic plane must be more than the mass of the material that can be seen. A year later (1933), Fritz Zwicky examined the dynamics of clusters of galaxies and found their movements similarly perplexing.
Discovery of methane in the atmosphere of Titan (1944)
The first formal proof of the existence of an atmosphere around Titan came in 1944, when Gerald Kuiper observed Titan with the new McDonald  telescope and discovered spectral signatures on Titan at wavelengths longer than 0.6 μm (micrometers), among which he identified two absorption bands of methane at 6190 and 7250 Å (Kuiper1944). This discovery was significant not only because it requires a dense atmosphere with a significant fraction of methane, but also because the atmosphere needs to be chemically evolved, since methane requires hydrogen in the presence of carbon, and molecular and atomic hydrogen would have escaped from Titan's weak gravitational field since the formation of the solar system.758
Discovery of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere of Mars (1947)
Using infrared spectrometry, in 1947 the Dutch-American astronomer Gerard Kuiper detected carbon dioxide in the Martian atmosphere, a discovery of biological significance because it is a principal gas in the process of photosynthesis (see also: History of Mars observation). He was able to estimate that the amount of carbon dioxide over a given area of the surface is double that on the Earth.
Miranda (Uranus's moon) (1948)
Miranda is the smallest and innermost of Uranus's five major moons. It was discovered by Gerard Kuiper on 16 February 1948 at McDonald Observatory.
Nereid (Neptune's moon) (1949)
Nereid, also known as Neptune II, is the third-largest moon of Neptune and was its second moon to be discovered, on 1 May 1949, by Gerard Kuiper, on photographic plates taken with the 82-inch telescope at McDonald Observatory.
Oort cloud (1950)
The Oort cloud or Öpik–Oort cloud, named after Dutch astronomer Jan Oort and Estonian astronomer Ernst Öpik, is a spherical cloud of predominantly icy planetesimals believed to surround the Sun at a distance of up to . Further evidence for the existence of the Kuiper belt emerged from the study of comets. That comets have finite lifespans has been known for some time. As they approach the Sun, its heat causes their volatile surfaces to sublimate into space, gradually evaporating them. In order for comets to continue to be visible over the age of the Solar System, they must be replenished frequently.759 One such area of replenishment is the Oort cloud, a spherical swarm of comets extending beyond 50,000 AU from the Sun first hypothesised by Dutch astronomer Jan Oort in 1950.760 The Oort cloud is believed to be the point of origin of long-period comets, which are those, like Hale–Bopp, with orbits lasting thousands of years.
Kuiper belt (1951)
The Kuiper belt was named after Dutch-American astronomer Gerard Kuiper, regarded by many as the father of modern planetary science, though his role in hypothesising it has been heavily contested. In 1951, he proposed the existence of what is now called the Kuiper Belt, a disk-shaped region of minor planets outside the orbit of Neptune, which also is a source of short-period comets.
Biology
Foundations of modern reproductive biology (1660s –1670s)
In the 1660s and 1670s the Dutch Republic-based scientists (in particular Leiden University-based Jan Swammerdam and Nicolas Steno, and Delft-based Regnier de Graaf and Anton van Leeuwenhoek) made key discoveries about animal and human reproduction. Their research and discoveries contributed greatly to the modern understanding of the female mammalian reproductive system.761 Many authors see Regnier de Graaf as the founder of modern reproductive biology (Setchell, 1974).762 This is due essentially to his use of convergent scientific methods: meticulous dissections, clinical observations and critical analysis of the available literature (Ankumet al., 1996).763
Function of the Fallopian tubes (1660s)
Dutch physician & anatomist Regnier de Graaf may have been the first to understand the reproductive function of the Fallopian tubes. He described the hydrosalpinx, linking its development to female infertility. de Graaf recognized pathologic conditions of the tubes. He was aware of tubal pregnancies, and he surmised that the mammalian egg traveled from the ovary to the uterus through the tube.
Development of ovarian follicles (1672)
In his De Mulierum Organis Generatione Inservientibus (1672), de Graaf provided the first thorough description of the female gonad and established that it produced the ovum. De Graaf used the terminology vesicle or egg (ovum) for what now called the ovarian follicle. Because the fluid-filled ovarian vesicles had been observed previously by others, including Andreas Vesalius and Falloppio, De Graaf did not claim their discovery. He noted that he was not the first to describe them, but to describe their development. De Graaf was the first to observe changes in the ovary before and after mating and describe the corpus luteum. From the observation of pregnancy in rabbits, he concluded that the follicle contained the oocyte. The mature stage of the ovarian follicle is called the Graafian follicle in his honour, although others, including Fallopius, had noticed it previously but failed to recognize its reproductive significance.
Foundations of microbiology (discovery of microorganisms) (1670s)
 Antonie van Leeuwenhoek is often considered to be the father of microbiology. Robert Hooke is cited as the first to record microscopic observation of the fruiting bodies of molds, in 1665. However, the first observation of microbes using a microscope is generally credited to van Leeuwenhoek. In the 1670s, he observed and researched bacteria and other microorganisms, using a single-lens microscope of his own design.764765766767768769770771772773774
In 1981 the British microscopist Brian J. Ford found that Leeuwenhoek's original specimens had survived in the collections of the Royal Society of London.775 They were found to be of high quality, and were all well preserved. Ford carried out observations with a range of microscopes, adding to our knowledge of Leeuwenhoek's work.776
Photosynthesis (1779)
 Photosynthesis is a fundamental biochemical process in which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight to chemical energy. The process was discovered by Jan Ingenhousz in 1779.777778779780781782783784785786787 The chemical energy is used to drive reactions such as the formation of sugars or the fixation of nitrogen into amino acids, the building blocks for protein synthesis. Ultimately, nearly all living things depend on energy produced from photosynthesis. It is also responsible for producing the oxygen that makes animal life possible. Organisms that produce energy through photosynthesis are called photoautotrophs. Plants are the most visible representatives of photoautotrophs, but bacteria and algae also employ the process.
Plant respiration (1779)
Plant respiration was also discovered by Ingenhousz in 1779.
Foundations of virology (1898)
Martinus Beijerinck is considered one of the founders of virology. In 1898, he published results on his filtration experiments, demonstrating that tobacco mosaic disease is caused by an infectious agent smaller than a bacterium. His results were in accordance with similar observations made by Dmitri Ivanovsky in 1892. Like Ivanovsky and Adolf Mayer, predecessor at Wageningen, Beijerinck could not culture the filterable infectious agent. He concluded that the agent can replicate and multiply in living plants. He named the new pathogen virus to indicate its non-bacterial nature. This discovery is considered to be the beginning of virology.
Chemistry of photosynthesis (1931)
In 1931, Cornelis van Niel made key discoveries explaining the chemistry of photosynthesis. By studying purple sulfur bacteria and green sulfur bacteria, he was the first scientist to demonstrate that photosynthesis is a light-dependent redox reaction, in which hydrogen reduces carbon dioxide.788789 Expressed as:

2 H2A + CO2 → 2A + CH2O + H2O
 

where A is the electron acceptor. His discovery predicted that H2O is the hydrogen donor in green plant photosynthesis and is oxidized to O2. The chemical summation of photosynthesis was a milestone in the understanding of the chemistry of photosynthesis. This was later experimentally verified by Robert Hill.
Foundations of modern ethology (Tinbergen's four questions) (1930s)
Many naturalists have studied aspects of animal behaviour throughout history. Ethology has its scientific roots in the work of Charles Darwin and of American and German ornithologists of the late 19th and early 20th century, including Charles O. Whitman, Oskar Heinroth, and Wallace Craig. The modern discipline of ethology is generally considered to have begun during the 1930s with the work of Dutch biologist Nikolaas Tinbergen and by Austrian biologists Konrad Lorenz and Karl von Frisch.790
Tinbergen's four questions, named after Nikolaas Tinbergen, one of the founders of modern ethology, are complementary categories of explanations for behaviour. It suggests that an integrative understanding of behaviour must include both a proximate and ultimate (functional) analysis of behaviour, as well as an understanding of both phylogenetic/developmental history and the operation of current mechanisms.791
Vroman effect (1975)
The Vroman effect, named after Leo Vroman, is exhibited by protein adsorption to a surface by blood serum proteins.
Chemistry
Concept of gas (1600s)
Flemish physician Jan Baptist van Helmont is sometimes considered the founder of pneumatic chemistry, coining the word gas and conducting experiments involving gases. Van Helmont had derived the word “gas” from the Dutch word geest, which means ghost or spirit.
Van 't Hoff equation (1884)
The Van 't Hoff equation in chemical thermodynamics relates the change in the equilibrium constant, Keq, of a chemical equilibrium to the change in temperature, T, given the standard enthalpy change, ΔHo, for the process. It was proposed by Dutch chemist Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff in 1884.792 The Van 't Hoff equation has been widely utilized to explore the changes in state functions in a thermodynamic system. The Van 't Hoff plot, which is derived from this equation, is especially effective in estimating the change in enthalpy, or total energy, and entropy, or amount of disorder, of a chemical reaction.
Van 't Hoff factor (1884)
The van 't Hoff factor 
 
 
 is a measure of the effect of a solute upon colligative properties such as osmotic pressure, relative lowering in vapor pressure, elevation of boiling point and freezing point depression. The van 't Hoff factor is the ratio between the actual concentration of particles produced when the substance is dissolved, and the concentration of a substance as calculated from its mass.
Lobry de Bruyn–van Ekenstein transformation (1885)
In carbohydrate chemistry, the Lobry de Bruyn–van Ekenstein transformation is the base or acid-catalyzed transformation of an aldose into the ketose isomer or vice versa, with a tautomeric enediol as reaction intermediate. The transformation is relevant for the industrial production of certain ketoses and was discovered in 1885 by Cornelis Adriaan Lobry van Troostenburg de Bruyn and Willem Alberda van Ekenstein.
Prins reaction (1919)
The Prins reaction is an organic reaction consisting of an electrophilic addition of an aldehyde or ketone to an alkene or alkyne followed by capture of a nucleophile. Dutch chemist Hendrik Jacobus Prins discovered two new organic reactions, both now carrying the name Prins reaction. The first was the addition of polyhalogen compounds to olefins, was found during Prins doctoral research, while the others, the acid-catalyzed addition of aldehydes to olefinic compounds, became of industrial relevance.
Hafnium (1923)
Dutch physicist Dirk Coster and Hungarian-Swedish chemist George de Hevesy co-discovered Hafnium (Hf) in 1923, by means of X-ray spectroscopic analysis of zirconium ore. ''Hafnium' is named after ''Hafnia', the Latin name for Copenhagen (Denmark), where it was discovered.
Crystal bar process (1925)
The crystal bar process (also known as iodide process or the van Arkel–de Boer process) was developed by Dutch chemists Anton Eduard van Arkel and Jan Hendrik de Boer in 1925. It was the first industrial process for the commercial production of pure ductile metallic zirconium. It is used in the production of small quantities of ultra-pure titanium and zirconium.
Koopmans' theorem (1934)
Koopmans' theorem states that in closed-shell Hartree–Fock theory, the first ionization energy of a molecular system is equal to the negative of the orbital energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). This theorem is named after Tjalling Koopmans, who published this result in 1934.793 Koopmans became a Nobel laureate in 1975, though neither in physics nor chemistry, but in economics.
Genetics
Concept of pangene/gene (1889)
In 1889, Dutch botanist Hugo de Vries published his book Intracellular Pangenesis, in which he postulated that different characters have different hereditary carriers, based on a modified version of Charles Darwin's theory of Pangenesis of 1868. He specifically postulated that inheritance of specific traits in organisms comes in particles. He called these units pangenes, a term shortened in 1909 to genes by Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen.
Rediscovery the laws of inheritance (1900)
1900 marked the "rediscovery of Mendelian genetics". The significance of Gregor Mendel's work was not understood until early in the twentieth century, after his death, when his research was re-discovered by Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns and Erich von Tschermak, who were working on similar problems.794 They were unaware of Mendel's work. They worked independently on different plant hybrids, and came to Mendel's conclusions about the rules of inheritance.
Geology
Bushveld Igneous Complex (1897)
The Bushveld Igneous Complex (or BIC) is a large, layered igneous intrusion within the Earth's crust that has been tilted and eroded and now outcrops around what appears to be the edge of a great geological basin, the Transvaal Basin. Located in South Africa, the BIC contains some of Earth's richest ore deposits. The complex contains the world's largest reserves of platinum group metals (PGMs), platinum, palladium, osmium, iridium, rhodium, and ruthenium, along with vast quantities of iron, tin, chromium, titanium and vanadium. The site was discovered around 1897 by Dutch geologist Gustaaf Molengraaff.
Mathematics
Analytic geometry (1637)
Descartes (1596–1650) was born in France, but spent most of his adult life in the Dutch Republic. As Bertrand Russell noted in his A History of Western Philosophy (1945): "He lived in Holland for twenty years (1629–49), except for a few brief visits to France and one to England, all on business....". In 1637, Descartes published his work on the methods of science, Discours de la méthode in Leiden. One of its three appendices was La Géométrie, in which he outlined a method to connect the expressions of algebra with the diagrams of geometry. It combined both algebra and geometry under one specialty — algebraic geometry, now called analytic geometry, which involves reducing geometry to a form of arithmetic and algebra and translating geometric shapes into algebraic equations.
Cartesian coordinate system (1637)
Descartes' La Géométrie contains Descartes' first introduction of the Cartesian coordinate system.
Differential geometry of curves (concepts of the involute and evolute of a curve) (1673)
Christiaan Huygens was the first to publish in 1673 (Horologium Oscillatorium) a specific method of determining the evolute and involute of a curve795
Korteweg–de Vries equation (1895)
In mathematics, the Korteweg–de Vries equation (KdV equation for short) is a mathematical model of waves on shallow water surfaces. It is particularly notable as the prototypical example of an exactly solvable model, that is, a non-linear partial differential equation whose solutions can be exactly and precisely specified. The equation is named for Diederik Korteweg and Gustav de Vries who, in 1895, proposed a mathematical model which allowed to predict the waves behaviour on shallow water surfaces.796
Proof of the Brouwer fixed-point theorem (1911)
Brouwer fixed-point theorem is a fixed-point theorem in topology, named after Dutchman Luitzen Brouwer, who proved it in 1911.
Proof of the hairy ball theorem (1912)
The hairy ball theorem of algebraic topology states that there is no nonvanishing continuous tangent vector field on even-dimensional n-spheres. The theorem was first stated by Henri Poincaré in the late 19th century. It was first proved in 1912 by Brouwer.797
Debye functions (1912)
The Debye functions are named in honor of Peter Debye, who came across this function (with n = 3) in 1912 when he analytically computed the heat capacity of what is now called the Debye model.
Kramers–Kronig relations (1927)
The Kramers–Kronig relations are bidirectional mathematical relations, connecting the real and imaginary parts of any complex function that is analytic in the upper half-plane. The relation is named in honor of Ralph Kronig798 and Hendrik Anthony Kramers.799
Heyting algebra (formalized intuitionistic logic) (1930)
Formalized intuitionistic logic was originally developed by Arend Heyting to provide a formal basis for Luitzen Brouwer's programme of intuitionism. Arend Heyting introduced Heyting algebra (1930) to formalize intuitionistic logic.800801
Zernike polynomials (1934)
In mathematics, the Zernike polynomials are a sequence of polynomials that are orthogonal on the unit disk. Named after Frits Zernike, the Dutch optical physicist, and the inventor of phase contrast microscopy, they play an important role in beam optics.
Minnaert function (1941)
In 1941, Marcel Minnaert invented the Minnaert function, which is used in optical measurements of celestial bodies. The Minnaert function is a photometric function used to interpret astronomical observations802803 and remote sensing data for the Earth.804
Mechanics
Proof of the law of equilibrium on an inclined plane (1586)
In 1586, Simon Stevin (Stevinus) derived the mechanical advantage of the inclined plane by an argument that used a string of beads.805 Stevin's proof of the law of equilibrium on an inclined plane, known as the "Epitaph of Stevinus".
Centripetal force (1659)
 Christiaan Huygens stated what is now known as the second of Newton's laws of motion in a quadratic form.806 In 1659 he derived the now standard formula for the centripetal force, exerted by an object describing a circular motion, for instance on the string to which it is attached.807808809810811812813 In modern notation:



with m the mass of the object, v the velocity and r the radius. The publication of the general formula for this force in 1673 was a significant step in studying orbits in astronomy. It enabled the transition from Kepler's third law of planetary motion, to the inverse square law of gravitation.814
Centrifugal force (1659)
Huygens coined the term centrifugal force in his 1659 De Vi Centrifiga and wrote of it in his 1673 Horologium Oscillatorium on pendulums.
Formula for the period of mathematical pendulum (1659)
In 1659, Christiaan Huygens was the first to derive the formula for the period of an ideal mathematical pendulum (with massless rod or cord and length much longer than its swing),815816817818819820821 in modern notation:



with T the period, l the length of the pendulum and g the gravitational acceleration. By his study of the oscillation period of compound pendulums Huygens made pivotal contributions to the development of the concept of moment of inertia.
Tautochrone curve (isochrone curve) (1659)
A tautochrone or isochrone curve is the curve for which the time taken by an object sliding without friction in uniform gravity to its lowest point is independent of its starting point. The curve is a cycloid, and the time is equal to π times the square root of the radius over the acceleration of gravity. Christiaan Huygens was the first to discover the tautochronous property (or isochronous property) of the cycloid.822 The tautochrone problem, the attempt to identify this curve, was solved by Christiaan Huygens in 1659. He proved geometrically in his Horologium Oscillatorium, originally published in 1673, that the curve was a cycloid. Huygens also proved that the time of descent is equal to the time a body takes to fall vertically the same distance as the diameter of the circle which generates the cycloid, multiplied by π⁄2. The tautochrone curve is the same as the brachistochrone curve for any given starting point. Johann Bernoulli posed the problem of the brachistochrone to the readers of Acta Eruditorum in June, 1696. He published his solution in the journal in May of the following year, and noted that the solution is the same curve as Huygens's tautochrone curve.823824
Coupled oscillation (spontaneous synchronization) (1665)
Christiaan Huygens observed that two pendulum clocks mounted next to each other on the same support often become synchronized, swinging in opposite directions. In 1665, he reported the results by letter to the Royal Society of London. It is referred to as "an odd kind of sympathy" in the Society's minutes. This may be the first published observation of what is now called coupled oscillations. In the 20th century, coupled oscillators took on great practical importance because of two discoveries: lasers, in which different atoms give off light waves that oscillate in unison, and superconductors, in which pairs of electrons oscillate in synchrony, allowing electricity to flow with almost no resistance. Coupled oscillators are even more ubiquitous in nature, showing up, for example, in the synchronized flashing of fireflies and chirping of crickets, and in the pacemaker cells that regulate heartbeats.
Medicine
Foundations of modern (human) anatomy (1543)
(Figure)
One of the large, detailed illustrations in Andreas Vesalius's De humani corporis fabrica, 1543

Flemish anatomist and physician Andreas Vesalius is often referred to as the founder of modern human anatomy for the publication of the seven-volume De humani corporis fabrica (On the Structure of the Human Body) in 1543.
Crystals in gouty tophi (1679)
In 1679, van Leeuwenhoek used a microscopes to assess tophaceous material and found that gouty tophi consist of aggregates of needle-shaped crystals, and not globules of chalk as was previously believed.
Boerhaave syndrome (1724)
Boerhaave syndrome (also known as spontaneous esophageal perforation or esophageal rupture) refers to an esophageal rupture secondary to forceful vomiting. Originally described in 1724 by Dutch physician/botanist Hermann Boerhaave, it is a rare condition with high mortality. The syndrome was described after the case of a Dutch admiral, Baron Jan von Wassenaer, who died of the condition.
Factor V Leiden (1994)
Factor V Leiden is an inherited disorder of blood clotting. It is a variant of human factor V that causes a hypercoagulability disorder. It is named after the city Leiden, where it was first identified by R. Bertina, et al., in 1994.
Microbiology
Blood cells (1658)
In 1658 Dutch naturalist Jan Swammerdam was the first person to observe red blood cells under a microscope and in 1695, microscopist Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, also Dutch, was the first to draw an illustration of "red corpuscles", as they were called. No further blood cells were discovered until 1842 when the platelets were discovered.
Red blood cells (1658)
The first person to observe and describe red blood cells was Dutch biologist Jan Swammerdam, who had used an early microscope to study the blood of a frog.
Infusoria (1674)
Infusoria is a collective term for minute aquatic creatures including ciliate, euglena, paramecium, protozoa and unicellular algae that exist in freshwater ponds. However, in formal classification microorganism called infusoria belongs to Kingdom Animalia, Phylum Protozoa, Class Ciliates (Infusoria). They were first discovered by Antoni van Leeuwenhoek.
Protozoa (1674)
(Figure)
Leishmania donovani, (a species of protozoa) in a bone marrow cell

In 1674, Van Leeuwenhoek was the first person to observe and describe protozoa.
Bacteria (1676)
(Figure)
Scanning electron micrograph of Escherichia coli bacilli

The first bacteria were observed by van Leeuwenhoek in 1676 using his single-lens microscope.825826827828829 He described the creatures he saw as small creatures. The name bacterium was introduced much later, by Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg in 1828, derived from the Greek word βακτηριον meaning "small stick". Because of the difficulty in describing individual bacteria and the importance of their discovery, the study of bacteria is generally that of the study of microbiology.
Sperm cells (1677)
Sperm cells were first observed by Anton van Leeuwenhoek in 1677. The term “sperm” refers to the male reproductive cells. A uniflagellar sperm cell that is motile is referred to as a “spermatozoon”, whereas a non-motile sperm cell is referred to as a “spermatium”.
Spermatozoa (1677)
(Figure)
A sperm cell attempts to penetrate an ovum coat to fertilize it

A spermatozoon or spermatozoon (pl. spermatozoa), from the ancient Greek σπερμα (seed) and ζων (alive) and more commonly known as a sperm cell, is the haploid cell that is the male gamete. Sperm cells were first observed by a student of van Leeuwenhoek in 1677. Leeuwenhoek pictured sperm cells with great accuracy.
Giardia (1681)
(Figure)
Giardia trophozoite, SEM. The trophozoite form of Giardia was first observed in 1681 by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in his own diarrhea stools. Van Leeuwenhoek's observations were recreated, using a single-lens microscope of the kind he used, by British microbiologist Brian J. Ford.

Giardia is a genus of anaerobic flagellated protozoan parasites of the phylum Sarcomastigophora that colonise and reproduce in the small intestines of several vertebrates, causing giardiasis. Their life cycle alternates between an actively swimming trophozoite and an infective, resistant cyst. The trophozoite form of Giardia was first observed in 1681 by Van Leeuwenhoek during observation of his own stool.830
Volvox (1700)
Volvox is a genus of chlorophytes, a type of green algae. It forms spherical colonies of up to 50,000 cells. They live in a variety of freshwater habitats, and were first reported by Van Leeuwenhoek in 1700.
Biological nitrogen fixation (1885)
Biological nitrogen fixation was discovered by Martinus Beijerinck in 1885.
Rhizobium (1888)
Rhizobium is a genus of Gram-negative soil bacteria that fix nitrogen. Rhizobium forms an endosymbiotic nitrogen fixing association with roots of legumes and Parasponia. Martinus Beijerinck in the Netherlands was the first to isolate and cultivate a microorganism from the nodules of legumes in 1888. He named it Bacillus radicicola, which is now placed in Bergey's Manual of Determinative Bacteriology under the genus Rhizobium.
Spirillum (first isolated sulfate-reducing bacteria) (1895)
Martinus Beijerinck discovered the phenomenon of bacterial sulfate reduction, a form of anaerobic respiration. He learned that bacteria could use sulfate as a terminal electron acceptor, instead of oxygen. He isolated and described Spirillum desulfuricans (now called Desulfovibrio desulfuricans831), the first known sulfate-reducing bacterium.
Concept of virus (1898)
 In 1898 Beijerinck coined the term "virus" to indicate that the causal agent of tobacco mosaic disease was non-bacterial. Beijerinck discovered what is now known as the tobacco mosaic virus. He observed that the agent multiplied only in cells that were dividing and he called it a contagium vivum fluidum (contagious living fluid). Beijerinck's discovery is considered to be the beginning of virology.832833834835836837838839840841
Azotobacter (1901)
Azotobacter is a genus of usually motile, oval or spherical bacteria that form thick-walled cysts and may produce large quantities of capsular slime. They are aerobic, free-living soil microbes which play an important role in the nitrogen cycle in nature, binding atmospheric nitrogen, which is inaccessible to plants, and releasing it in the form of ammonium ions into the soil. Apart from being a model organism, it is used by humans for the production of biofertilizers, food additives, and some biopolymers. The first representative of the genus, Azotobacter chroococcum, was discovered and described in 1901 by the Dutch microbiologist and botanist Martinus Beijerinck.
Enrichment culture (1904)
Beijerinck is credited with developing the first enrichment culture, a fundamental method of studying microbes from the environment.
Physics
31 equal temperament (1661)
Division of the octave into 31 steps arose naturally out of Renaissance music theory; the lesser diesis — the ratio of an octave to three major thirds, 128:125 or 41.06 cents — was approximately a fifth of a tone and a third of a semitone. In 1666, Lemme Rossi first proposed an equal temperament of this order. Shortly thereafter, having discovered it independently, scientist Christiaan Huygens wrote about it also. Since the standard system of tuning at that time was quarter-comma meantone, in which the fifth is tuned to 51/4, the appeal of this method was immediate, as the fifth of 31-et, at 696.77 cents, is only 0.19 cent wider than the fifth of quarter-comma meantone. Huygens not only realized this, he went farther and noted that 31-ET provides an excellent approximation of septimal, or 7-limit harmony. In the twentieth century, physicist, music theorist and composer Adriaan Fokker, after reading Huygens's work, led a revival of interest in this system of tuning which led to a number of compositions, particularly by Dutch composers. Fokker designed the Fokker organ, a 31-tone equal-tempered organ, which was installed in Teyler's Museum in Haarlem in 1951.
Foundations of classical mechanics (1673)
Through his fundamental contributions Christiaan Huygens helped shape and lay the foundations of classical mechanics. His works cover all the fields of mechanics, from the invention of technical devices applicable to different machines to a purely rational knowledge of motion.842 Huygens published his results in a classic of the 17th-century mechanics, Horologium Oscillatorium (1673), that is regarded as one of the three most important work done in mechanics in the 17th century, the other two being Galileo Galilei’s Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences (1638) and Isaac Newton's Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687). It is Huygens' major work on pendulums and horology. As Domenico Bertoloni Meli (2006) notes, Horologium Oscillatorium was “a masterful combination of sophisticated mathematics and mechanics mixed with a range of practical applications culminating with a new clock aimed at resolving the vexing problem of longitude.”843
Foundations of physical optics / wave optics (wave theory of light) (1678)
Huygens' groundbreaking research on the nature of light helped lay the foundations of modern optics (physical optics in particular).844845 Huygens is remembered especially for his wave theory of light, which he first communicated in 1678 to France's Royal Académie des sciences and which he published in 1690 in his Treatise on light. His argument that light consists of waves now known as the Huygens–Fresnel principle, two centuries later became instrumental in the understanding of wave–particle duality. The interference experiments of Thomas Young vindicated Huygens' s wave theory in 1801.846847
Polarization of light (1678)
In 1678, Huygens discovered the polarization of light by double refraction in calcite.848849850
Huygens' principle (concepts of the wavefront and wavelet) (1690)
 In his Treatise on light, Huygens showed how Snell's law of sines could be explained by, or derived from, the wave nature of light, using the Huygens–Fresnel principle.
Bernoulli's principle (1738)
Bernoulli's principle was discovered by Dutch-Swiss mathematician and physicist Daniel Bernoulli and named after him. It states that for an inviscid flow, an increase in the speed of the fluid occurs simultaneously with a decrease in pressure or a decrease in the fluid's potential energy.
Brownian motion (1785)
In 1785, Ingenhousz described the irregular movement of coal dust on the surface of alcohol and therefore has a claim as discoverer of what came to be known as Brownian motion.
Buys Ballot's law (1857)
The law takes its name from Dutch meteorologist C. H. D. Buys Ballot, who published it in the Comptes Rendus, in November 1857. While William Ferrel first theorized this in 1856, Buys Ballot was the first to provide an empirical validation. The law states that in the Northern Hemisphere, if a person stands with his back to the wind, the low pressure area will be on his left, because wind travels counterclockwise around low pressure zones in that hemisphere. this is approximately true in the higher latitudes and is reversed in the Southern Hemisphere.
Foundations of molecular physics (1873)
Spearheaded by Mach and Ostwald, a strong philosophical current that denied the existence of molecules arose towards the end of the 19th century. The molecular existence was considered unproven and the molecular hypothesis unnecessary. At the time Van der Waals' thesis was written (1873), the molecular structure of fluids had not been accepted by most physicists, and liquid and vapor were often considered as chemically distinct. But Van der Waals's work affirmed the reality of molecules and allowed an assessment of their size and attractive strength. By comparing his equation of state with experimental data, Van der Waals was able to obtain estimates for the actual size of molecules and the strength of their mutual attraction.851 The effect of Van der Waals's work on molecular science in the 20th century was direct and fundamental, as is well recognized and documented, due in large part to books by John Rowlinson (1988), and by Kipnis and Yavelov (1996). By introducing parameters characterizing molecular size and attraction in constructing his equation of state, Van der Waals set the tone for molecular physics (molecular dynamics in particular) of the 20th century. That molecular aspects such as size, shape, attraction, and multipolar interactions should form the basis for mathematical formulations of the thermodynamic and transport properties of fluids is presently considered an axiom.852
Van der Waals equation of state (1873)
In 1873, J. D. van der Waals introduced the first equation of state derived by the assumption of a finite volume occupied by the constituent molecules.853 The Van der Waals equation is generally regarded as the first somewhat realistic equation of state (beyond the ideal gas law). Van der Waals noted the non-ideality of gases and attributed it to the existence of molecular or atomic interactions. His new formula revolutionized the study of equations of state, and was most famously continued via the Redlich-Kwong equation of state (1949) and the Soave modification of Redlich-Kwong. While the Van der Waals equation is definitely superior to the ideal gas law and does predict the formation of a liquid phase, the agreement with experimental data is limited for conditions where the liquid forms. Except at higher pressures, the real gases do not obey Van der Waals equation in all ranges of pressures and temperatures. Despite its limitations, the equation has historical importance, because it was the first attempt to model the behaviour of real gases.
Van der Waals forces (1873)
(Figure)
The Van der Waals force between atoms, molecules and surfaces is a part of everyday life in many different ways. Geckos can stick to walls and ceilings because of Van der Waals forces.

The van der Waals forces are named after the scientist who first described them in 1873. Johannes Diderik van der Waals noted the non-ideality of gases and attributed it to the existence of molecular or atomic interactions. They are forces that develop between the atoms inside molecules and keep them together.854 The Van der Waals forces between molecules, much weaker than chemical bonds but present universally, play a fundamental role in fields as diverse as supramolecular chemistry, structural biology, polymer science, nanotechnology, surface science, and condensed matter physics. Elucidation of the nature of the Van der Waals forces between molecules has remained a scientific effort from Van der Waals's days to the present.
Van der Waals radius (1873)
The Van der Waals radius, r

 
 , of an atom is the radius of an imaginary hard sphere which can be used to model the atom for many purposes. It is named after Johannes Diderik van der Waals, winner of the 1910 Nobel Prize in Physics, as he was the first to recognise that atoms were not simply points and to demonstrate the physical consequences of their size through the van der Waals equation of state.
Law of corresponding states (1880)
The law of corresponding states was first suggested and formulated by van der Waals in 1880. This showed that the van der Waals equation of state can be expressed as a simple function of the critical pressure, critical volume and critical temperature. This general form is applicable to all substances. The compound-specific constants a and b in the original equation are replaced by universal (compound-independent) quantities. It was this law that served as a guide during experiments which ultimately led to the liquefaction of hydrogen by James Dewar in 1898 and of helium by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in 1908.
Lorentz ether theory (1892)
Lorentz ether theory has its roots in Hendrik Lorentz's "theory of electrons", which was the final point in the development of the classical aether theories at the end of the 19th and at the beginning of the 20th century. Lorentz's initial theory created in 1892 and 1895 was based on a completely motionless aether. Many aspects of Lorentz's theory were incorporated into special relativity with the works of Albert Einstein and Hermann Minkowski.
Lorentz force law (1892)
 In 1892, Hendrik Lorentz derived the modern form of the formula for the electromagnetic force which includes the contributions to the total force from both the electric and the magnetic fields.855856857 In many textbook treatments of classical electromagnetism, the Lorentz force law is used as the definition of the electric and magnetic fields E and B.858859860 To be specific, the Lorentz force is understood to be the following empirical statement:

''The electromagnetic force F on a test charge at a given point and time is a certain function of its charge q and velocity v, which can be parameterized by exactly two vectors E and B, in the functional form'':
 









Abraham–Lorentz force (1895)
In the physics of electromagnetism, the Abraham–Lorentz force (also Lorentz-Abraham force) is the recoil force on an accelerating charged particle caused by the particle emitting electromagnetic radiation. It is also called the radiation reaction force or the self force.
Lorentz transformation (1895)
In physics, the Lorentz transformation (or Lorentz transformations) is named after the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz. It was the result of attempts by Lorentz and others to explain how the speed of light was observed to be independent of the reference frame, and to understand the symmetries of the laws of electromagnetism. The Lorentz transformation is in accordance with special relativity, but was derived before special relativity. Early approximations of the transformation were published by Lorentz in 1895. In 1905, Poincaré was the first to recognize that the transformation has the properties of a mathematical group, and named it after Lorentz.
Lorentz contraction (1895)
In physics, length contraction (more formally called Lorentz contraction or Lorentz–FitzGerald contraction after Hendrik Lorentz and George FitzGerald) is the phenomenon of a decrease in length measured by the observer, of an object which is traveling at any non-zero velocity relative to the observer. This contraction is usually only noticeable at a substantial fraction of the speed of light.
Lorentz factor (1895)
The Lorentz factor or Lorentz term is the factor by which time, length, and relativistic mass change for an object while that object is moving. It is an expression which appears in several equations in special relativity, and it arises from deriving the Lorentz transformations. The name originates from its earlier appearance in Lorentzian electrodynamics – named after the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz.861
Zeeman effect (1896)
 The Zeeman effect, named after the Dutch physicist Pieter Zeeman, is the effect of splitting a spectral line into several components in the presence of a static magnetic field. It is analogous to the Stark effect, the splitting of a spectral line into several components in the presence of an electric field. Also similar to the Stark effect, transitions between different components have, in general, different intensities, with some being entirely forbidden (in the dipole approximation), as governed by the selection rules.
Since the distance between the Zeeman sub-levels is a function of the magnetic field, this effect can be used to measure the magnetic field, e.g. that of the Sun and other stars or in laboratory plasmas. The Zeeman effect is very important in applications such as nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, electron spin resonance spectroscopy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and Mössbauer spectroscopy. It may also be utilized to improve accuracy in atomic absorption spectroscopy.
A theory about the magnetic sense of birds assumes that a protein in the retina is changed due to the Zeeman effect.862
When the spectral lines are absorption lines, the effect is called inverse Zeeman effect.
Liquid helium (liquefaction of helium) (1908)
 Helium was first liquefied (liquid helium) on 10 July 1908, by Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes. With the production of liquid helium, it was said that “the coldest place on Earth” was in Leiden.863864865
Superconductivity (1911)
(Figure)
Paul Ehrenfest, Hendrik Lorentz and Niels Bohr visit Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in the cryogenic lab (where Onnes discovered the phenomenon of superconductivity in 1911).

Superconductivity, the ability of certain materials to conduct electricity with little or no resistance, was discovered by Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes.866867868869
Einstein–de Haas effect (1910s)
The Einstein–de Haas effect or the Richardson effect (after Owen Willans Richardson), is a physical phenomenon delineated by Albert Einstein and Wander Johannes de Haas in the mid 1910s, that exposes a relationship between magnetism, angular momentum, and the spin of elementary particles.
Debye model (1912)
In thermodynamics and solid state physics, the Debye model is a method developed by Peter Debye in 1912 for estimating the phonon contribution to the specific heat (heat capacity) in a solid.870 It treats the vibrations of the atomic lattice (heat) as phonons in a box, in contrast to the Einstein model, which treats the solid as many individual, non-interacting quantum harmonic oscillators. The Debye model correctly predicts the low temperature dependence of the heat capacity.
De Sitter precession (1916)
The geodetic effect (also known as geodetic precession, de Sitter precession or de Sitter effect) represents the effect of the curvature of spacetime, predicted by general relativity, on a vector carried along with an orbiting body. The geodetic effect was first predicted by Willem de Sitter in 1916, who provided relativistic corrections to the Earth–Moon system's motion.
De Sitter space and anti-de Sitter space (1920s)
In mathematics and physics, a de Sitter space is the analog in Minkowski space, or spacetime, of a sphere in ordinary, Euclidean space. The n-dimensional de Sitter space, denoted dSn, is the Lorentzian manifold analog of an n-sphere (with its canonical Riemannian metric); it is maximally symmetric, has constant positive curvature, and is simply connected for n at least 3. The de Sitter space, as well as the anti-de Sitter space is named after Willem de Sitter (1872–1934), professor of astronomy at Leiden University and director of the Leiden Observatory. Willem de Sitter and Albert Einstein worked in the 1920s in Leiden closely together on the spacetime structure of our universe. De Sitter space was discovered by Willem de Sitter, and, at the same time, independently by Tullio Levi-Civita.
Van der Pol oscillator (1920)
In dynamical systems, a Van der Pol oscillator is a non-conservative oscillator with non-linear damping. It was originally proposed by Dutch physicist Balthasar van der Pol while he was working at Philips in 1920. Van der Pol studied a differential equation that describes the circuit of a vacuum tube. It has been used to model other phenomenon such as human heartbeats by colleague Jan van der Mark.
Kramers' opacity law (1923)
Kramers' opacity law describes the opacity of a medium in terms of the ambient density and temperature, assuming that the opacity is dominated by bound-free absorption (the absorption of light during ionization of a bound electron) or free-free absorption (the absorption of light when scattering a free ion, also called bremsstrahlung).871 It is often used to model radiative transfer, particularly in stellar atmospheres.872 The relation is named after the Dutch physicist Hendrik Kramers, who first derived the form in 1923.873
Electron spin (1925)
In 1925, Dutch physicists George Eugene Uhlenbeck and Samuel Goudsmit co-discovered the concept of electron spin, which posits an intrinsic angular momentum for all electrons.
Solidification of helium (1926)
In 1926, Onnes' student, Dutch physicist Willem Hendrik Keesom, invented a method to freeze liquid helium and was the first person who was able to solidify the noble gas.
Ehrenfest theorem (1927)
The Ehrenfest theorem, named after the Austrian-born Dutch-Jew theoretical physicist Paul Ehrenfest at Leiden University.
De Haas–van Alphen effect (1930)
The de Haas–van Alphen effect, often abbreviated to dHvA, is a quantum mechanical effect in which the magnetic moment of a pure metal crystal oscillates as the intensity of an applied magnetic field B is increased. It was discovered in 1930 by Wander Johannes de Haas and his student P. M. van Alphen.
Shubnikov–de Haas effect (1930)
The Shubnikov–de Haas effect (ShdH) is named after Dutch physicist Wander Johannes de Haas and Russian physicist Lev Shubnikov.
Kramers degeneracy theorem (1930)
In quantum mechanics, the Kramers degeneracy theorem states that for every energy eigenstate of a time-reversal symmetric system with half-integer total spin, there is at least one more eigenstate with the same energy. It was first discovered in 1930 by H. A. Kramers874 as a consequence of the Breit equation.
Minnaert resonance frequency (1933)
In 1933, Marcel Minnaert published a solution for the acoustic resonance frequency of a single bubble in water, the so-called Minnaert resonance. The Minnaert resonance or Minnaert frequency875 is the acoustic resonance frequency of a single bubble in an infinite domain of water (neglecting the effects of surface tension and viscous attenuation).
Casimir effect (1948)
In quantum field theory, the Casimir effect and the Casimir–Polder force are physical forces arising from a quantized field. Dutch physicists Hendrik Casimir and Dirk Polder at Philips Research Labs proposed the existence of a force between two polarizable atoms and between such an atom and a conducting plate in 1947. After a conversation with Niels Bohr who suggested it had something to do with zero-point energy, Casimir alone formulated the theory predicting a force between neutral conducting plates in 1948; the former is called the Casimir–Polder force while the latter is the Casimir effect in the narrow sense.
Tellegen's theorem (1952)
Tellegen's theorem is one of the most powerful theorems in network theory. Most of the energy distribution theorems and extremum principles in network theory can be derived from it. It was published in 1952 by Bernard Tellegen. Fundamentally, Tellegen's theorem gives a simple relation between magnitudes that satisfy Kirchhoff's laws of electrical circuit theory.
Stochastic cooling (1970's)
In the early 1970s Simon van der Meer, a Dutch particle physicist at CERN, discovered this technique to concentrate proton and anti-proton beams, leading to the discovery of the W and Z particles. He won the 1984 Nobel Prize in Physics together with Carlo Rubbia.
Renormalization of gauge theories (1971)
In 1971, Gerardus 't Hooft, who was completing his PhD under the supervision of Dutch theoretical physicist Martinus Veltman, renormalized Yang–Mills theory. They showed that if the symmetries of Yang–Mills theory were to be realized in the spontaneously broken mode, referred to as the Higgs mechanism, then Yang–Mills theory can be renormalized.876877 Renormalization of Yang–Mills theory is considered as a major achievement of twentieth century physics.
Holographic principle (1993)
The holographic principle is a property of string theories and a supposed property of quantum gravity that states that the description of a volume of space can be thought of as encoded on a boundary to the region—preferably a light-like boundary like a gravitational horizon. In 1993, Dutch theoretical physicist Gerard 't Hooft proposed what is now known as the holographic principle. It was given a precise string-theory interpretation by Leonard Susskind878 who combined his ideas with previous ones of 't Hooft and Charles Thorn.879880
Explorations
Voyages of discovery
Orange Islands (1594)
(Figure)
Map of Willem Barentsz' first voyage

During his first journey in 1594, Dutch explorer Willem Barentsz discovered the Orange Islands.
Svalbard (first documented/undisputed sighting of, landing on and charting of the Svalbard Archipelago) (1596)
(Figure)
Map of Willem Barentsz third voyage

(Figure)
Crew of Willem Barentsz fighting a polar bear

On 10 June 1596, Barentsz and Dutchman Jacob van Heemskerk discovered Bear Island,881882883 a week before their discovery of Spitsbergen Island.884885886
(Figure)
Portion of 1599 map of Arctic exploration by Willem Barentsz. Spitsbergen, here mapped for the first time, is indicated as "Het Nieuwe Land" (Dutch for "the New Land"), center-left.

(Figure)
Willem Barentsz made the first indisputable discovery of Svalbard in 1596, in an attempt to find the Northern Sea Route. The three voyages of Willem Barents are remembered today chiefly for the first documented wintering in the High Arctic.

(Figure)
Objects found in Het Behouden Huys (The Saved House) on Novaya Zemlya.

The first undisputedly to have discovered the archipelago is an expedition led by the Dutch mariner Willem Barentsz, who was looking for the Northern Sea Route to China.887 He first spotted Bjørnøya on 10 June 1596888 and the northwestern tip of Spitsbergen on 17 June.889 The sighting of the archipelago was included in the accounts and maps made by the expedition and Spitsbergen was quickly included by cartographers. The name Spitsbergen, meaning "pointed mountains" (from the Dutch spits – pointed, bergen – mountains), was at first applied to both the main island and the Svalbard archipelago as a whole.890891
There is no conclusive evidence of the first human activity on Svalbard. Swedish archeologist Hans Christiansson found flint and slate objects he identified as Stone Age tools dating from ca. 3000 BC,892 but there is little support among his peers as no dwelling place has been found.893 During the 19th century, Norwegian historians proposed that Norse seamen had found Svalbard in 1194. This is based on annals that found Svalbarði four days sailing from Iceland. Although it forms the basis for the modern name of the archipelago, there is no scientific consensus that supports the hypothesis. Russian historians have proposed that Russian Pomors may have visited the island as early as the 15th century.894 This line was largely pursued by Soviet scholars, but again, no conclusive evidence has been found.895
First documented winter surviving in the High Arctic (1596-1597)
  The Russians knew of Novaya Zemlya from the 11th century, when hunters from Novgorod visited the area.896 For western Europeans, the search for the Northern Sea Route in the 16th century led to its exploration.897 The first visit from a west European was by Hugh Willoughby in 1553, and he met Russian ships from the already established hunting trade.898 Dutch explorer Willem Barentsz reached the west coast of Novaya Zemlya in 1594, and in a subsequent expedition of 1596 rounded the Northern point and wintered on the Northeast coast.899 Willem Barents, Jacob van Heemskerck and their crew were blocked by the pack ice in the Kara Sea and forced to winter on the east coast of Novaya Zemlya. The wintering of the shipwrecked crew in the 'Saved House' was the first successful wintering of Europeans in the High Arctic. Twelve of the 17 men managed to survive the polar winter (De Veer, 1917). Barentsz died during the expedition, and may have been buried on the northern island.900
First undisputed sighting of the Falkland Islands/Sebald Islands (1600)
In 1600 the Dutch navigator Sebald de Weert made the first undisputed sighting of the Falkland Islands. It was on his homeward leg back to the Netherlands after having left the Straits of Magellan that Sebald De Weert noticed some unnamed and uncharted islands, at least islands that did not exist on his nautical charts. There he attempted to stop and replenish but was unable to land due to harsh conditions. The islands Sebald de Weert charted were a small group off the northwest coast of the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) and are in fact part of the Falklands. De Weert then named these islands the “Sebald de Weert Islands” and the Falklands as a whole were known as the Sebald Islands until well into the 18th century.
Pennefather River, Northern Australia (first documented/undisputed sighting of, landing on and charting of the mainland Australia) (1606)
   The Dutch ship, Duyfken, led by Willem Janszoon, made the first documented European landing in Australia in 1606.901 Although a theory of Portuguese discovery in the 1520s exists, it lacks definitive evidence.902903904 Precedence of discovery has also been claimed for China,905 France,906 Spain,907 India,908 and even Phoenicia.909
The Janszoon voyage of 1606 led to the first undisputed sighting of Australia by a European was made on 26 February 1606. Dutch vessel Duyfken, captained by Janszoon, followed the coast of New Guinea, missed Torres Strait, and explored perhaps  of western side of Cape York, in the Gulf of Carpentaria, believing the land was still part of New Guinea. The Dutch made one landing, but were promptly attacked by Maoris and subsequently abandoned further exploration.910911912913914915
The first recorded European sighting of the Australian mainland, and the first recorded European landfall on the Australian continent, are attributed to the Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon. He sighted the coast of Cape York Peninsula in early 1606, and made landfall on 26 February at the Pennefather River near the modern town of Weipa on Cape York.916 The Dutch charted the whole of the western and northern coastlines and named the island continent "New Holland" during the 17th century, but made no attempt at settlement.917
First charting of Manhattan, New York (1609)
 The area that is now Manhattan was long inhabited by the Lenape Indians. In 1524, Florentine explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano – sailing in service of the king Francis I of France – was the first European to visit the area that would become New York City. It was not until the voyage of Henry Hudson, an Englishman who worked for the Dutch East India Company, that the area was mapped.
Hudson Valley (1609)
At the time of the arrival of the first Europeans in the 17th century, the Hudson Valley was inhabited primarily by the Algonquian-speaking Mahican and Munsee Native American people, known collectively as River Indians. The first Dutch settlement was in the 1610s at Fort Nassau, a trading post (factorij) south of modern-day Albany, that traded European goods for beaver pelts. Fort Nassau was later replaced by Fort Orange. During the rest of the 17th century, the Hudson Valley formed the heart of the New Netherland colony operations, with the New Amsterdam settlement on Manhattan serving as a post for supplies and defense of the upriver operations.
Brouwer Route (1610–1611)
The Brouwer Route was a route for sailing from the Cape of Good Hope to Java. The Route took ships south from the Cape into the Roaring Forties, then east across the Indian Ocean, before turning northwest for Java. Thus it took advantage of the strong westerly winds for which the Roaring Forties are named, greatly increasing travel speed. It was devised by Dutch sea explorer Hendrik Brouwer in 1611, and found to halve the duration of the journey from Europe to Java, compared to the previous Arab and Portuguese monsoon route, which involved following the coast of East Africa northwards, sailing through the Mozambique Channel and then across the Indian Ocean, sometimes via India. The Brouwer Route played a major role in the discovery of the west coast of Australia.
Jan Mayen Island (first verified discovery of Jan Mayen island) (1614)
The island was named after Dutchman Jan Jacobszoon May van Schellinkhout, who visited the island in July 1614. As locations of these islands were kept secret by the whalers, Jan Mayen got its current name only in 1620.918
Hell Gate, Long Island Sound, Connecticut River and Fisher's Island (1614)
(Figure)
Block's map of his 1614 voyage, with the first appearance of the term "New Netherland"

The name "Hell Gate" is a corruption of Dutch phrase Hellegat, which could mean either "hell's hole" or "bright gate/passage". It was originally applied to the entirety of the East River. The strait was described in the journals of Dutch explorer Adriaen Block, who is the first European known to have navigated the strait, during his 1614 voyage aboard the Onrust.
The first European to record the existence of Long Island Sound and the Connecticut River was Dutch explorer Adriaen Block, who entered it from the East River in 1614.
Fishers Island was called Munnawtawkit by the Native American Pequot nation. Block named it Visher's Island in 1614, after one of his companions. For the next 25 years, it remained a wilderness, visited occasionally by Dutch traders.
Staten Island (Argentina), Cape Horn, Tonga, Hoorn Islands (1615)
On 25 December 1615, Dutch explorers Jacob le Maire and Willem Schouten aboard the Eendracht, discovered Staten Island, close to Cape Horn.
(Figure)
The voyage of Willem Schouten and Jacob le Maire in 1615–1616

On 29 January 1616, they sighted land they called Cape Horn, after the city of Hoorn. Aboard the Eendracht was the crew of the recently wrecked ship called Hoorn.
(Figure)
Arrival of Abel Tasman in Tongatapu, 1643, drawing by Isaack Gilsemans

They discovered Tonga on 21 April 1616 and the Hoorn Islands on 28 April 1616.
They discovered New Ireland around May–July 1616.
They discovered the Schouten Islands (also known as Biak Islands or Geelvink Islands) on 24 July 1616.
The Schouten Islands (also known as Eastern Schouten Islands or Le Maire Islands) of Papua New Guinea, were named after Schouten, who visited them in 1616.
Dirk Hartog Island (first documented/undisputed sighting of, landing on and charting of the Western Australia coastline) (1616)
(Figure)
Dirk Hartog's plate in the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam

(Figure)
Map of Shark Bay area showing Dirk Hartog Island and Cape Inscription

Hendrik Brouwer's discovery that sailing east from the Cape of Good Hope until land was sighted, and then sailing north along the west coast of Australia was a much quicker route than around the coast of the Indian Ocean made Dutch landfalls on the west coast inevitable. The first such landfall was in 1616, when Dirk Hartog landed at Cape Inscription on what is now known as Dirk Hartog Island, off the coast of Western Australia, and left behind an inscription on a pewter plate. In 1697 the Dutch captain Willem de Vlamingh landed on the island and discovered Hartog's plate. He replaced it with one of his own, which included a copy of Hartog's inscription, and took the original plate home to Amsterdam, where it is still kept in the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam.
Houtman Abrolhos (Western Australia) (1619)
The first sighting of the Houtman Abrolhos by Europeans was by Dutch VOC ships Dordrecht and Amsterdam in 1619, three years after Hartog made the first authenticated sighting of what is now Western Australia, 13 years after the first authenticated voyage to Australia, that of the Duyfke] in 1606. Discovery of the islands was credited to Frederick de Houtman, Captain-General of the Dordrecht, as it was Houtman who later wrote of the discovery in a letter to Company directors.
Carstensz Glacier, Carstensz Pyramid/Puncak Jaya (1623)
The first person to spot Carstensz Pyramid (or Puncak Jaya) is reported to be the Dutch navigator and explorer Jan Carstensz in 1623, for whom the mountain is named. Carstensz was the first (non-native) to sight the glaciers on the peak of the mountain on a rare clear day. The sighting went unverified for over two centuries, and Carstensz was ridiculed in Europe when he said he had seen snow and glaciers near the equator. The snowfield of Puncak Jaya was reached as early as 1909 by a Dutch explorer, Hendrik Albert Lorentz with six of his indigenous Dayak Kenyah porters recruited from the Apo Kayan in Borneo. The now highest Carstensz Pyramid summit was not climbed until 1962, by an expedition led by the Austrian mountaineer Heinrich Harrer with three other expedition members – the New Zealand mountaineer Philip Temple, the Australian rock climber Russell Kippax, and the Dutch patrol officer Albertus (Bert) Huizenga.
Gulf of Carpentaria (Northern Australia) (1623)
The first known European explorer to visit the region was Dutch Willem Janszoon (also known as Willem Jansz) on his 1606 voyage. His fellow countryman, Jan Carstenszoon (also known as Jan Carstensz), visited in 1623 and named the gulf in honour of Pieter de Carpentier, at that time the Governor-General of Dutch East Indies. Abel Tasman explored the coast in 1644.
Staaten River (Cape York Peninsula, Northern Australia) (1623)
The Staaten River is a river in the Cape York Peninsula, Australia that rises more than  to the west of Cairns and empties into the Gulf of Carpentaria. The river was first named by Carstenszoon in 1623.
Arnhem Land and Groote Eylandt (Gulf of Carpentaria, Northern Australia) (1623)
In 1623 Dutch East India Company captain Willem van Colster sailed into the Gulf of Carpentaria. Cape Arnhem is named after his ship, the Arnhem, which itself was named after the city of Arnhem.
Groote Eylandt was first sighted the Arnhem. Only in 1644, when Abel Tasman arrived, was the island given a European name, Dutch for "Large Island" in an archaic spelling. The modern Dutch spelling is Groot Eiland.
Hermite Islands (1624)
In February 1624, Dutch admiral Jacques l'Hermite discovered the Hermite Islands at Cape Horn.
First documented/undisputed sighting of, landing on and charting of the Southern Australia coast (1627)
In 1627, Dutch explorers François Thijssen and Pieter Nuyts discovered the south coast of Australia and charted about  of it between Cape Leeuwin and the Nuyts Archipelago.919920 François Thijssen, captain of the ship 't Gulden Zeepaert (The Golden Seahorse), sailed to the east as far as Ceduna in South Australia. The first known ship to have visited the area is the Leeuwin ("Lioness"), a Dutch vessel that charted some of the nearby coastline in 1622. The log of the Leeuwin has been lost, so very little is known of the voyage. However, the land discovered by the Leeuwin was recorded on a 1627 map by Hessel Gerritsz: Caert van't Landt van d'Eendracht ("Chart of the Land of Eendracht"), which appears to show the coast between present-day Hamelin Bay and Point D’Entrecasteaux. Part of Thijssen's map shows the islands St Francis and St Peter, now known collectively with their respective groups as the Nuyts Archipelago. Thijssen's observations were included as soon as 1628 by the VOC cartographer Hessel Gerritsz in a chart of the Indies and New Holland. This voyage defined most of the southern coast of Australia and discouraged the notion that "New Holland", as it was then known, was linked to Antarctica.
St Francis Island (originally in Dutch: Eyland St. François) is an island on the south coast of South Australia near Ceduna. It is now part of the Nuyts Archipelago Wilderness Protection Area. It was one of the first parts of South Australia to be discovered and named by Europeans, along with St Peter Island. Thijssen named it after his patron saint, St. Francis.
St Peter Island is an island on the south coast of South Australia near Ceduna to the south of Denial Bay. It is the second largest island in South Australia at about 13 km long. It was named in 1627 by Thijssen after Pieter Nuyts' patron saint.
Western Australia (1629)
 The Weibbe Hayes Stone Fort, remnants of improvised defensive walls and stone shelters built by Wiebbe Hayes and his men on the West Wallabi Island, are Australia's oldest known European structures, more than 150 years before expeditions to the Australian continent by James Cook and Arthur Phillip.
Tasmania (first documented/undisputed sighting and charting of the Tasmanian mainland and the surrounding islands) (1642)
(Figure)
Tasman's routes of the first and second voyage

Tasmania was inhabited by an indigenous population, the Tasmanian Aborigines, and evidence indicates their presence in the territory, later to become an island, at least 35,000 years ago. The Aboriginal population at the time of British settlement in 1803 has been estimated at approximately 5,000 or more 921
In 1642, Abel Tasman sailed from Mauritius and on 24 November, sighted Tasmania. He named Tasmania Van Diemen's Land, after Anthony van Diemen, the Dutch East India Company's Governor General, who had commissioned his voyage.922923924 It was officially renamed Tasmania in honour of its first European discoverer on 1 January 1856.925
(Figure)
Map of the Maatsuyker Islands

Maatsuyker Islands, a group of small islands that are the southernmost point of the Australian continent. were discovered and named by Tasman in 1642 after a Dutch official. The main islands of the group are De Witt Island (354 m), Maatsuyker Island (296 m), Flat Witch Island, Flat Top Island, Round Top Island, Walker Island, Needle Rocks and Mewstone.
Maria Island was discovered and named in 1642 by Tasman after Maria van Diemen (née van Aelst), wife of Anthony. The island was known as Maria's Isle in the early 19th century.
Tasman's journal entry for 29 November 1642 records that he observed a rock which was similar to a rock named Pedra Branca off China, presumably referring to the Pedra Branca in the South China Sea.
Schouten Island is a  island in eastern Tasmania, Australia. It lies 1.6 kilometres south of Freycinet Peninsula and is a part of Freycinet National Park. In 1642, while surveying the south-west coast of Tasmania, Tasman named the island after Joost Schouten, a member of the Council of the Dutch East India Company.
Tasman also reached Storm Bay, a large bay in the south-east of Tasmania, Australia. It is the entrance to the Derwent River estuary and the port of Hobart, the capital city of Tasmania. It is bordered by Bruny Island to the west and the Tasman Peninsula to the east.
New Zealand and Fiji (first documented/undisputed sighting and charting of New Zealand) (1642)
(Figure)
Murderers' Bay, drawing by Isaack Gilsemans, 1642

(Figure)
Detail from a 1657 map by Jan Janssonius, showing the western coastline of Nova Zeelandia.

(Figure)
Tasman voyage of 1642-43 was the known (documented) first to sail across the Tasman Sea and explore its islands.

In 1642, during the same expedition, Abel Tasman discovered New Zealand. The first Europeans known to reach New Zealand were the crew of Dutch explorer Abel Tasman who arrived in his ships Heemskerck and Zeehaen. Tasman anchored at the northern end of the South Island in Golden Bay (he named it Murderers' Bay) in December 1642 and sailed northward to Tonga following a clash with local Māori. Tasman sketched sections of the two main islands' west coasts. Tasman called them Staten Landt, after the States General of the Netherlands, and that name appeared on his first maps of the country. In 1645 Dutch cartographers changed the name to Nova Zeelandia in Latin, from Nieuw Zeeland, after the Dutch province of Zeeland. It was subsequently Anglicised as New Zealand by British naval captain James Cook
Various claims have been made that New Zealand was reached by other non-Polynesian voyagers before Tasman, but these are not widely accepted. Peter Trickett, for example, argues in Beyond Capricorn that the Portuguese explorer Cristóvão de Mendonça reached New Zealand in the 1520s, and the Tamil bell926 discovered by missionary William Colenso has given rise to a number of theories,927 928 but historians generally believe the bell 'is not in itself proof of early Tamil contact with New Zealand'.929930931
In 1643, still during the same expedition, Tasman discovered Fiji.
Tongatapu and Haʻapai (Tonga) (1643)
Tasman discovered Tongatapu and Haʻapai in 1643 commanding two ships, the Heemskerck and the Zeehaen commissioned by the Dutch East India Company. The expedition's goals were to chart the unknown southern and eastern seas and to find a possible passage through the South Pacific and Indian Ocean providing a faster route to Chile.
Sakhalin (Cape Patience) (1643)
The first European known to visit Sakhalin was Martin Gerritz de Vries, who mapped Cape Patience and Cape Aniva on the island's east coast in 1643.
Kuril Islands (1643)
In the summer of 1643, the Castricum, under command of Martin Gerritz de Vries sailed by the southern Kuril Islands, visiting Kunashir, Iturup and Urup, which they named "Company Island" and claimed for the Netherlands.
Vries Strait or Miyabe Line is a strait between two main islands of the Kurils. It is located between the northeastern end of the island of Iturup and the southwestern headland of Urup Island, connecting the Sea of Okhotsk on the west with the Pacific Ocean on the east. The strait is named after de Vries, the first recorded European to explore the area.
The Gulf of Patience is a large body of water off the southeastern coast of Sakhalin, Russia, between the main body of Sakhalin Island in the west and Cape Patience in the east. It is part of the Sea of Okhotsk. The first Europeans to visit the bay sailed on Castricum. They named the gulf in memory of the fog that had to clear for them to continue their expedition.
Rottnest Island and Swan River (Western Australian coast) (1696)
(Figure)
A Quokka family on Rottnest Island, Western Australia

The first Europeans known to land on the Rottnest Island were 13 Dutch sailors including Abraham Leeman from the Waeckende Boey who landed near Bathurst Point on 19 March 1658 while their ship was nearby. The ship had sailed from Batavia in search of survivors of the missing Vergulde Draeck which was later found wrecked  north near present day Ledge Point. The island was given the name "Rotte nest" (meaning "rat nest" in the 17th century Dutch language) by Dutch captain Willem de Vlamingh who spent six days exploring the island from 29 December 1696, mistaking the quokkas for giant rats. De Vlamingh led a fleet of three ships, De Geelvink, De Nijptang and Weseltje and anchored on the northern side of the island, near The Basin.
(Figure)
Willem de Vlamingh's ships, with black swans, at the entrance to the Swan River, Western Australia, coloured engraving (1796), derived from an earlier drawing (now lost) from the de Vlamingh expeditions of 1696–97.

(Figure)
An adult black swan and cygnet. For some 1500 years, the black swan existed in the European imagination as a metaphor for that which could not exist. Dutch explorer Willem de Vlamingh made the first European record of sighting a black swan in 1697. The sighting was significant in Europe, where "all swans are white" had long been used as a standard example of a well-known truth.

On 10 January 1697, de Vlamingh ventured up the Swan River. He and his crew are believed to have been the first Europeans to do so. He named the Swan River (Zwaanenrivier in Dutch) after the large numbers of black swans that he observed there.
Easter Island and Samoa (first documented sighting of, landing on and charting of Easter Island) (1722)
(Figure)
Easter Island is world famous for its 887 extant monumental statues, called moai

On Easter Sunday, 5 April 1722, Dutch explorer Jacob Roggeveen discovered Easter Island. Easter Island is one of the most remote inhabited islands in the world.932 The nearest inhabited land (50 residents) is Pitcairn Island  away, the nearest town with a population over 500 is Rikitea on island Mangareva  away, and the nearest continental point lies in central Chile,  away.
The name "Easter Island" was given by the island's first recorded European visitor, the Dutch explorer Jacob Roggeveen, who encountered it on Easter Sunday (5 April933) 1722, while searching for Davis or David's island. Roggeveen named it Paasch-Eyland (18th century Dutch for "Easter Island").934 The island's official Spanish name, Isla de Pascua, also means "Easter Island".
The first-recorded European contact with the island took place on 5 April (Easter Sunday) 1722 when Dutch navigator Jacob Roggeveen visited for a week and estimated there were 2,000 to 3,000 inhabitants on the island. This was an estimate, not a census, and archaeologists estimate the population may have been as high as 10,000 to 12,000 a few decades earlier. His party reported "remarkable, tall, stone figures, a good 30 feet in height", the island had rich soil and a good climate and "all the country was under cultivation". Fossil-pollen analysis shows that the main trees on the island had gone 72 years earlier in 1650. The civilization of Easter Island was long believed to have degenerated drastically during the century before the arrival of the Dutch, as a result of overpopulation, deforestation and exploitation of an extremely isolated island with limited natural resources. The Dutch reported that a fight broke out in which they killed ten or twelve islanders.
Jacob Roggeveen's expedition of 1722 gives us our first description of the islanders. They were "of all shades of colour, yellow, white and brown" and they distended their ear lobes so greatly with large disks that when they took them out they could "hitch the rim of the lobe over the top of the ear".935 Roggeveen also noted how some of the islanders were "generally large in stature". Islanders' tallness was also witnessed by the Spanish who visited the island in 1770, measuring heights of 196 and 199 cm.
On 13 June Roggeveen discovered the islands of Samoa.
Orange River (1779)
The Orange River was named by Colonel Robert Gordon, commander of the Dutch East India Company garrison at Cape Town, on a trip to the interior in 1779.
Scientific explorations
First systematic mapping of southern celestial hemisphere (1595–1597)
In 1595, Petrus Plancius, a key promoter to the East Indies expeditions, asked Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser, the chief pilot on the Hollandia, to make observations to fill in the blank area around the south celestial pole on European maps of the southern sky. Plancius had instructed Keyser to map the skies in the southern hemisphere, which were largely uncharted at the time. Keyser died in Java the following year but his catalogue of 135 stars, probably measured up with the help of explorer-colleague Frederick de Houtman, was delivered to Plancius, and then those stars were arranged into 12 new southern constellations, letting them be inscribed on a 35-cm celestial globe that was prepared in late 1597 (or early 1598). This globe was produced in collaboration with the Amsterdam cartographer Jodocus Hondius.
Plancius's constellations (mostly referring to animals and subjects described in natural history books and travellers' journals of his day) are Apis the Bee (later changed to Musca by Lacaille), Apus the Bird of Paradise, Chamaeleon, Dorado the Goldfish (or Swordfish), Grus the Crane, Hydrus the Small Water Snake, Indus the Indian, Pavo the Peacock, Phoenix, Triangulum Australe the Southern Triangle, Tucana the Toucan, and Volans the Flying Fish. The acceptance of these new constellations was assured when Johann Bayer, a German astronomer, included them in his Uranometria of 1603, the leading star atlas of its day. These 12 southern constellations are still recognized today by the International Astronomical Union (IAU).936937938939940941942
First major scientific expedition to Brazil (1637–1644)
Within the thirty-year period the Dutch West India Company controlled the northeast region of Brazil (1624–1654), the seven-year governorship of Count Johan Maurits van Nassau-Siegen was marked by an intense ethnographic exploration.943944945 To that end, Johan Maurits brought from Europe with him a team of artists and scientists who lived in Recife between 1637 and 1644: painter Albert Eckhout (specializing in the human figure), painter Frans Post (landscape painter), natural historian Georg Marcgraf (who also produced drawings and prints), and the physician Willem Piso. Together with Georg Marcgraf, and originally published by Joannes de Laet, Piso wrote the Historia Naturalis Brasiliae (1648), an important early western insight into Brazilian flora and fauna, also is the first scientific book about Brazil. Albert Eckhout, along with the landscape artist Frans Post, was one of two formally trained painters charged with recording the complexity of the local scene. The seven years Eckhout spent in Brazil constitute an invaluable contribution to the understanding of the European colonization of the New World. During his stay he created hundreds of oil sketches – mostly from life – of the local flora, fauna and people. These paintings by Eckhout and the landscapes by Post were among the Europeans' first, introductions to South America.
First ethnographic descriptions of New Netherland and North American Indians (1641–1653)
In 1641, Kiliaen van Rensselaer, the director of the Dutch West India Company, hired Adriaen van der Donck (1620–1655) to be his lawyer for his large, semi-independent estate, Rensselaerswijck, in New Netherland. Until 1645, van der Donck lived in the Upper Hudson River Valley, near Fort Orange (later Albany), where he learned about the Company's fur trade, the Mohawk and Mahican Indians who traded with Dutch, the agriculturist settlers, and the area's plants and animals. In 1649, after a serious disagreement with the new governor, Peter Stuyvesant, he returned to the Dutch Republic to petition Dutch government. In 1653, still in the Netherlands waiting for the government to decide his case, Adriaen van der Donck wrote a comprehensive description of the New Netherland's geography and native peoples based on material in his earlier Remonstrance. The book, Beschryvinge van Nieuw-Nederlant or A Description of New Netherland later published in 1655. This new book was well-crafted to the interests of his audience, consisting of an extensive description of American Indians and their customs, reports on the abundance of the area's agriculture and wealth of its natural resources.946947948949950
Others
First non-Asian first-hand account of Korea (1653–1666)
Jan Weltevree (1595-?) is regarded as the first naturalized Westerner to Korea. Weltevree was a Dutch sailor who arrived on the shores of an island off Joseon’s west coast in 1627 in a shipwreck. The Joseon Dynasty at that time maintained an isolation policy, so the captured foreigner could not leave the country. Weltevree took the name Bak Yeon (also Pak Yeon). He became an important government official and aided King Hyojong with his keen knowledge of modern weaponry. His adventures were recorded in the report by Dutch East India Company accountant Hendrik Hamel.951952953954955956957958959
Dutch seafarer and VOC's bookkeeper Hendrick Hamel was the first westerner to experience first-hand and write about Korea in Joseon era (1392–1897). In 1653, Hamel and his men were shipwrecked on Jeju island, and they remained captives in Korea for more than a decade. The Joseon dynasty was often referred to as the "Hermit Kingdom" for its harsh isolationism and closed borders. The shipwrecked Dutchmen were given some freedom of movement, but were forbidden to leave the country. After thirteen years (1653–1666), Hamel and seven of his crewmates managed to escape to the VOC trading mission at Dejima (an artificial island in the bay of Nagasaki, Japan), and from there to the Netherlands. In 1666, three different publishers published his report (Journal van de Ongeluckige Voyage van 't Jacht de Sperwer or An account of the shipwreck of a Dutch vessel on the coast of the isle of Quelpaert together with the description of the kingdom of Corea), describing their improbable adventure and giving the first detailed and accurate description of Korea to the western world.960961962963964965
See also

List of place names of Dutch origin
Australian places with Dutch names
Toponymy of New Netherland
New Holland
Dutch linguistic influence on naval terms
List of English words of Dutch origin
Japanese words of Dutch origin
Rangaku
Age of Discovery/Age of Exploration
Arctic exploration (Northern Sea Route)
European exploration of Australia
Northern Renaissance (Renaissance in the Low Countries)
Dutch Golden Age
Flood control in the Netherlands
Scientific Revolution
Science in the Age of Enlightenment
Renaissance humanism
Protestant Reformation
Protestantism
17th-century philosophy
Age of Enlightenment
History of liberalism


History of public international law
Military Revolution
Commercial Revolution
Agricultural Revolution
Glorious Revolution
Pilgrim Fathers
The Fens
New Netherland
Dutch Brazil
Dutch Formosa
Dutch Quarter (Potsdam)
Friedrichstadt
Christianshavn (Copenhagen)
New Holland Island (St. Petersburg)
Holland, Michigan
Holambra (São Paulo)
Tainan (Taiwan)
Dejima (Nagasaki)
History of Pernambuco
History of Svalbard
History of South Africa
History of Mauritius
History of Taiwan
History of Australia
History of Tasmania
History of New Zealand


History of Tonga
History of Fiji
History of Samoa
History of Easter Island
History of New York
History of New York City (prehistory–1664)
History of Cape Town
History of Saint Petersburg
History of Gothenburg
History of Danzig
Fokker
State University of Leuven
Ghent University
University of Liège
University of Indonesia
Bandung Institute of Technology
Royal Observatory of Belgium
Bosscha Observatory
Economic history of the Netherlands (1500–1815)
Financial history of the Dutch Republic
History of capitalism
World-systems theory
Great Divergence
The European Miracle
The Fable of The Bees: or, Private Vices, Public Benefits
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism

Bibliography

Adams, Ann Jensen: Temporality and the Seventeenth-century Dutch Portrait (Journal of Historians of Netherlandish Art – JHNA.2013.5.2.15)
Adams, Julia: The Familial State: Ruling Families and Merchant Capitalism in Early Modern Europe (The Wilder House Series in Politics, History and Culture). Cornell University Press, 2007, 250pp
Akashi, Kinji: Cornelius Van Bynkershoek: His Role in the History of International Law (International Law in Japanese Perspective). BRILL, 1998, 224pp
Andersen, Geoff: The Telescope: Its History, Technology, and Future. Princeton University Press, 2007, 256pp
Anderson, Grahame: The Merchant of the Zeehaen: Isaac Gilsemans and the Voyages of Abel Tasman. Wellington, NZ: Te Papa Press, 2001, 162pp
Arrighi, Giovanni; Silver, Beverly: Chaos and Governance in the Modern World System (Contradictions of Modernity). University of Minnesota Press, 1999, 348pp
Arrighi, Giovanni: The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power and the Origins of Our Times. New York: Verso, 1994, 400pp
Atack, Jeremy; Neal, Larry (eds.): The Origins and Development of Financial Markets and Institutions, from the Seventeenth Century to the Present. Cambridge University Press, 2011, 496pp
Aymard, Maurice (ed.): Dutch Capitalism and World Capitalism / Capitalisme hollandais et capitalisme mondial (Studies in Modern Capitalism / Etudes sur le capitalisme moderne). (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, 1982, pp. viii+312)
Baker, Bevan B.; Copson, E. T.: The Mathematical Theory of Huygens' Principle, 3rd edition. (New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, 1987, 193pp)
Barbour, Violet: Capitalism in Amsterdam in the Seventeenth Century. (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1963)
Barnett, Jo Ellen: Time's Pendulum: From Sundials to Atomic Clocks, the Fascinating History of Timekeeping and How Our Discoveries Changed the World. Harcourt Brace/Harvest Book, 1999, 334pp
Barreveld, Dirk Jan: The Dutch Discovery of Japan: The True Story behind James Clavell's Famous Novel 'SHOGUN'. (iUniverse, 2001, 328pp)
Barreveld, Dirk J.: From New Amsterdam to New York: The Founding of New York by the Dutch in July 1625. (iUniverse, 2001, 332pp)
Battye, James S.: Western Australia : A History from its Discovery to the Inauguration of the Commonwealth (Oxford, 1924)
Bell, A. E.: Christian Huygens and the Development of Science in the Seventeenth Century (London, 1947)
Bennett, Matthew; Schatz, Michael F.; Rockwood, Heidi; Wiesenfeld, Kurt: Huygens's Clocks (Proceedings: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, Vol. 458, No. 2019), 8 Mar 2002, pp. 563–579 [Published by the Royal Society]
Blaeu, Joan: Atlas Maior of 1665 (Taschen 25). Introduction by Peter van der Krogt. Taschen GmbH, 2010, 544pp
Blundell, Stephen J.: Superconductivity: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2009, 144pp
Blussé, Leonard; Remmelink, Willem; Smits, Ivo (ed.): Bridging the Divide: 400 Years The Netherlands-Japan. Leiden: Hotei Publishing, 2000, 288pp
Boterbloem, Kees: Moderniser of Russia: Andrei Vinius, 1641-1716. Palgrave Macmillan, 2013, 280pp
Boterbloem, Kees: The Fiction & Reality of Jan Struys: A Seventeenth-Century Dutch Globetrotter. Palgrave Macmillan, 2008, 272pp
Boxer, Charles R.: Jan Compagnie in Japan, 1600–1850: An Essay on the Cultural, Artistic and Scientific Influence Exercised by the Hollanders in Japan from the Seventeenth to the Nineteenth Centuries (Den Haag, Martinus Nijhoff, 1950)
Boxer, Charles R.: The Dutch in Brazil, 1624–1654. Archon Books, 1973, 329pp
Boxer, Charles R.: Dutch Merchants and Mariners in Asia, 1602-1795 (Collected Studies Series). Variorum, 1988, 350pp
Brand, Hanno (ed.): Trade, Diplomacy and Cultural Exchange: Continuity and Change in the North Sea and the Baltic c. 1350-1750. (Uitgeverij Verloren, 2006, 248pp)
Brienen, Rebecca Parker: Visions of Savage Paradise: Albert Eckhout, Court Painter in Colonial Dutch Brazil. Amsterdam University Press, 2007, 288pp
Broers, Herman: Inventor for Life: The Story of W. J. Kolff, Father of Artificial Organs. B&Vmedia; Publishers, 2007, 260pp
Brook, Timothy: Vermeer's Hat: The Seventeenth Century and the Dawn of the Global World. (Profile Books, 2008, 272pp)
Brusati, Celeste: Artifice and Illusion: The Art and Writing of Samuel van Hoogstraten. University of Chicago Press, 1st edition, 1995, 428pp
Buchwald, Jed Z.: The Rise of the Wave Theory of Light: Optical Theory and Experiment in the Early Nineteenth Century. (University of Chicago Press, 1989, 498pp)
Bulut, Mehmet: Ottomaans-Nederlandse Economische Betrekkingen in de Vroeg-moderne Periode 1571–1699 (Ottoman-Dutch Economic Relations in the Early Modern Period 1571–1699). Uitgeverij Verloren, 2001, 240pp
Burch, George Edward; DePasquale, Nicholas P.; Howell, Joel D.: A History of Electrocardiography (Norman Cardiology Series). Norman Publishing, 1990, 309pp
Burkhardt, Jr., Richard W.: Patterns of Behavior: Konrad Lorenz, Niko Tinbergen, and the Founding of Ethology. University of Chicago Press, 2005, 648pp
Calisher, Charles H.; Horzinek, M.C. (eds.): 100 Years of Virology: The Birth and Growth of a Discipline. Springer, 1st edition, 1999, 224pp
Cassis, Youssef: Capitals of Capital: The Rise and Fall of International Financial Centres 1780-2009. Translated by Jacqueline Collier. (Cambridge University Press, 2010, 408pp)
Castro, Xavier de: Prisonniers des Glaces. Les Expéditions de Willem Barentsz (1594–1597). Préface, traduction et notes de Xavier de Castro. (Editions Chandeigne, 1996, 286pp
Cellarius, Andreas: Harmonia Macrocosmica. Introduction by Robert Van Gent. Taschen GmbH, 2012, 240pp
Chaiklin, Martha: Cultural Commerce and Dutch Commercial Culture: The Influence of European Material Culture on Japan, 1700–1850 (Studies in Overseas History 5). Research School CNWS, Leiden University, 2003, 284pp
Christensen, Aksel E.: Dutch Trade to the Baltic about 1600: Studies in the Sound Toll Register and Dutch Shipping Records. (Copenhagen: Einar Munksgaard, 1941)
Chase-Dunn, Christopher; Friedman, Jonathan (eds.): Hegemonic Decline: Present and Past (Political Economy of the World-System Annuals). Paradigm Publishers, 2005, 252pp
Chase-Dunn, Christopher; Bornschier, Volker (eds.): Future of Global Conflict (SAGE Studies in International Sociology). SAGE Publications Ltd, 1999, 320pp
Chase-Dunn, Christopher; Lerro, Bruce: Social Change: Globalization from the Stone Age to the Present. Paradigm Publishers, 2013, 504pp
Chiu, Hsin-Hui: The Colonial 'Civilizing Process' in Dutch Formosa, 1624–1662 (Tanap Monographs on the History of Asian-European Interaction). Brill Academic, 2008, 346pp
Chua, Amy: Day of Empire: How Hyperpowers Rise to Global Dominance – and Why They Fall. Anchor, 2009, 432pp
Cipolla, Carlo M.: Clocks and Culture: 1300–1700 (Norton Library). W. W. Norton & Company, 2003, 192pp
Clulow, Adam: The Company and the Shogun: The Dutch Encounter with Tokugawa Japan (Columbia Studies in International and Global History). Columbia University Press, 2014, 352pp
Cobb, Matthew: Generation: The Seventeenth-Century Scientists Who Unraveled the Secrets of Sex, Life, and Growth. Bloomsbury USA, 2006, 256pp
Cobb, Matthew: The Egg and Sperm Race: The Seventeenth-Century Scientists Who Unlocked the Secrets of Sex and Growth. London Simon & Schuster 2006
Conway, Martin: No Man's Land: A History of Spitsbergen from its Discovery in 1596 to the Beginning of the Scientific Exploration of the Country. Cambridge University Press, 2012, 412pp
Cook, Harold J.: Matters of Exchange: Commerce, Medicine, and Science in the Dutch Golden Age. (Yale University Press, 2008, 576pp)
Crawford, Dorothy H.: Deadly Companions: How Microbes Shaped Our History. Oxford University Press, 2009, 272pp
Croft, William J.: Under the Microscope: A Brief History of Microscopy. (World Scientific Publishing Company, 2006, 152pp)
Curley, Robert: The Britannica Guide to Inventions That Changed the Modern World (Series: Turning Points in History). Rosen Education Service, 2009, 386pp
Dahl, P. F.: Superconductivity: Its Historical Roots and Development from Mercury to the Ceramic Oxides. American Institute of Physics, 1992, 400pp
Dash, Mike: Tulipomania: The Story of the World's Most Coveted Flower & the Extraordinary Passions It Aroused. Broadway Books, 2001, 273pp
Davids, Karel: The Rise and Decline of Dutch Technological Leadership Technology, Economy, and Culture in the Netherlands, 1350–1800 (2 vols), 2008, 634pp
Day, Alan: The A to Z of the Discovery and Exploration of Australia (The A to Z Guide Series). Scarecrow Press, 2009, 370pp
De la Vega, Joseph Penso: Confusión de Confusiones (Amsterdam, 1688). The Confusion of Confusions: Portions Descriptive of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange (Hermann Kellenbenz trans.,1957, Baker Library, Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration)
De Veer, Gerrit: Three Voyages of William Barents to the Arctic Regions (1594, 1595, and 1596) (Cambridge Library Collection – Hakluyt First Series). Edited by Koolemans Beynen and Charles T. Beke. Cambridge University Press, reprint edition, 2010, 556pp
De Vries, Jan; Woude, Ad van der: The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500–1815. Cambridge University Press, 1997, 792pp
Dijksterhuis, Fokko Jan: Lenses and Waves: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematical Science of Optics in the Seventeenth Century. Springer, 2004, 289pp
Dijksterhuis, E. J.: Simon Stevin: Science in the Netherlands around 1600. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1970, pp. x + 145
Dobell, Clifford: Antony Van Leeuwenhoek and His Little Animals. Dover Publications Inc, 1932, 435pp
Dolev, Shlomi: Self-stabilization. (MIT Press, 2000, 207pp)
Dunn, Richard: The Telescope: A Short History. Conway, Reprint edition, 2011, 192pp
Dunthorne, H. (2004): The Dutch Republic: that Mother Nation of Liberty, in The Enlighten-ment World, M. Fitzpatrick, P. Jones, C. Knellwolf and I. McCalman eds. London: Routledge, pp. 87–103
Dupré, Sven; Lüthy, Christoph (eds.): Silent Messengers: The Circulation of Material Objects of Knowledge in the Early Modern Low Countries (Low Countries Studies on the Circulation of Natural Knowledge, Vol. 1). (LIT Verlag, 2011, ii + 387 pp)
Dupré, Sven; Cook, Harold J. (eds.): Translating Knowledge in the Early Modern Low Countries (Low Countries Studies on the Circulation of Natural Knowledge, Vol. 3). (LIT Verlag, 2012, ii + 466 pp)
Duyker, Edward (ed.): The Discovery of Tasmania: Journal Extracts from the Expeditions of Abel Janszoon Tasman and Marc-Joseph Marion Dufresne 1642 & 1772. St David's Park Publishing/Tasmanian Government Printing Office, Hobart, 1992, pp. 106
Duyker, Edward: Mirror of the Australian Navigation by Jacob Le Maire: A Facsimile of the ‘Spieghel der Australische Navigatie . . .’ Being an Account of the Voyage of Jacob Le Maire and Willem Schouten 1615–1616 published in Amsterdam in 1622. Hordern House for the Australian National Maritime Museum, Sydney, 1999, 202pp
Ell, Gordon C.: Abel Tasman: In Search of the Great South Land. Auckland, NZ: Bush Press, 1992
Ende, Hans van den; Kersen, Frits van; Kersen, Maria van; Taylor, John C.; Taylor, Neil R.: Huygens' Legacy: The Golden Age of the Pendulum Clock. Isle of Man (UK), Fromanteel Ltd, 2004, 320pp
Falkowski, Paul G.: Life's Engines: How Microbes Made Earth Habitable. (Princeton University Press, 2015, 224pp)
Fischer, Steven Roger: Island at the End of the World: The Turbulent History of Easter Island. Reaktion Books, 2005, 304pp
Flannery, Tim: The Explorers: Stories of Discovery and Adventure from the Australian Frontier. Grove Press, 2000, 400pp
Fléchon, Dominique; Cologni, Franco: The Mastery of Time: A History of Timekeeping, from the Sundial to the Wristwatch. Discoveries, Inventions, and Advances in Master Watchmaking. Flammarion, 2012, 456pp
Fleuriet, Michel: Finance: A Fine Art. Wiley, 2003, 298pp
Ford, Brian J.: Single Lens: The Story of the Simple Microscope. London: William Heinemann, 1985, 182pp
Ford, Brian J.: The Revealing Lens: Mankind and the Microscope. London: George Harrap, 1973, 208pp
Ford, Brian J.: The Leeuwenhoek Legacy. Bristol: Biopress, 1991, 185pp
Fossheim, Kristian: Superconductivity. Discoveries and Discoverers: Ten Physics Nobel Laureates Tell Their Story. Springer, 2013, 200pp
Freist, Dagmar: The Dutch Century (Das niederländische Jahrhundert). Translated by William Petropulos (Europäische Geschichte Online – EGO). Mainz: Leibniz-Institut für Europäische Geschichte (IEG), 2012-10-17
Friedrich, Susanne; Brendecke, Arndt; Ehrenpreis, Stefan (eds.): Transformations of Knowledge in Dutch Expansion (Pluralisierung & Autorität, 44). (Walter de Gruyter GmbH, 2015, 292 pp)
Funnell, Warwick; Robertson, Jeffrey: Accounting by the First Public Company: The Pursuit of Supremacy (Routledge New Works in Accounting History). Routledge, 2013, 224pp
Garvey, Robert: To Build a Ship: The VOC Replica Ship Duyfken. UWA Publishing, 2001, 104pp
Genpaku, Sugita: Dawn of Western Science in Japan: Rangaku Kotohajime. Ryozo Matsumoto (translator), Tomio Ogata (contributor). Hokuseido Press, 1969
Gillard, Lucien: La Banque d'Amsterdam et le florin européen au temps de la République néerlandaise, 1610-1820. (Paris: Editions de l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, 420 p., 2004)
Gepken-Jager, Ella; van Solinge, Gerard; Timmermann, Levinus (eds.): VOC 1602-2002: 400 Years of Company Law (Series Law of Business and Finance, Vol. 6). (Deventer: Kluwer Legal Publishers, 2005, 459pp)
Goetzmann, William N.; Rouwenhorst, K. Geert: The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations that Created Modern Capital Markets. (USA: Oxford University Press, 2005, 416pp)
Goffart, Walter: Historical Atlases: The First Three Hundred Years, 1570–1870. University of Chicago Press, 2003, 512pp
Goldgar, Anne: Tulipmania: Money, Honor and Knowledge in the Dutch Golden Age. (University of Chicago Press, 2008, 446pp)
Goldstein, Leslie Friedman: Constituting Federal Sovereignty: The European Union in Comparative Context (The Johns Hopkins Series in Constitutional Thought). Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001, 256pp
Goodfriend, Joyce D.; Schmidt, Benjamin; Stott, Annette (eds.): Going Dutch: The Dutch Presence in America 1609–2009 (Atlantic World). Brill Academic, 2008, 367pp
Goodman, Grant K.: Japan and the Dutch 1600–1853. Richmond: Curzon Press, 2000, 304pp
Gordon, John Steele: The Great Game: The Emergence of Wall Street as a World Power: 1653–2000. Scribner, 1999, 320pp
Goslinga, Cornelius C.: The Dutch in the Caribbean and on the Wild Coast 1580-1680. (University Press of Florida, 1971, 647pp)
Goslinga, Cornelius C.: The Dutch in the Caribbean and in the Guianas 1680-1791. (Assen, 1985)
Gregoriou, Greg N.: Handbook of Short Selling. Academic Press, 2011, 624pp
Haley, K.H.D.: Dutch in the Seventeenth Century (Library of European Civilization). Thames & Hudson Ltd., 1st edition, 1972, 216pp
Hamel, Hendrick: Hamel's Journal and a Description of the Kingdom of Korea 1653–1666. Translated by Jean-Paul Buys. Royal Asiatic Society, Korea Branch, 2011, 107pp
Haven, Kendall: 100 Greatest Science Discoveries of All Time. Libraries Unlimited, 2007, 272pp
Haven, Kendall: 100 Greatest Science Inventions of All Time. Libraries Unlimited, 2005, 360pp
Headstrom, Richard: Adventures with a Microscope. (Dover Publications, 1977, 232pp)
Heath, Byron: Discovering the Great South Land. Rosenberg Publishing, 2005, 192pp
Heeres, J. E.: The Part Borne by the Dutch in the Discovery of Australia 1606–1765 (Published by the Royal Dutch Geographical Society in Commemoration of the XXVth Anniversary of Its Foundation, 1899)
Heeres J. E. (ed): Abel Janszoon Tasman's Journal of His Discovery of Van Diemen's Land and New Zealand in 1642 (Amsterdam, 1898)
Henderson, J.: Sent Forth a Dove: The Discovery of Duyfken, 1999, 232pp
Hochstrasser, Julie Berger: Still Life and Trade in the Dutch Golden Age. (Yale University Press, 2007, 320pp)
Horstmeier, Carel; Koningsbrugge, Hans van (ed.): Around Peter the Great: Three Centuries of Russian-Dutch Relations (Groningen: INOS, 1997)
Hoving, Ab; Emke, Cor: The Ships of Abel Tasman. Uitgeverij Verloren B.V., 2000, 144pp
Hoving, A. J.; Wildeman, Diederick: Nicolaes Witsen and Shipbuilding in the Dutch Golden Age (Ed Rachal Foundation Nautical Archaeology Series). Translated by Alan Lemmers, foreword by André Wegener Sleeswyk. Texas A&M; University Press, 2011, 310pp
Howitt, William: The History of Discovery in Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand from the Earliest Date to the Present Day, 2 Vols (Cambridge Library Collection – History of Oceania). Cambridge University Press, 2011
Huerta, Robert D.: Giants of Delft: Johannes Vermeer and the Natural Philosophers: the Parallel Search for Knowledge During the Age of Discovery. Bucknell University Press, 2003
Huigen, Siegfried; de Jong, Jan L.: The Dutch Trading Companies as Knowledge Networks (Intersections). BRILL, 2010, 448pp
Hunt, John Dixon: Dutch Garden in the Seventeenth Century (Dumbarton Oaks Colloquium Series in the History of Landscape Architecture, Book 12). (Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, 1990, 214pp)
Hunt, John: Dutch South Africa: Early Settlers at the Cape 1652-1708. Matador, 2005, 180pp
Huizinga, Johan: Dutch Civilisation in the Seventeenth Century, and Other Essays. Translated by Arnold J. Pomermans. (London: Collins, 1968)
Hunt, John Dixon: Dutch Garden in the Seventeenth Century (Dumbarton Oaks Colloquium on the History of Landscape Architecture). Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, 1990, 214pp
Hunter, Douglas: Half Moon: Henry Hudson and the Voyage that Redrew the Map of the New World. Bloomsbury Press, 2009, 336pp
Hyma, Albert: A History of the Dutch in the Far East. (George Wahr Pub Co, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1953)
Israel, Jonathan Irvine: The Dutch Republic: Its Rise, Greatness, and Fall 1477–1806 (Oxford History of Early Modern Europe). Oxford University Press, USA, 1998, 1280pp
Israel, Jonathan Irvine: Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585–1740 (Clarendon Paperbacks). Oxford University Press, USA, 1990, 488pp
Israel, Jonathan Irvine: The Anglo-Dutch Moment: Essays on the Glorious Revolution and its World Impact. Cambridge University Press, 1991, 520pp
Israel, Jonathan Irvine: Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity 1650-1750. (Oxford University Press, 2001, 832pp)
Israel, Jonathan Irvine; Schwartz, Stuart: The Expansion of Tolerance: Religion in Dutch Brazil (1624–1654) (Amsterdam Studies in the Dutch Golden Age). Amsterdam University Press, 2007
Jacob, Trevor K.: Southland: The Maritime Exploration of Australia. Ministry of Education, Western Australia, 1987, 164pp
Jardine, Lisa: Going Dutch: How England Plundered Holland's Glory. Harper Perennial, 2009, 432pp
Jenkin, Robert: Strangers in Mohua: Abel Tasman's Exploration of New Zealand. The Golden Bay Museum
Johnson, Hiroko: Western Influence on Japanese Art: The Akita Ranga Art School and Foreign Books. (Hotei Publishing, 2005, 250pp)
Jonker, Joost; Sluyterman, Keetie: At Home on the World Markets: Dutch International Trading Companies from the 16th Century until the Present. McGill Queens University Press, 2001, 429pp
Jonker, Joost; Gelderblom, Oscar: Completing a Financial Revolution: The Finance of the Dutch East India Trade and the Rise of the Amsterdam Capital Market, 1595-1612. (The Journal of Economic History, 2004, vol. 64, issue 03, pages 641-672)
Jonker, Joost; 't Hart, Marjolein; van Zanden, Jan Luiten: A Financial History of the Netherlands. Cambridge University Press, 2010, 252pp
Jonker, Joost; Gelderblom, Oscar; Dari-Mattiacci, Giuseppe; Perotti, Enrico C.: The Emergence of the Corporate Form. (Amsterdam Law School Research Paper No. 2013-11, Amsterdam Center for Law & Economics Working Paper No. 2013-02)
Jonker, Joost; Gelderblom, Oscar; de Jong, Abe: The Formative Years of the Modern Corporation: The Dutch East India Company VOC, 1602–1623. (The Journal of Economic History / Volume 73 / Issue 04 / December 2013, pp 1050–1076)
Jorink, Eric: Reading the Book of Nature in the Dutch Golden Age, 1575–1715, BRILL, 2010, 474pp
Kanas, Nick: Star Maps: History, Artistry, and Cartography (Springer Praxis Books / Popular Astronomy). Praxis, 2007, 416pp
Karsten, Luchien: Globalization and Time. Routledge, 2012, 456pp
Kaufmann, Thomas Dacosta; North, Michael: Mediating Netherlandish Art and Material Culture in Asia (Amsterdam Studies in the Dutch Golden Age). Amsterdam University Press, 2014, 250pp
Keene, Donald: The Japanese Discovery of Europe, 1720–1830. Routledge, 2010, 274pp
Kenny, John: Before the First Fleet: European Discovery of Australia, 1606–1777. Kangaroo Press, 1995, 192pp
Keyes, George S.: Mirror of Empire: Dutch Marine Art of the Seventeenth Century. (Cambridge University Press, 1990, 458pp)
King, Henry C.: The History of the Telescope (Dover Books on Astronomy). Dover Publications, 2011, 480pp
Kipnis, A. Ya.; Yavelov, B. E. ; Rowlinson, J. S.: Van der Waals and Molecular Science. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996, 313pp
Knobel, E. B.: On Frederick de Houtman's Catalogue of Southern Stars, and the Origin of the Southern Constellations. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 77, p. 414–432
Krabbendam, Hans; Minnen, Cornelis A. van; Scott-Smith, Giles (eds.): Four Centuries of Dutch-American Relations: 1609-2009. (State University of New York Press, 2009, 1190pp)
Lachmann, Richard: Capitalists in Spite of Themselves: Elite Conflict and European Transitions in Early Modern Europe. Oxford University Press, USA, 328pp
Landes, David S.: Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983, xviii + 482 pp)
Landes, David S.; Mokyr, Joel; Baumol, William J.: The Invention of Enterprise: Entrepreneurship from Ancient Mesopotamia to Modern Times. (Princeton University Press, 2012, 584pp); Oscar, Gelderblom: The Golden Age of the Dutch Republic (Chapter 6), pp. 156–182
Ledyard, Gari: The Dutch Come to Korea. Royal Asiatic Society-Korea Branch, 1st edition, 1971, 231pp
Lee, Richard E. (ed): The Longue Duree and World-Systems Analysis (Fernand Braudel Center Studies in Historical Social Science). State University of New York Press, 2013, 292pp
Lesger, Clé: The Rise of the Amsterdam Market and Information Exchange: Merchants, Commercial Expansion and Change in the Spatial Economy of the Low Countries, c.1550-1630. (Ashgate Publishing Limited, 2006, 300pp)
Luna, Antoni Bayés De: Clinical Electrocardiography: A Textbook, fourth edition. Wiley, 2012, 568pp
Marandjian, Karine: Unseen Paradise: the Image of Holland in the Writings of Ando Shoeki, in The Japanese and Europe: Images and Perceptions (2000), edited by Bert Edström
Marcgraf, Georg; Piso, Willem: Historia Naturalis Brasiliae (1648)
MacDonald, Scott B.; Gastmann, Albert L.: A History of Credit and Power in the Western World. Transaction Publishers, 2001, 314pp
Maczulak, Anne: Allies and Enemies: How the World Depends on Bacteria. Financial Times / Prentice Hall, 1st edition, 2010, 224pp
Magiels, Geerdt: From Sunlight to Insight: Jan IngenHousz, the Discovery of Photosynthesis & Science in the Light of Ecology. ASP – Academic & Scientific Publishers, 2010, 408pp
Major, R. H.: Early Voyages to Terra Australis, now called Australia. London: Printed for the Hakluyt Society, 1859
Margócsy, Dániel: Commercial Visions: Science, Trade, and Visual Culture in the Dutch Golden Age. (University of Chicago Press, 2014, 336pp)
Matricon, Jean; Waysand, Georges; Glashausser, Charles: The Cold Wars: A History of Superconductivity. Rutgers University Press, 2003, 288pp
McCloskey, Deirdre N.: Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can't Explain the Modern World. University Of Chicago Press, 2011, 592pp
McHugh, Evan: 1606: An Epic Adventure (New South Books). University of New South Wales Press, 2006, 248pp
Mirsky, Jeannette: To the Arctic!: The Story of Northern Exploration from Earliest Times. University of Chicago Press, 1998, 372pp
Monmonier, Mark: Rhumb Lines and Map Wars: A Social History of the Mercator Projection. University of Chicago Press, 2004, 256pp
Moree, P. J.: A Concise History of Dutch Mauritius, 1598-1711 (Studies from the International Institute for Asian Studies). Routledge, 1998, 220pp
Muller, Sheila D.: Dutch Art: An Encyclopedia (Garland Reference Library of the Humanities). Routledge, 1997, 664pp
Murdoch, Priscilla: Duyfken and the First Discoveries of Australia. Artarmon, N.S.W. : Antipodean Publishers, 1974
Murphy, Henry Cruse: Henry Hudson in Holland: An Inquiry into the Origin and Objects of the Voyage which Led to the Discovery of the Hudson River, with Bibliographical Notes (Classic Reprint). Nabu Press, 2011, 90pp
Mutch, T. D.: The First Discovery of Australia – With an Account of the Voyage of the "Duyfken" and the Career of Captain Willem Jansz. (Sydney, 1942) Reprinted from the Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society, Vol. XXVIII., Part V]
National Maritime Museum (UK): The Art of the Van de Veldes: Paintings and Drawings by the Great Dutch Marine Artists and Their English Followers. Greenwich, England: The National Maritime Museum, 1982, 143pp
North, Michael: Art and Commerce in the Dutch Golden Age. Yale University Press. 1997, 164pp
Numata, Jiro: Western Learning: A Short History of the Study of Western Science in Early Modern Japan (Scientific Publications of the Japan-Netherlands Institute). Japan-Netherlands Institute, 1992, 196pp
Panetta, Roger: Dutch New York: The Roots of Hudson Valley Culture. Fordham University Press, 2nd edition, 2009, 450pp
Parsegian, V. Adrian: Van der Waals Forces: A Handbook for Biologists, Chemists, Engineers, and Physicists. (Cambridge University Press, 2005, 398pp)
Parthesius, Robert: Dutch Ships in Tropical Waters: The Development of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) Shipping Network in Asia 1595-1660 (Amsterdam Studies in the Dutch Golden Age). Amsterdam University Press, 2010, 217pp
Pearson, Michael: Great Southern Land: The Maritime Exploration of Terra Australis. Australian Government Department of the Environment and Heritage, 2005, 160pp
Peters, Nonja (ed.): The Dutch Down Under 1606–2006. Perth, Western Australia. University of Western Australia Press, 2006, 422pp
Peterson, Robert A.: Lessons in Liberty: The Dutch Republic, 1579–1750. Foundation for Economic Education: The Freeman, July 1987
Petram, Lodewijk: The World's First Stock Exchange (Columbia Business School Publishing). Columbia University Press, 2014, 304pp
Philbin, Tom: 100 Greatest Inventions of All Time: A Ranking Past and Present. Citadel, 2003, 352pp
Playford, Phillip E.: Voyage of Discovery to Terra Australis : by Willem de Vlamingh in 1696–97. Perth, Western Australia: Western Australian Museum, 1998
Plomp, R., Dr.: Spring-Driven Dutch Pendulum Clocks 1657–1710. Interbook International, 1979, 251pp
Porter, Roy; Teich, Mikulas: The Scientific Revolution in National Context, Cambridge University Press, 1992
Prakash, Om: The Dutch East India Company and the Economy of Bengal, 1630-1720. (Princeton University Press, 1985, 303pp)
Price, J. Leslie: Dutch Culture in the Golden Age. London: Reaktion Books, 2011, 286pp
Price, J. Leslie: Dutch Society, 1588–1713. Routledge, 2000, 306pp
Price, J. Leslie: The Dutch Republic in the Seventeenth Century (European History in Perspective). Palgrave Macmillan, 1998, 184pp
Price, J. Leslie: Culture and Society in the Dutch Republic during the 17th Century (Studies in Cultural History). London: HarperCollins Distribution Services, 1974, 296pp
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William: An Economic Explanation of the Early Bank of Amsterdam, Debasement, Bills of Exchange, and the Emergence of the First Central Bank. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (Working Paper 2006–13), 2006
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William: The Big Problem of Large Bills: The Bank of Amsterdam and the Origins of Central Banking. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (Working Paper 2005–16), 2005
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William: The Bank of Amsterdam and the Leap to Central Bank Money. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97, 2007, p262-5.
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William: Domestic Coinage and the Bank of Amsterdam. (August 2008 Draft of Chapter 7 of the Wisselbankboek)
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William: How Amsterdam Got Fiat Money. (Working Paper 2010-17, December 2010)
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William: The Bank of Amsterdam through the Lens of Monetary Competition. (Working Paper 2012-14, September 2012)
Ratcliff, Marc J.: The Quest for the Invisible: Microscopy in the Enlightenment. (Ashgate, 2009, 332pp)
Ridpath, Ian: Star Tales. Universe Publisher, 1988, 161pp
Ridpath, Ian: A Dictionary of Astronomy (Oxford Paperback Reference). Oxford University Press, 2nd edition, 2012, 544pp
Rimbert, Emmanuel: Le chapeau de Barentsz: La route du Grand Nord. (Editions Magellan et Cie, 2009, 176pp)
Rink, Oliver A.: Holland on the Hudson: An Economic and Social History of Dutch New York. Cornell University Press, 1989, 288pp
Roeper, Vibekeand; Walraven, Boudewijn; Buys, Jean-Paul (eds.): Hamel's World: A Dutch-Korean Encounter in the Seventeenth Century. Amsterdam: SUN, 2003, 192pp
Ruestow, Edward G.: The Microscope in the Dutch Republic: The Shaping of Discovery. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996. Pp. xii+348pp
Ruestow, Edward G.: Physics at 17th and 18th Century Leiden: Philosophy and the New Science in the University (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1973)
Russell, Bertrand: A History of Western Philosophy. George Allen & Unwin Ltd, London, 1945
Russel, Margarita: Visions of the Sea: Hendrick C. Vroom and the Origins of Dutch Marine Painting. Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 1983, 236pp
Rybczynski, Witold: Home: A Short History of an Idea. (Penguin Books, 1987, 272pp)
Sagan, Carl: Cosmos. New York: Random House, 1980, 365pp
Sagan, Carl; Agel, Jerome: The Cosmic Connection: An Extraterrestrial Perspective. Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 2012, 334pp
Sanderson, Stephen K.: Social Transformations: A General Theory of Historical Development. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1999, 496pp
Sarna, David E. Y.: History of Greed: Financial Fraud from Tulip Mania to Bernie Madoff. Wiley, 2010, 398pp
Schama, Simon: The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age. (Alfred A. Knopf, 1987, 698pp)
Schickore, Jutta: The Microscope and the Eye: A History of Reflections, 1740-1870. (University of Chicago Press, 2007, 320pp)
Schilder, G.: Australia Unveiled: the Share of Dutch Navigators in the Discovery of Australia (includes bibliography). Amsterdam: Thearum Orbis Terrarum, 1976
Schilder, Gunther: ''The Netherland Nautical Cartography from 1550 to 1650", RUC, Coimbra: BGUC, 1985, vol. XXXII, 97-119 (reed. Lisboa: CEHCA, 1984, sep. 159)
Schilling, Govert; Christensen, Lars Lindberg: Eyes on the Skies: 400 Years of Telescopic Discovery. (Wiley-VCH, 2009, 132pp)
Scholthof, Karen-Beth; Shaw, John G.; Zaitlin, Milton (eds.): Tobacco Mosaic Virus: One Hundred Years of Contributions to Virology. American Society of Plant Physiologists, 1st edition, 1999, 264pp
Screech, Timon: The Western Scientific Gaze and Popular Imagery in Later Edo Japan: The Lens within the Heart (Cambridge Studies in New Art History and Criticism). Cambridge University Press, 1996, 321pp
Shachtman, Tom: Absolute Zero and the Conquest of Cold. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1999)
Sengers, Johanna Levelt: How Fluids Unmix: Discoveries by the School of Van der Waals and Kamerlingh Onnes (Edita - History of Science and Scholarship in the Netherlands). Edita-the Publishing House of the Royal, 2002, 318pp
Sharp, Andrew: The Voyages of Abel Janszoon Tasman. Oxford University Press, 1st edition, 1968, 388pp
Sharp, Andrew (ed.): The Journal of Jacob Roggeveen. Oxford University Press, 1970, 200pp
Shaw, Lindsey; Wilkins, Wendy: Dutch Connections: 400 Years of Australian-Dutch Maritime Links, 1606–2006. Sydney: Australian National Maritime Museum, 2006, 175pp
Shorto, Russell: The Island at the Center of the World: The Epic Story of Dutch Manhattan and the Forgotten Colony That Shaped America. Vintage, 2005, 416pp
Shulman, Michael: Sell Short: A Simpler, Safer Way to Profit When Stocks Go Down. Wiley, 2009, 225pp
Sicking, Louis; de Bles, Harry; des Bouvrie, Erlend (eds.): Dutch Light in the Norwegian Night: Maritime Relations and Migration Across the North Sea in Early Modern Times. (Uitgeverij Verloren, 2004)
Sigmond, J.P.; Zuiderbaan, L.H.: Dutch Discoveries of Australia: Shipwrecks, Treasures and Early Voyages off the West Coast. Adelaide: Rigby, 1979, 176pp
Simpson, Phil: Guidebook to the Constellations: Telescopic Sights, Tales, and Myths (The Patrick Moore Practical Astronomy Series). Springer, 2012, 425pp
Singh, Abhay Kumar: Modern World System and Indian Proto-Industrialization: Bengal 1650–1800 (2 Vols). New Delhi: Northern Book Centre, 2006, 1004pp
Slot, B. J.: Abel Tasman and the Discovery of New Zealand. Amsterdam: O. Cramwinckel, 1992, 126pp
Snellen, H. A.: Willem Einthoven (1860–1927), Father of Electrocardiography: Life and Work, Ancestors and Contemporaries. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1995, 140pp
Snyder, Laura J.: Eye of the Beholder: Johannes Vermeer, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, and the Reinvention of Seeing. (W. W. Norton & Company, 2015, 448pp)
Sobel, Andrew C.: Birth of Hegemony: Crisis, Financial Revolution, and Emerging Global Networks. University of Chicago Press, 2012, 296pp
Spenlé, Virginie: "Savagery" and "Civilization": Dutch Brazil in the Kunst- and Wunderkammer. Journal of Historians of Netherlandish Art 3, no. 2, 2011
Steadman, Philip: Vermeer's Camera: Uncovering the Truth behind the Masterpieces. Oxford University Press, USA, 2001, 232pp
Stephenson, Bruce; Bolt, Marvin; Friedman, Anna Felicity: The Universe Unveiled: Instruments and Images Through History. Cambridge University Press, 2000, 152pp
Stone, Harriet: Tables of Knowledge: Descartes in Vermeer's Studio. Cornell University Press, 2006, 208pp
Struik, Dirk J.: The Land of Stevin and Huygens: A Sketch of Science and Technology in the Dutch Republic during the Golden Century (Studies in the History of Modern Science). Springer, 1981, 208pp
Suarez, Thomas: Early Mapping of the Pacific: The Epic Story of Seafarers, Adventurers and Cartographers Who Mapped the Earth's Greatest Ocean. Periplus Editions, 2004, 224pp
Sutton, Elizabeth A.: Mapping Meaning: Ethnography and Allegory in Netherlandish Cartography, 1570–1655 (2009)
Sutton, Elizabeth A.: Early Modern Dutch Prints of Africa (Transculturalisms, 1400-1700). (Ashgate, 2012, 276pp)
Sutton, Elizabeth A.: Capitalism and Cartography in the Dutch Golden Age. (University of Chicago Press, 2015, 208pp)
Suzuki, Yasuko: Japan-Netherlands Trade 1600-1800: The Dutch East India Company and Beyond. Trans Pacific Press, 2012, 298pp
Swan, Claudia: Art, Science, and Witchcraft in Early Modern Holland: Jacques de Gheyn II (1565–1629). (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005, xvi + 254 pp)
Swart, K.W.: The Miracle of the Dutch Republic as Seen in the Seventeenth Century: An Inaugural Lecture Delivered at University College London 6 November 1967. (London: H. K. Lewis, 1968)
Tarshis, Jerome: Andreas Vesalius, Father of Modern Anatomy (New York, 1969)
Taulli, Tom: All About Short Selling (All About Series). McGraw-Hill, 2011, 256pp
Taylor, Peter J.: The Way the Modern World Works: World Hegemony to World Impasse. Wiley, 1st edition, 1996, 290pp
Taylor, Peter J.: Modernities: A Geohistorical Interpretation. University of Minnesota Press, 1999, 168pp
Taylor, Peter J.: Dutch Hegemony and Contemporary Globalization (Paper prepared for Political Economy of World-Systems Conference, Riverside, California, 2002)
Theal, George McCall: History of South Africa under the Administration of the Dutch East India Company, 1652 to 1795. Nabu Press, 2010, 474pp
Thompson, David; Peckham, Saul: The History of Watches. Abbeville Press, 2008, 175pp
Tracy, James D.: A Financial Revolution in the Habsburg Netherlands: Renten and Renteniers in the County of Holland, 1515–1565. (University of California Press, 1985, 300pp)
Tuchman, Barbara W.: The First Salute: A View of the American Revolution. Random House Trade Paperbacks, 1989, 368pp
Ueno, Kazuo: The Light Theatre Opened to Universe (II): New Vermeer Theory. (XLIBRIS, 2013, 90pp)
Unger, Richard W.: Dutch Shipbuilding before 1800: Ships and Guilds. Assen: Van Gorcum, 1978
Van Berkel, Klaas; Van Helden, Albert; Palm, L. C.: The History of Science in the Netherlands: Survey, Themes and Reference. BRILL, 1998, xxviii + 660pp
Van Berkel, Klaas: "The Dutch Republic: Laboratory of the Scientific Revolution", BMGN: The Low Countries Historical Review 125 (2010), pp. 81-106)
Van Bunge, Wiep: From Stevin to Spinoza: an Essay on Philosophy in the Seventeenth-Century Dutch Republic (Brill's Studies in Intellectual History, 103). (Leiden and Boston: Brill Academic Publishers, 2001, 220pp)
Van Bunge, Wiep (ed.): The Early Enlightenment in the Dutch Republic, 1650-1750. (Leiden, 2003, 272pp)
Van Campen, Samuel Richard: The Dutch in the Arctic Seas: A Dutch Arctic Expedition and Route (Cambridge Library Collection – Polar Exploration). Cambridge University Press, 2013, 312pp
Van Delft, Dirk: Freezing Physics: Heike Kamerlingh Onnes and the Quest for Cold. (Edita-the Publishing House of the Royal, 2008, 592pp)
Van den Broecke, M. P. R.: Abraham Ortelius and the First Atlas: Essays Commemorating the Quadricentennial of His Death, 1598–1998. Hes & De Graff B.V., 1998, 432pp
Van der Hoven, Marco: Exercise of Arms: Warfare in the Netherlands, 1568–1648 (History of Warfare, V. 1). Brill Academic, 1997, 288pp
Van der Sijs, Nicoline: Cookies, Coleslaw, and Stoops: The Influence of Dutch on the North American Languages. Amsterdam University Press, 2009, 384pp
Van Gelder, Geert J.; de Moor, Ed (eds.): Eastward Bound: Dutch Ventures and Adventures in the Middle East (Orientations, 2). (Editions Rodopi, 1994, 178pp)
Van Groesen, Michiel : The Legacy of Dutch Brazil. (Cambridge University Press, 2014, 372pp)
Van Helden, Albert; Dupre, Sven; Van Gent, Rob; Zuidervaar, Huibt: The Origins of the Telescope (History of Science and Scholarship in the Netherlands). Amsterdam University Press, 2011, 368pp
Van Lottum, Jelle: Across the North Sea: The Impact of the Dutch Republic on International Labour Migration, c. 1550–1850 (Close Encounters With the Dutch). Aksant Academic Publishers, 2008, 256pp
Van Nieuwkerk, Marius (ed.): The Bank of Amsterdam: on the Origins of Central Banking. Translated by Joanne Victoria Trees. Sonsbeek Publishers, Amsterdam, 2009
Van Nieuwkerk, Marius; Kroeze, C.: Bubbles: Market Crashes Throughout History. Sonsbeek Publishers, 2007, 112pp
Van Nieuwkerk, Marius: Dutch Golden Glory: The Financial Power of the Netherlands Through the Ages. (Uitgeverij Becht, 2006, 224pp)
Van Nimwegen, Olaf: The Dutch Army and the Military Revolutions, 1588–1688. Translated by Andrew May. Warfare in History series. Woodbridge, England: Boydell Press, 2010
Van Noordwijk, Jacob: Dialysing for Life: The Development of the Artificial Kidney. Springer, 2001, 114pp
Vreeland, Hamilton: Hugo Grotius: The Father of the Modern Science of International Law. New York: Oxford University Press, 1917
Walker, James Backhouse: Abel Janszoon Tasman: His Life and Voyages, and The Discovery of Van Diemen's Land in 1642. Dodo Press, 2008, 102pp
Wallerstein, Immanuel: The Modern World-System II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600–1750. University of California Press, 2011, 397pp
Wassenaar, Trudy M.: Bacteria: The Benign, the Bad, and the Beautiful. Wiley-Blackwell, 2011, 232pp
Weir, William: 50 Military Leaders Who Changed the World. Pentagon Press, 2007, 262pp
Weslager, C. A.; Dunlap, A. R.: Dutch Explorers, Traders and Settlers in the Delaware Valley, 1609-1664. Literary Licensing, LLC, 2011, 332pp
Wiarda, Howard J.: The Dutch Diaspora: Growing Up Dutch in New Worlds and the Old. The Netherlands and Its Settlements in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. (Lexington Books, 2007, 237pp)
Wilson, Catherine: The Invisible World: Early Modern Philosophy and the Invention of the Microscope. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1995. Pp. x+280
Wilson, Charles; Hooykaas, Reyer; Hall, A. Rupert; Waszink, Jan Hendrik: The Anglo-Dutch Contribution to the Civilization of Early Modern Society: An Anglo-Netherlands Symposium. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976)
Wilson, Charles: The Dutch Republic and the Civilisation of the 17th Century. (McGraw-Hill, 1968, 255pp)
Wilson, Eric Michael: Savage Republic: De Indis of Hugo Grotius, Republicanism and Dutch Hegemony within the Early Modern World-System (c. 1600–1619). Martinus Nijhoff, 2008, 534pp
Woodfin, Thomas McCall: The Cartography of Capitalism: Cartographic Evidence for the Emergence of the Capitalist World-System in Early Modern Europe (2007)
Worden, Nigel; van Heyningen, Elizabeth; Bickford-Smith, Vivian: Cape Town: The Making of a City. (Cape Town: David Philip Publishers., 1998, 283pp)
Yeazell, Ruth Bernard: Art of the Everyday: Dutch Painting and the Realist Novel. (Princeton University Press, 2008, 252pp)
Yoder, Joella G.: Unrolling Time: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematization of Nature. Cambridge University Press, 1988, 256pp
Zagorin, Perez: How the Idea of Toleration Came to the West. (Princeton University Press, 2003)
Zandvliet, Kees: Mapping for Money: Maps, Plans and Topographic Paintings and their Role in Dutch Overseas Expansion During the 16th and 17th Centuries. Batavian Lion International, 1998, 328pp
Zandvliet, Kees; Blusse, Leonard: The Dutch Encounter with Asia, 1600-1950. Waanders, 2004, 464pp
Zeeberg, Jaap J.; Floore, Pieter: Into the Ice Sea Barents' Wintering on Novaya Zemlya: A Renaissance Voyage of Discovery. Rozenberg Publishers, 2005, 296pp

Notes
References
External links

Daily Dutch Innovation
Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, Episode 6: Travellers' Tales (Documentary TV Series by Carl Sagan):
 
Part 1 (YouTube link)
Part 2 (YouTube link)
Part 3 (YouTube link)
Full (YouTube link)

Civilisation, chapter 8/13: The Light of Experience (Documentary TV Series by Kenneth Clark)

"
Category:Dutch inventions Holland Category:Lists of inventions or discoveries Category:Economic history of the Netherlands Category:Science and technology in the Netherlands Category:Scientific revolution Category:Maritime history Category:Age of Discovery Category:Age of Sail Category:Dutch Golden Age Category:History of geography Category:History of the Netherlands Category:Netherlands-related lists



Motley, John Lothrop (1855). “The Rise of the Dutch Republic”, Volume I, Preface. “The rise of the Dutch Republic must ever be regarded as one of the leading events of modern times. Without the birth of this great commonwealth, the various historical phenomena of the sixteenth and following centuries must have either not existed, or have presented themselves under essential modifications.”
Rybczynski, Witold (1987). Home: A Short History of an Idea. According to Witold Rybczynski’s Home: A Short History of an Idea, private spaces in households are a Dutch seventeenth-century invention, despite their commonplace nature today. He has argued that home as we now know it came from the Dutch canal house of the seventeenth century. That, he said, was the first time that people identified living quarters as being precisely the residence of a man, a woman and their children. “The feminization of the home in seventeenth century Holland was one of the most important events in the evolution of the domestic interior.” This evolution took place in part due to Dutch law being “explicit on contractual arrangements and on the civil rights of servants”. And, “for the first time, the person who was in intimate contact with housework was also in a position to influence the arrangement and disposition of the house.”
  Rybczynski (2007) discusses why we live in houses in the first place: “To understand why we live in houses, it is necessary to go back several hundred years to Europe. Rural people have always lived in houses, but the typical medieval town dwelling, which combined living space and workplace, was occupied by a mixture of extended families, servants, and employees. This changed in seventeenth-century Holland. The Netherlands was Europe’s first republic, and the world’s first middle-class nation. Prosperity allowed extensive home ownership, republicanism discouraged the widespread use of servants, a love of children promoted the nuclear family, and Calvinism encouraged thrift and other domestic virtues. These circumstances, coupled with a particular affection for the private family home, brought about a cultural revolution... The idea of urban houses spread to the British Isles thanks to England's strong commercial and cultural links with the Netherlands.”
Schama, Simon (1988). The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age
Prak, Maarten (2005). The Dutch Republic in the Seventeenth Century: The Golden Age, p. 2
Tabor, Philip (2005). "Striking Home: The Telematic Assault on Identity". Published in Jonathan Hill, editor, Occupying Architecture: Between the Architect and the User. Philip Tabor states the contribution of 17th century Dutch houses as the foundation of houses today: “As far as the idea of the home is concerned, the home of the home is the Netherlands. This idea's crystallization might be dated to the first three-quarters of the seventeenth century, when the Dutch Netherlands amassed the unprecedented and unrivalled accumulation of capital, and emptied their purses into domestic space.”
  According to Jonathan Hill (Immaterial Architecture, 2006), compared to the large scaled houses in England and the Renaissance, the 17th Century Dutch house was smaller, and was only inhabited by up to four to five members. This was due to their embracing "self-reliance", in contrast to the dependence on servants, and a design for a lifestyle centered on the family. It was important for the Dutch to separate work from domesticity, as the home became an escape and a place of comfort. This way of living and the home has been noted as highly similar to the contemporary family and their dwellings. House layouts also incorporated the idea of the corridor as well as the importance of function and privacy. By the end of the 17th Century, the house layout was soon transformed to become employment-free, enforcing these ideas for the future. This came in favour for the industrial revolution, gaining large-scale factory production and workers. The house layout of the Dutch and its functions are still relevant today.
Perry, Marvin; Jacob, Margaret; Jacob, James; Chase, Myrna; Von Laue, Theodore (2009). Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics, and Society: Since 1400, p. 391-392


including the Dutch-speaking Southern Netherlands prior to 1585
Taylor, Peter J. (2002). Dutch Hegemony and Contemporary Globalization. “The Dutch developed a social formula, which we have come to call modern capitalism, that proved to be transferable and ultimately deadly to all other social formulations.”
Dunthorne, Hugh (2004). The Dutch Republic: That mother nation of liberty, in The Enlightenment World, M. Fitzpatrick, P. Jones, C. Knellwolf and I. McCalman eds. London: Routledge, pp. 87-103

Hamowy, Ronald (2008). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism, p. 130-131. “Although today we can easily find much to criticize about the Dutch Republic, it remains a crucial early experiment in toleration, limited government, and commercial capitalism... Dutch shipping, banking, commerce, and credit raised living standards for the rich and the poor alike and for the first time created that characteristically modern social phenomenon, a middle class... Libertarians value the Dutch Republic as a historical phenomenon not because it represented any sort of perfection, but above all because it demonstrated to several generations of intellectuals the practicality of allowing citizens greater liberties than were customarily accorded them, which in turn contributed to producing what we now know as classical liberalism.”




The Dutch Republic was the birthplace of the first modern art market, successfully combining art and commerce together as we would recognise it today. Until the 17th century, commissioning works of art was largely the preserve of the church, monarchs and aristocrats. The emergence of a powerful and wealthy middle class in Holland, though, produced a radical change in patronage as the new Dutch bourgeoisie bought art. For the first time, the direction of art was shaped by relatively broadly-based demand rather than religious dogma or royal whim, and the result was the birth of a large-scale open (free) art market which today's dealers and collectors would find familiar.
Jaffé, H. L. C. (1986). De Stijl 1917-1931: The Dutch Contribution to Modern Art
Muller, Sheila D. (1997). Dutch Art: An Encyclopedia

Struik, Dirk J. (1981). The Land of Stevin and Huygens: A Sketch of Science and Technology in the Dutch Republic during the Golden Century (Studies in the History of Modern Science)
Porter, Roy; Teich, Mikulas (1992). The Scientific Revolution in National Context
Van Berkel, Klaas; Van Helden, Albert; Palm, Lodewijk (1998). A History of Science in the Netherlands: Survey, Themes and Reference
Jorink, Eric (2010). Reading the Book of Nature in the Dutch Golden Age, 1575-1715
Haven, Kendall (2005). 100 Greatest Science Inventions of All Time
Davids, Karel (2008). The Rise and Decline of Dutch Technological Leadership. Technology, Economy and Culture in the Netherlands, 1350-1800 (2 vols)
Curley, Robert (2009). The Britannica Guide to Inventions That Changed the Modern World
During their Golden Age, the Dutch were responsible for three major institutional innovations in economic and financial history. The first major innovation was the foundation of the Dutch East India Company (VOC), the world's first publicly traded company, in 1602. As the first listed company (the first company to be ever listed on an official stock exchange), the VOC was the first company to actually issue stock and bonds to the general public. Considered by many experts to be the world's first truly (modern) multinational corporation, the VOC was also the first permanently organized limited-liability joint-stock company, with a permanent capital base. The Dutch merchants were the pioneers in laying the basis for modern corporate governance. The VOC is often considered as the precursor of modern corporations, if not the first truly modern corporation. It was the VOC that invented the idea of investing in the company rather than in a specific venture governed by the company. With its pioneering features such as corporate identity (first globally-recognized corporate logo), entrepreneurial spirit, legal personhood, transnational (multinational) operational structure, high stable profitability, permanent capital (fixed capital stock), freely transferable shares and tradable securities, separation of ownership and management, and limited liability for both shareholders and managers, the VOC is generally considered a major institutional breakthrough and the model for the large-scale business enterprises that now dominate the global economy.
  The second major innovation was the creation of the world's first fully functioning financial market, with the birth of a fully fledged capital market. The Dutch were also the first to effectively use a fully-fledged capital market (including the bond market and the stock market) to finance companies (such as the VOC and the WIC). It was in seventeenth-century Amsterdam that the global securities market began to take on its modern form. In 1602 the Dutch East India Company (VOC) established an exchange in Amsterdam where VOC stock and bonds could be traded in a secondary market. The VOC undertook the world's first recorded IPO in the same year. The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (Amsterdamsche Beurs in Dutch) was also the world's first fully-fledged stock exchange. While the Italian city-states produced the first transferable government bonds, they didn't develop the other ingredient necessary to produce a fully fledged capital market: corporate shareholders. The Dutch East India Company (VOC) became the first company to offer shares of stock. The dividend averaged around 18% of capital over the course of the company's 200-year existence. Dutch investors were the first to trade their shares at a regular stock exchange. The buying and selling of these shares of stock in the VOC became the basis of the first stock market. It was in the Dutch Republic that the early techniques of stock-market manipulation were developed. The Dutch pioneered stock futures, stock options, short selling, bear raids, debt-equity swaps, and other speculative instruments. Amsterdam businessman Joseph de la Vega's Confusion of Confusions (1688) was the earliest book about stock trading.
  The third major innovation was the establishment of the Bank of Amsterdam (Amsterdamsche Wisselbank in Dutch) in 1609, which led to the introduction of the concept of bank money. The Bank of Amsterdam was arguably the world's first central bank. The Wisselbank's innovations helped lay the foundations for the birth and development of the central banking system that now plays a vital role in the world's economy. It occupied a central position in the financial world of its day, providing an effective, efficient and trusted system for national and international payments, and introduced the first ever international reserve currency, the bank guilder. Lucien Gillard (2004) calls it the European guilder (le florin européen), and Adam Smith devotes many pages to explaining how the bank guilder works (Smith 1776: 446-455). The model of the Wisselbank as a state bank was adapted throughout Europe, including the Bank of Sweden (1668) and the Bank of England (1694).
Bornschier, Volker; Lengyel, Peter (1992). Waves, Formations and Values in the World System, p. 69. “The rise of capitalist national states (as opposed to city-states) was a European innovation, and the first of these was the Dutch Republic of the seventeenth century.”
Brenner, Reuven (1994). Labyrinths of Prosperity: Economic Follies, Democratic Remedies, p. 60
De Vries, Jan; Woude, Ad van der (1997). The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500–1815
Gordon, John Steele (1999). The Great Game: The Emergence of Wall Street as a World Power: 1653–2000. “The Dutch invented modern capitalism in the early seventeenth century. Although many of the basic concepts had first appeared in Italy during the Renaissance, the Dutch, especially the citizens of the city of Amsterdam, were the real innovators. They transformed banking, stock exchanges, credit, insurance, and limited-liability corporations into a coherent financial and commercial system.”
Gordon, Scott (1999). Controlling the State: Constitutionalism from Ancient Athens to Today, p. 172. “In addition to its role in the history of constitutionalism, the republic was important in the early development of the essential features of modern capitalism: private property, production for sale in general markets, and the dominance of the profit motive in the behavior of producers and traders.”




Schilder, Gunther (1985). The Netherland Nautical Cartography from 1550 to 1650
Woodward, David, ed (1987). Art and Cartography: Six Historical Essays, p. 147-174
Paine, Lincoln P. (2000). Ships of Discovery and Exploration
Day, Alan (2003). The A to Z of the Discovery and Exploration of Australia, p. xxxvii-xxxviii
The Dutch made significant contributions to the law of the sea, law of nations (public international law) and company law


Van Bunge, Wiep (2001). From Stevin to Spinoza: an Essay on Philosophy in the Seventeenth-Century Dutch Republic
Van Bunge, Wiep (2003). The Early Enlightenment in the Dutch Republic 1650–1750



including Southern Netherlands-based (Zuid-Nederlanders in Dutch) cartographers/geographers such as Gemma Frisius, Gerardus Mercator and Abraham Ortelius
Koeman, Cornelis; Schilder, Günter; van Egmond, Marco; van der Krogt, Peter; Zandvliet, Kees: The History of Cartography, Volume 3: Cartography in the European Renaissance (Part 2: Low Countries), pp. 1246–1462, David Woodward ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007)
that comprising mainland Australia, Tasmania and their surrounding islands
The first European known to visit Sakhalin was Martin Gerritz de Vries, who mapped Cape Patience and Cape Aniva on the island's east coast in 1643. The Dutch captain, however, was not aware of their being on an island, and 17th century maps usually showed these points—and often Hokkaido, too—as parts of the mainland.
McManamon, Francis; Cordell, Linda S.; Lightfoot, Kent; Milner, George (2009). Archaeology in America: An Encyclopedia (4 volumes), p. 26
As Peter J. Taylor (2002) notes: ‘The Dutch polity of the seventeenth century was famously unconcerned with territorial expansion: as long as the frontier operated effectively as a defensive shield no extra land was deemed necessary.’
Knobel, E. B. (1917). On Frederick de Houtman's Catalogue of Southern Stars, and the Origin of the Southern Constellations. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 77, p. 414–432. The constellations around the South Pole were not observable from north of the equator, by Babylonians, Greeks, Chinese or Arabs. During the Age of Exploration, expeditions to the southern hemisphere began to result in the addition of new constellations. The modern constellations in this region were defined notably by Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman, who in 1595 traveled together to the East Indies (first Dutch expedition to Indonesia). These 12 newly Dutch-created southern constellations (that including Apus, Chamaeleon, Dorado, Grus, Hydrus, Indus, Musca, Pavo, Phoenix, Triangulum Australe, Tucana and Volans) first appeared on a 35-cm diameter celestial globe published in 1597/1598 in Amsterdam by Dutch cartographers Petrus Plancius and Jodocus Hondius. The first depiction of these constellations in a celestial atlas was in Johann Bayer's Uranometria of 1603.
Simpson, Phil (2012): Guidebook to the Constellations: Telescopic Sights, Tales, and Myths, p. 559-561, p. 599-600
Among 15 Dutch-created constellations (recognized by the IAU), three constellations including Camelopardalis, Columba, and Monoceros, formed by Petrus Plancius in 1592 and in 1613, are often erroneously attributed to Jacob Bartsch and Augustin Royer
Frisians, specifically West Frisians, are an ethnic group; present in the North of the Netherlands; mainly concentrating in the Province of Friesland. Culturally, modern Frisians and the (Northern) Dutch are rather similar; the main and generally most important difference being that Frisians speak West Frisian, one of the three sub-branches of the Frisian languages, alongside Dutch.
West Frisians in the general do not feel or see themselves as part of a larger group of Frisians, and, according to a 1970 inquiry, identify themselves more with the Dutch than with East or North Frisians. Because of centuries of cohabitation and active participation in Dutch society, as well as being bilingual, the Frisians are not treated as a separate group in Dutch official statistics.
Hertzberger, Herman (1991). Lessons for Students in Architecture, p. 219-220
Hanson, Julienne (1998). Decoding Homes and Houses, p. 196-214
Langmead, Donald; Garnaut, Christine (2001). Encyclopedia of Architectural and Engineering Feats, p. 91
Risebero, Bill (2002). Modern Architecture and Design: An Alternative History, p. 184
Sharp, Dennis (2002). Twentieth Century Architecture: A Visual History, p. 74
Friedman, Alice T. (2006). Women and the Making of the Modern House: A Social and Architectural History, p. 65








Hertzberger, Herman (1991). Lessons for Students in Architecture, p. 216-218
Von Moos, Stanislaus (2009). Le Corbusier: Elements of a Synthesis, p. 114


"Dutch door (American) (34.79a,b)". In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000 (October 2006)

Ione, Amy (2005). Innovation and Visualization: Trajectories, Strategies, and Myths (Consciousness, Literature and the Arts 1), p. 97-105
Benton, Janetta Rebold (2009). Materials, Methods, and Masterpieces of Medieval Art, p. 36-42
Smith, Jamie L. (2012). Als ich can: How Jan van Eyck Extended the Vernacular from Dutch Poetry to Oil Painting in The Transformation of Vernacular Expression in Early Modern Arts, edited by Joost Keizer and Todd M. Richardson (2012)

Russel, Margarita (1983). Visions of the Sea: Hendrick C. Vroom and the Origins of Dutch Marine Painting
Unger, Richard W. (1996). Marine Paintings and the History of Shipbuilding (p. 75-93) in Art in History/History in Art: Studies in Seventeenth-Century Dutch Culture, edited by David Freedberg and Jan de Vries (1996)
Hind, Arthur M. (1963). A History of Engraving and Etching, p. 261
Martin, Henri-Jean (1994). The History and Power of Writing, p. 407

Oxford Dictionary of Art Terms: Pronkstilleven
[http://www.rkd.nl/rkddb/dispatcher.aspx?action=search&database;;=ChoiceArtists&search;=priref=36842 Jan Davidsz. de Heem] at the Netherlands Institute for Art History 
[http://www.hermitage.nl/nl/pers/rubens_van_dyck_en_jordaens/achtergrond.htm Ben van Beneden, Massijs, Rubens, Van Dyck en de anderen.] Schilderkunst in Antwerpen, 1500-1650 


Gillespie, James; Flanders, Frank (2010). Modern Livestock and Poultry Production, 8th edition, p. 741

Albala, Ken (2003). Food in Early Modern Europe, p. 33
Foley, Caroline (2006). The A-Z of Allotment Vegetables, p. 56
Bewley, J. Derek; Black, Michael; Halmer, Peter (2006). The Encyclopedia of Seeds: Science, Technology and Uses, p. 733
Kotthoff, Helga; Spencer-Oatey, Helen (2007). Handbook of Intercultural Communication, p. 43
Smith, Andrew F. (2007). The Oxford Companion to American Food and Drink, p. 95
Sampson, Anastacia (2009). A Calendar of Nutritional Tidbits and Nourishing Plants, p. 147
Dowdy, Penny (2010). Plant Cells (Let's Relate to Genetics), p. 10
Rupp, Rebecca (2011). How Carrots Won the Trojan War: Curious (but True) Stories of Common Vegetables, p. 88
Green, Joey (2012). Joey Green's Kitchen Magic, p. 119
Madison, Deborah (2013). Vegetable Literacy: Cooking and Gardening with Twelve Families from the Edible Plant Kingdom, with over 300 Deliciously Simple Recipes, p. 12
Cumo, Christopher (2013). Encyclopedia of Cultivated Plants: From Acacia to Zinnia, 3 Volumes, p. 223

Violeta, N. O. U. R., Ion Trandafir, and Mira Elena Ionica. "Compositional characteristics of fruits of several apple (Malus domestica Borkh.) cultivars." Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca 38.3 (2010): 228-233.
Elstar profile on cffresh.com
Allaby, Michael (2009). Oceans: A Scientific History of Oceans and Marine Life (Discovering the Earth)
Swann, G. M. Peter (2006). Putting Econometrics in Its Place: A New Direction in Applied Economics, p. 29-32
Stachurski, Richard (2009). Longitude by Wire: Finding North America, p. 10
Henzel, Cynthia Kennedy (2010). Creating Modern Maps, p. 6
Bagrow, Leo (2010). History of Cartography, p. 159
Hewitt, Rachel (2011). Map of a Nation: A Biography of the Ordnance Survey. “Triangulation had first emerged as a map-making method in the mid sixteenth century when the Flemish mathematician Gemma Frisius set out the idea in his Libellus de locorum describendorum ratione (Booklet concerning a way of describing places), and by the turn of the eighteenth century it had become the most respected surveying technique in use.”
Bellos, Alex (2014). The Grapes of Math: How Life Reflects Numbers and Numbers Reflect Life, p. 74
Kirby, Richard Shelton et al. (1990). Engineering in History, p. 131
Harwood, Jeremy (2006). To the Ends of the Earth: 100 Maps that Changed the World, p. 107
Devreese, Jozef T.; Vanden Berghe, Guido (2009). Magic is No Magic: The Wonderful World of Simon Stevin, p. 272
Haven, Kendall (2005). 100 Greatest Science Inventions of All Time, p. 51
Harwood, Jeremy (2006). To the Ends of the Earth: 100 Maps that Changed the World, p. 83
Woodward, David (1987). Art and Cartography: Six Historical Essays, p. 148
Goffart, Walter (2003). Historical Atlases: The First Three Hundred Years, 1570-1870, p. 1
Thrower, Norman J. W. (2008). Maps and Civilization: Cartography in Culture and Society, Third Edition, p. 81
Struik, Dirk J. (1981). The Land of Stevin and Huygens: A Sketch of Science and Technology in the Dutch Republic during the Golden Century, p. 37
Kirby, David; Hinkkanen, Merja-Liisa (2000). The Baltic and the North Seas, p. 61-62
Buisseret, David (2003). The Mapmakers' Quest: Depicting New Worlds in Renaissance Europe
Harwood, Jeremy (2006). To the Ends of the Earth: 100 Maps that Changed the World, p. 88
Lasater, Brian (2007). The Dream of the West, Part II, p. 317
Thrower, Norman J. W. (2008). Maps and Civilization: Cartography in Culture and Society, Third Edition, p. 84
Kieding, Robert B. (2011). Scuttlebutt: Tales and Experiences of a Life at Sea, p. 290

Harwood, Jeremy (2006). To the Ends of the Earth: 100 Maps that Changed the World, p. 81



Daniel, Eric D.; Mee, C. Denis; Clark, Mark H. (1999). Magnetic Recording: The First 100 Years, p. 102-105
Cole, David J.; Browning, Eve; Schroeder, Fred E. H. (2003). Encyclopedia of Modern Everyday Inventions, p. 28
Bessant, John; Tidd, Joe (2007). Innovation and Entrepreneurship, p. 407
Rumsey, Francis; McCormick, Tim (2009). Sound and Recording, p. 185-186
Sethi, Anand Kumar (2013). The Business of Electronics: A Concise History, p. 91-92
 Transparent recording disc, 1969.
 Video signal transducer, 1970.
  Disc-shaped member, 1990.



Brinch Hansen, Per (2002). The Origin of Concurrent Programming: From Semaphores to Remote Procedure Calls. (Springer)., p. 8

Taubenfeld, The Black-White Bakery Algorithm. In Proc. Distributed Computing, 18th international conference, DISC 2004. Vol 18, 56-70, 2004

McHoes, Ann; Flynn, Ida M. (2014). Understanding Operating Systems (7th edition)
 (in Dutch; An algorithm for the prevention of the deadly embrace)



 (Jun 14, 1965)




Peter van Emde Boas: Preserving order in a forest in less than logarithmic time (Proceedings of the 16th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science 10: 75-84, 1975)
The A-Z of Programming Languages: Python. "...I figured I could design and implement a language 'almost, but not quite, entirely unlike' ABC, improving upon ABC's deficiencies...", Computerworld (2008-08-05). Retrieved on 2014-07-08.
An Interview with Guido van Rossum. "... in my head I had analyzed some of the reasons it had failed..." ONLamp.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-08.
















Embree, Ainslie Thomas; Gluck, Carol (1997). Asia in Western and World History: A Guide for Teaching. “Still more important was the joint-stock company, of which the Dutch East India Company was the outstanding example. The typical commercial organization of the Middle Ages had been the regulated company restricted to members of a guild of merchants who combined, ordinarily under government charter, to create a monopoly of trade with an area. English examples were the Russia or Levant companies. In contrast, the joint-stock company was open to all. Its profits were not necessarily shared out at the end of each voyage...”
Wilson, Eric Michael (2008). The Savage Republic: De Indis of Hugo Grotius, Republicanism and Dutch Hegemony Within the Early Modern World-System (c.1600-1619), p. 215-216
Faure, Michael; van der Walt, Andre (2010). Globalization and Private Law: The Way Forward, p. 213
Isles, Nick (2010). The Good Work Guide: How to Make Organizations Fairer and More Effective, p. 86
Van Daelen, Marijn; Van der Elst, Christoph (2010). Risk Management and Corporate Governance: Interconnections in Law, Accounting and Tax, p. 57
Munson, Lee (2012). Rigged Money: Beating Wall Street at Its Own Game, p. 5-7
Caprio, Gerard; Arner, Douglas W. (2013). Handbook of Key Global Financial Markets, Institutions, and Infrastructure, p. 76
Kaiser, Kevin; Young, S. David (2013). The Blue Line Imperative: What Managing for Value Really Means, p. 26
Funnell, Warwick; Robertson, Jeffrey (2014). Accounting by the First Public Company: The Pursuit of Supremacy (Routledge New Works in Accounting History)




Funnell, Warwick; Robertson, Jeffrey (2013). Accounting by the First Public Company: The Pursuit of Supremacy (Routledge New Works in Accounting History)



Christensen, Thomas (2012). 1616: The World in Motion, p. 41
Goetzmann, William N.; Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (2005). The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations that Created Modern Capital Markets
Daly, Jonathan (2014). The Rise of Western Power: A Comparative History of Western Civilization, p. 228
Frentrop, Paul (2003). A History of Corporate Governance, 1602–2002
Clarke, Thomas; Branson, Douglas (2012). The SAGE Handbook of Corporate Governance, p. 431. “It was the Dutch East India Company, formed in 1602 with an initial charter for 21 years, that invented the idea in 1606 of investing in the company rather than in a specific venture governed by the company (Frentrop, 2002).”
Steengaard, Niels (1982). The Dutch East India Company as an Institutional Innovation
Gelderblom, Oscar; De Jong, Abe; Jonker, Joost (2012). The Formative Years of the Modern Corporation: The Dutch East India Company VOC, 1602–1623
Gelderblom, Oscar; De Jong, Abe; Jonker, Joost (2012)

De Vries, Jan; Van der Woude, Ad (1997). The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500-1815, p. 385
Van der Hoeven, Marco (1997). Exercise of Arms: Warfare in the Netherlands, 1568-1648, p. 3-4
Micklethwait, John; Wooldridge, Adrian (2003). The Company: A Short History of a Revolutionary Idea
Ferguson, Niall (2008). The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the World
Koppell, Jonathan GS (2011). Origins of Shareholder Advocacy, p. 29-31
Brose, Margarita S.; Flood, Mark D.; Krishna, Dilip; Nichols, Bill (2014). Handbook of Financial Data and Risk Information I: Principles and Context, p. 14

Micklethwait, John; Wooldridge, Adrian (2003). The Company: A Short History of a Revolutionary Idea. “The Dutch East India Company, alternatively known as the VOC (for Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie) or the Seventeen (after its seventeen-strong board)—became the model for all chartered firms. Whereas the English East India Company initially treated each voyage as a separate venture, with different shareholders, the VOC made all the voyages part of a twenty-one-year venture (something the English imitated a decade later). The VOC's charter also explicitly told investors that they had limited liability.”

Nadesan, Majia Holmer (2008). Governmentality, Biopower, and Everyday Life, p. 48

Brook, Timothy (2009). Vermeer's Hat: The Seventeenth Century and the Dawn of the Global World, p. 16
Shinkai, Tetsuya; Ohkawa, Takao; Okamura, Makoto; Harimaya, Kozo (5 December 2012). Why did the Dutch East India Co. outperform the British East India Co.? A theoretical explanation based on the objective of the firm and limited liability. (No 96, Discussion Paper Series, School of Economics, Kwansei Gakuin University). “The Dutch company sent a governor-general with full authority over all of the company's officers to Indonesia. The British East India Company was even more decentralized, however, and acted less as a trading company than as a guild. It allowed each of its members to trade on his account, owning only the ships in common with other members. Bernstein (2008) also describes the behavior of the employees of the British East India Company, the employee of the East India Company treated its ships as their own, transporting large amounts of trade goods for their accounts to and from Asia. From these historical facts, the objective of the Dutch East India Company was likely to maximize profits, whereas the British East India Company tried to maximize sales since the employee of it transported large amounts of trade goods not only for the company's but their own accounts to and from Asia.”
Brook, Timothy (2009). Vermeer's Hat: The Seventeenth Century and the Dawn of the Global World, p. 15


Hawley, James P.; Williams, Andrew T. (2000). The Rise of Fiduciary Capitalism: How Institutional Investors Can Make Corporate America More Democratic, p. 44
Ferguson, Niall (2002). Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the Lessons for Global Power, p. 15. “Moreover, their company [the Dutch East India Company] was a permanent joint-stock company, unlike the English company, which did not become permanent until 1650.”
Smith, B. Mark (2003). A History of the Global Stock Market: From Ancient Rome to Silicon Valley, p. 17. “The first joint-stock companies had actually been created in England in the sixteenth century. These early joint-stock firms, however, possessed only temporary charters from the government, in some cases for one voyage only. (One example was the Muscovy Company, chartered in England in 1533 for trade with Russia; another, chartered the same year, was a company with the intriguing title Guinea Adventurers.) The Dutch East India Company was the first joint-stock company to have a permanent charter.”
Frankfurter, George; Wood, Bob G.; Wansley, James (2003). Dividend Policy: Theory and Practice, p. 12
Baker, H. Kent (2009). Dividends and Dividend Policy, p. 23
Clarke, Thomas; Branson, Douglas (2012). The SAGE Handbook of Corporate Governance (Sage Handbooks), p. 431. “The EIC first issued permanent shares in 1657 (Harris, 2005: 45).”
Shorto, Russell (2013). Amsterdam: A History of the World's Most Liberal City. “What made the Dutch East India Company different from all previous companies was it permanence. Where companies before had always formed around a particular venture and dissolved when the venture was complete, the VOC continued. (Technically, it was granted an initial charter for twenty-one years, but the charter was perennially renewed.) This was more than just a novelty: it meant that investors were buying not into a voyage but into the company itself. And it allowed for a far-reaching innovation, for Amsterdammers who signed the subscription book could read, on the first page, that they were entitled to sell their shares to someone else. They were further assured that if they did so the transfer would be rigorously monitored, and the subscription book stipulated the process for selling shares.”
Brook, Timothy (2008). Vermeer's Hat: The Seventeenth Century and the Dawn of the Global World
Shorto, Russell (2013). Amsterdam: A History of the World's Most Liberal City. “Like the oceans it mastered, the VOC had a scope that is hard to fathom. One could craft a defensible argument that no company in history has had such an impact on the world. It surviving archives—in Cape Town, Colombo, Chennai, Jakarta, and The Hague—have been measured (by a consortium applying for a UNESCO grant to preserve them) in kilometers. In innumerable ways the VOC both expanded the world and brought its far-flung regions together. It introduced Europe to Asia and Africa, and vice versa (while its sister multinational, the West India Company, set New York City in motion and colonized Brazil and the Caribbean Islands). It pioneered globalization and invented what might be the first modern bureaucracy. It advanced cartography and shipbuilding. It fostered disease, slavery, and exploitation on a scale never before imaged.”
Anderson, Clare; Frykma, Niklas; van Voss, Lex Heerma; Rediker, Marcus (2013). Mutiny and Maritime Radicalism in the Age of Revolution: A Global Survey, p. 113-114
De Vries, Jan; Van der Woude, Ad (1997). The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500-1815, p. 462
Howard, Michael C. (2011). Transnationalism and Society: An Introduction, p. 121

Van Daelen, Marijn; Van der Elst, Christoph (2010). Risk Management and Corporate Governance: Interconnections in Law, Accounting and Tax, p. 57
Kaiser, Kevin; Young, S. David (2013). The Blue Line Imperative: What Managing for Value Really Means, p. 26. “There are other claimants to the title of first public company, including a twelfth-century water mill in France and a thirteenth-century company intended to control the English wool trade, Staple of London. Its shares, however, and the manner in which those shares were traded, did not truly allow public ownership by anyone who happened to be able to afford a share. The arrival of VOC shares was therefore momentous, because as Fernand Braudel pointed out, it opened up the ownership of companies and the ideas they generated, beyond the ranks of the aristocracy and the very rich, so that everyone could finally participate in the speculative freedom of transactions. By expanding ownership of its company pie for a certain price and a tentative return, the Dutch had done something historic: they had created a capital market.”

Bahnemann, Bastian (2008). Rights Issue Related Discounts in France, Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, p. 6

Gourevitch, Peter A.; Shinn, James (2005). Political Power and Corporate Control: The New Global Politics of Corporate Governance, p. xiii
Wilson, Eric Michael (2008). The Savage Republic: De Indis of Hugo Grotius, Republicanism and Dutch Hegemony Within the Early Modern World-System (c.1600-1619), p. 215-217. “The defining characteristics of the modern corporation, all of which emerged during the Dutch cycle, include: limited liability for investors, free transferability of investor interests, legal personality and centralised management. Although some of these characteristics were present to a certain extent in the fourteenth-century Genose societas comperarum of the first cycle, the first wholly cognisable modern limited liability public company was the VOC. The organisational structures and corporate practices of the VOC were closely paralleled by the English East India Company and served as the direct model for all of the later mercantile trading companies of the second cycle, including those of Italy, France, Portugal, Denmark, and Brandenburg-Prussia.”
Bishop, Matthew; Green, Michael (2010). The Road from Ruin: A New Capitalism for a Big Society, p. 48
Daly, Jonathan (2014). The Rise of Western Power: A Comparative History of Western Civilization, p. 136
Soll, Jacob (2014). The Reckoning: Financial Accountability and the Rise and Fall of Nations, p. 79

De Vries and Van der Woude, p. 385
Lucas, Gavin (2006). An Archaeology of Colonial Identity: Power and Material Culture in the Dwars Valley, South Africa (Contributions To Global Historical Archaeology), p. 28



The share price had appreciated significantly, so in that respect the dividend was less impressive
Sarna, David E. Y. (2010). History of Greed: Financial Fraud from Tulip Mania to Bernie Madoff





North, Michael (1999). Art and Commerce in the Dutch Golden Age. Translated by Catherine Hill. (Yale University Press)

Gelderblom, Oscar; De Jong, Abe; Jonker, Joost (2010). Putting Le Maire into Perspective: Business Organization and the Evolution of Corporate Governance in the Dutch Republic, 1590-1610, in J. Koppell, ed., Origins of Shareholder Advocacy. (New York: Palgrave Macmillian)

Mueller, Dennis C. (ed.), (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Capitalism, p. 333. (New York: Oxford University Press)
Frentrop, P. (2009). The First Known Shareholder Activist: The Colorful Life and Times of Isaac le Maire (1559–1624), in Frentrop/Jonker/Davis 2009, 11–26
Frentrop, P.; Jonker, J; Davis, S. (ed.), (2009). Shareholder Rights at 400: Commemorating Isaac Le Maire and the First Recorded Expression of Investor Advocacy (The Hague: Remix Business Communications, 2009)
Hansmann, Henry; Pargendler, Mariana (2013). The Evolution of Shareholder Voting Rights: Separation of Ownership and Consumption. (Yale Law Journal, Vol. 123, pp. 100-165, 2014)

De Jongh, Matthijs (2010). Shareholder Activism at the Dutch East India Company 1622-1625, in Origins of Shareholder Advocacy (Palgrave Macmillan, 2011)
De Vries and Van der Woude, pp. 301–302
Wallerstein, Immanuel (2011). The Modern World-System II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600–1750, p. 43-44

Kotilane, J. T. (2005). Russia's Foreign Trade and Economic Expansion in the Seventeenth Century: Windows on the World (Northern World) (No. 13), p. 65
Goldfrank, Walter L.; Goodman, David; Szasz, Andrew (1999). Ecology and the World-System, p. 110-111
Hoving, A. J.; Wildeman, Diederick (2011). Nicolaes Witsen and Shipbuilding in the Dutch Golden Age (Ed Rachal Foundation Nautical Archaeology Series)
Griswold, Mac (2013). The Manor: Three Centuries at a Slave Plantation on Long Island, p. 56-57
Wiesner, Merry E. (2013). Early Modern Europe, 1450-1789, p. 220

Delgado, James P. (2009). Gold Rush Port: The Maritime Archaeology of San Francisco's Waterfront, p. 17
Virginia W. Lunsford (2005). Piracy and Privateering in the Golden Age Netherlands, p. 69



Verhoogt, Robert (2007). Art in Reproduction: Nineteenth-Century Prints after Lawrence Alma-Tadema, Jozef Israëls and Ary Scheffer, p. 165
Wuthnow, Robert (2009). Communities of Discourse: Ideology and Social Structure in the Reformation, the Enlightenment, and European Socialism, p. 265
Klaesson, Johan; Johansson, Borje; Karlsson, Charlie (2013). Metropolitan Regions: Knowledge Infrastructures of the Global Economy, p. 360
Reinders, Michel (2013). Printed Pandemonium: Popular Print and Politics in the Netherlands 1650-72 (Library of the Written Word), p. 37-38
Deen, Femke; Onnekink, David; Reinders, Michel (2010). Pamphlets and Politics in the Dutch Republic, p. 20





MacDonald, Scott B.; Gastmann, Albert L. (2001), p. 95




Andrew Roberts in his book A History of the English-Speaking Peoples Since 1900 (2010), observed: “The English-speaking peoples did not invent the ideas that nonetheless made them great: the Romans invented the concept of Law, the Greeks one-freeman-one-vote democracy, the Dutch modern capitalism...”
Manning, Patrick; Gills, Barry K. (2013). Andre Gunder Frank and Global Development: Visions, Remembrances, and Explorations , p.107
Hall, Thomas D. (2000). A World-Systems Reader: New Perspectives on Gender, Urbanism, Cultures, Indigenous Peoples, and Ecology, p. 32
Kuzminski, Adrian (2013). The Ecology of Money: Debt, Growth, and Sustainability, p. 38
Brenner, Reuven (1994). Labyrinths of Prosperity: Economic Follies, Democratic Remedies, p. 60
Moore, Jason W. (2010a). “‘Amsterdam is Standing on Norway’ Part I: The Alchemy of Capital, Empire, and Nature in the Diaspora of Silver, 1545–1648,” Journal of Agrarian Change, 10, 1, p. 35–71
Moore, Jason W. (2010b). “‘Amsterdam is Standing on Norway’ Part II: The Global North Atlantic in the Ecological Revolution of the Long Seventeenth Century,” Journal of Agrarian Change, 10, 2, p. 188–227
Sombart, Werner (1930). The Quintessence of Capitalism: A Study of the History and Psychology of the Modern Business Man, p. 144. As Werner Sombart noted: “In all probability the United Provinces were the land in which the capitalist spirit for the first time attained its fullest maturity ; where this maturity related to all its aspects, which were equally developed; and where this development had never been done comprehensive before. Moreover, in the Netherlands an entire people became imbued with the capitalist spirit ; so much so, that in the 17th century Holland was universally regarded as the land of capitalism par exellence ; it was envied by all other nations, who put forth their keenest endeavours in their desire to emulate it...”
Brenner, Robert P. (2001). The Low Countries in the Transition to Capitalism. “The Dutch economy thus differentiated itself from the leading economies that preceded it (Flanders, Brabant, the city-states of northern Italy) in its capitalist modernity, manifested most tellingly in its advanced, capital-intensive agricul-tural sector. But it shared those economies’ imbrication in, and dependence upon, the pre-capitalist economy of Europe as a whole.”
Lefer, David (2013). The Founding Conservatives: How a Group of Unsung Heroes Saved the American Revolution. “Along with his army, William brought something even more formidable to England—a series of Dutch financial innovations that we now call capitalism. Capitalism needs to be understood as more than just making money. Commerce is as old as human history, as Lycurgus' s decision to ban it in the ninth century B.C. shows. Modern capitalism, on the other hand, was invented in the early seventeenth century as a way of pooling money to lit risk in large-scale investments. If there was on thing that distinguished this new financial system from anything that had come before, it was the sheer scale on which it operated. Capitalism was big and systematic in its approach to making money.”
Congleton, Roger D. (2007)
Van Zanden, J. L. (1993). The Rise and Decline of Holland's Economy: Merchant Capitalism and the Labour Market, p. 3
Van der Linden, Marcel (1997). Marx and Engels, Dutch Marxism and the “Model Capitalist Nation of the Seventeenth Century. (Science and Society, 61, p. 161-192)
Jan Lucassen (2007). Wages and Currency: Global Comparisons from Antiquity to the Twentieth Century (International and Comparative Social History), p. 7
Wilson, Eric Michael (2008). Savage Republic: De Indis of Hugo Grotius, Republicanism and Dutch Hegemony within the Early Modern World-System (c. 1600–1619), p. 151

Moore, Jason W. (2012). Dutch Capitalism and the Europe’s Great Frontier: The Baltic in the Ecological Revolution of the Long Seventeenth Century, in The Longue Duree and World-Systems Analysis, edited by Richard E. Lee, p. 65-97

Gordon, John Steele (1999)
Brooke, Peter A. (2009). A Vision for Venture Capital: Realizing the Promise of Global Venture Capital and Private Equity, p. 59
Robertson, Jeffrey; Funnell, Warwick N. (2012). The Dutch East-India Company and Accounting for Social Capital at the Dawn of Modern Capitalism 1602-1623. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 37 (5). pp. 342-360
Cocks, Doug (2013). Global Overshoot: Contemplating the World's Converging Problems, p. 230

Brook, Timothy (2009)
Israel, Jonathan (1989). Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585–1740, p. 409
Arrighi, Giovanni; Silver, Beverly (1999). Chaos and Governance in the Modern World System (Contradictions of Modernity), p. 39
Lachmann, Richard (2000). Capitalists in Spite of Themselves: Elite Conflict and European Transitions in Early Modern Europe, p. 158
Taylor, Peter J. (2002). Dutch Hegemony and Contemporary Globalization (Paper prepared for Political Economy of World-Systems Conference, Riverside, California). This research bulletin has been published in Hegemonic Decline: Present and Past (Political Economy of the World-System Annuals), edited by Christopher Chase-Dunn and Jonathan Friedman (2005)
Wallerstein, Immanuel (2011). The Modern World-System II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600–1750, p. 36
Palumbo-Liu, David; Robbins, Bruce W.; Tanoukhi, Nirvana (2011). Immanuel Wallerstein and the Problem of the World: System, Scale, Culture, p. 28
Lee, Richard E. (2012). The Longue Duree and World-Systems Analysis, p. 65
Sobel, Andrew C. (2012). Birth of Hegemony: Crisis, Financial Revolution, and Emerging Global Networks, p. 54-88

Kaletsky, Anatole (2010). Capitalism 4.0: The Birth of a New Economy in the Aftermath of Crisis, p. 109. “In 1602, exploiting their advantage against the declining Spanish and Portuguese maritime powers, the citizens of Holland founded the Dutch East India Company, quickly gaining a monopoly over most of Europe's trade with Asia. This incredible commercial opportunity inspired and financially underpinned the creation in Holland of the first mercantile capitalist nation. This was arguably the most important event in the economic history of the world up to that point.”
Raico, Ralph (1994). The Theory of Economic Development and the European Miracle in The Collapse of Development Planning, edited by Peter J. Boettke, pp. 47-48
Brenner, Reuven (1994). Labyrinths of Prosperity: Economic Follies, Democratic Remedies, p. 51-65



Davids, Karel; Lucassen, Jan (1995). A Miracle Mirrored: The Dutch Republic in European Perspective, p. 370
Dingsdale, Alan (2002). Mapping Modernities, p. 8
Babones, Salvatore; Chase-Dunn, Christopher (2012). Routledge Handbook of World-Systems Analysis (Routledge International Handbooks), p. 181-182
Daly, Jonathan (2014). The Rise of Western Power: A Comparative History of Western Civilization, p. 228-229



Brenner, Reuven (1994), p. 57
The preponderance of the Dutch population lived in two provinces, Holland and Zeeland. This area experienced a population explosion between 1500 and 1650, with a growth from 350,000 to 1,000,000 inhabitants. Thereafter the growth leveled off, so that the population of the whole country remained at the 2 million level throughout the 18th century; De Vries and Van der Woude, pp. 51–52
At the beginning of the 17th century, England and Wales contained more than four million people. It was about 4 million in 1600 and it grew to about 5 1/2 million by 1700.
Gieseking, Jen Jack; Mangold, William; Katz, Cindi; Low, Setha; Saegert, Susan (2014). The People, Place, and Space Reader, p. 151
Steckel, Richard H.; Floud, Roderick (1997). Health and Welfare during Industrialization, p. 332

Wilson, Charles (1968)
Soll, Jacob (2014). The Reckoning: Financial Accountability and the Rise and Fall of Nations, p. 79. As Jacob Soll notes, “of which 20 percent of its [the Dutch Republic's] landmass was below sea level and another 40 percent was exposed to tides and flooding.”
Kaletsky, Anatole (2010). Capitalism 4.0: The Birth of a New Economy in the Aftermath of Crisis, p. 109-110. “The bursting of the tulip bubble in 1637 did not end Dutch economic hegemony. Far from it. Tulipmania was followed by a century of Dutch leadership in almost every branch of global commerce, finance, and manufacturing.”
The business activities around the world by Dutch companies (such as Noordsche Compagnie, Dutch East India Company and Dutch West India Company) and Dutch merchants (like Louis de Geer) are referred to as the earliest cases of outward foreign direct investment (FDI) in history of world economy.
The Dutch merchants laid the foundations for modern capital markets with the birth of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange in 1602.
Israel, Jonathan Irvine (1990). Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585–1740
Cipolla, Carlo (2004). Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy, 1000-1700, p. 200-201. “Whether one looks at the agricultural, commercial, or manufacturing sector, one finds that the Dutch had a genius, if not an obsession, for reducing costs. They succeeded in selling anything to anybody anywhere in the world because they sold it more cheaply than anybody else, and their prices were competitively low because their costs of production were more compressed than elsewhere.”
  “In sacrificing quality for the sake of reducing price, the Dutch departed from a tradition that had prevailed in the Middle Ages and the early Renaissance and heralded a principle which was to prevail in modern times. The medieval merchant had normally tried to maximize profit per unit of production—thus his insistence on high quality. The Dutch, however, made a decisive move toward mass production. In an increasing number of activities they endeavoured to maximize their profit by maximizing the volume of sales... Even Dutch painters produced their masterpieces at low prices and in prolific quantities... Dutch success evoked admiration among some, envy among others, and great interest everywhere. Holland held all Europe fascinated, but more than anyone else their neighbors across the Channel, the English.”
Kraska, James (2011). Maritime Power and the Law of the Sea: Expeditionary Operations in World Politics, p. 50

Rybczynski, Witold (1987)
Bourse. Online Etymology Dictionary


Goetzmann, William N.; Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (2005). The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations that Created Modern Capital Markets, p. 165
Leopold, Les (2009). The Looting of America: How Wall Street's Game of Fantasy Finance Destroyed Our Jobs, Pensions, and Prosperity—and What We Can Do about It, p. 31. “While Italy produced the first transferable government bonds, it didn't develop the other ingredient necessary to produce a fully fledged capital market: corporate shareholders. The Dutch East India Company, founded in 1602, became the first to offer shares... This buying and selling of shares in the Dutch East India Company became the basis of the first stock market.”
Shorto, Russell (2013). Amsterdam: A History of the World's Most Liberal City. “The truly revolutionary innovation of Amsterdam's stock market lay in the fact that it became the world's first market in the sale of company shares: a secondary securities market. If a company's shares of stock are frozen, its ownership is frozen and the business is a private affair. But if those shares, or derivatives based on them, can be resold, then you have a financial marketplace, which is a kind of living thing, constantly churning. It can then become a means of individual expression and power, allowing for anyone with a few extra coins to play a part in the great economic drama society.”

Brooks, John (1968). “The Fluctuation: The Little Crash in '62” in “Business Adventures: Twelve Classic Tales from the World of Wall Street”. (New York: Weybright & Talley). “What is truly extraordinary is the speed with which this pattern emerged full blown following the establishment, in 1611, of the world’s first important stock exchange — a roofless courtyard in Amsterdam — and the degree to which it persists (with variations, it is true) on the New York Stock Exchange in the nineteen-sixties. Present-day stock trading in the United States — a bewilderingly vast enterprise, involving millions of miles of private telegraph wires, computers that can read and copy the Manhattan Telephone Directory in three minutes, and over twenty million stockholder participants — would seem to be a far cry from a handful of seventeenth-century Dutchmen haggling in the rain. But the field marks are much the same. The first stock exchange was, inadvertently, a laboratory in which new human reactions were revealed. By the same token, the New York Stock Exchange is also a sociological test tube, forever contributing to the human species’ self-understanding. The behaviour of the pioneering Dutch stock traders is ably documented in a book entitled “Confusion of Confusions,” written by a plunger on the Amsterdam market named Joseph de la Vega; originally published in 1688, it was reprinted in English translation a few years ago by the Harvard Business School.”
Petram, Lodewijk (2014). The World's First Stock Exchange (Columbia Business School Publishing)
Reszat, Beate (2005). European Financial Systems in the Global Economy, p. 7
Braudel, Fernand (1982). Civilization and Capitalism, 15th-18th Century: The Wheels of Commerce, p. 101. “All evidence points to the Mediterranean as the cradle of the stock market. But what was new in Amsterdam was the volume, the fluidity of the market and publicity it received, and the speculative freedom of transactions.”
Poitras, Geoffrey (2013). Commodity Risk Management: Theory and Application, p. 59-83. (New York: Routledge). “The use of the term ‘bourse’ (beurs) is indicative of the historical development, the term being taken from a square in Bruges, named for an inn on the square owned at one time by the van Beurs family, where the Florentines, Genoese and Venetians had their consular houses. This inn was a popular meeting place for foreign merchants. Though exchange trading of derivative securities was yet to come, some essential characteristics of exchange trading are discernible at the beginnings of the bourses: a self-regulating collection of merchants – both brokers and dealers – meeting for the mutual gain of enhanced liquidity... In 1531, Antwerp opened a new exchange building designed exclusively for trading of commodities and bills of exchange... Exchange trading in Amsterdam marks the beginning of the distinction between derivative securities for bulk commodities versus financial assets, in particular shares in joint stock companies... Amsterdam is the first instance in the history of exchange traded derivative securities where the distinction between financial assets and bulk commodities as deliverables assumes importance.”
MacDonald, Scott B.; Gastmann, Albert L. (2001). A History of Credit and Power in the Western World, p. 98

Rothwell, Kevin (2007). Handbook of Investment Administration, p. 78
Israel, Jonathan I. (1989). Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585-1740, p. 75
Law, Jonathan (2010). A Dictionary of Accounting, p. 399
Ban, Zoltan (2011). Sustainable Trade: Changing the Environment the Market Operates in, Through Standardized Global Trade Tariffs, p. 219
Westbrook, Ian (2014). Strategic Financial and Investor Communication: The Stock Price Story, p. 25

Poitras, Geoffrey (2012). Handbook of Research on Stock Market Globalization (Edward Elgar Publishing Limited), p. 39. “By the end of the seventeenth century a small but relatively sophisticated stock market existed in Amsterdam, and certainly one of sufficient importantance as to be worthy of a description by a contemporary, Joseph de la Vega, in 1688. What emerges from that description is that the main stock traded remained the shares of the Dutch East India Company but the techniques in use included spot and future contracts; call, put and straddle options; margin trading, hedging and short-selling; and the ability to defer both payment and delivery. Such was the level of trust that existed in this market that buying and selling was done for a monthly settlement when the outstanding differences in the money owed were cleared through the debiting and crediting of accounts at the Bank of Amsterdam.”




Giroux, Gary (2013). Business Scandals, Corruption, and Reform: An Encyclopedia [2 volumes], p. 95
Negishi, Takashi; Mino, Kazuo; Ramachandran, Rama V. (2001). Economic Theory, Dynamics and Markets: Essay in Honor of Ryuzo Sato, p. 498
Heckman, James J.; Nelson, Robert L.; Cabatingan, Lee (2010). Global Perspectives on the Rule of Law. (Routledge-Cavendish, 2010), p. 152

Jonker, Joost; Gelderblom, Oscar: Completing a Financial Revolution: The Finance of the Dutch East India Trade and the Rise of the Amsterdam Capital Market, 1595-1612. (The Journal of Economic History, 2004, vol. 64, issue 03, pages 641-672)
Kuzminski, Adrian (2013). The Ecology of Money: Debt, Growth, and Sustainability, p. 39
Chorafas, Dimitris N. (2005). The Management of Equity Investments, p. 79
Ferguson, Niall (2008)

Cross, Frank B.; Prentice, Robert A. (2007). Law and Corporate Finance, p. 130

Levich, Richard M.; Majnoni, Giovanni; Reinhart, Carmen (2002). Ratings, Rating Agencies and the Global Financial System, p. 20
Goetzmann, William N.; Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (2005). The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations that Created Modern Capital Markets, p. 301
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William (2006), "An Economic Explanation of the Early Bank of Amsterdam, Debasement, Bills of Exchange, and the Emergence of the First Central Bank", Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Working Paper 2006–13
Atack, Jeremy; Neal, Larry (2009). The Origins and Development of Financial Markets and Institutions: From the Seventeenth Century to the Present, p. 46-47
Franks, Sandy; Nunnally, Sara (2011). Barbarians of Wealth: Protecting Yourself from Today's Financial Attilas, p. 57-58
Rolland, Gail (2011). Market Players: A Guide to the Institutions in Today's Financial Markets, p. 58


Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William (2005). The Big Problem of Large Bills: The Bank of Amsterdam and the Origins of Central Banking. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (Working Paper 2005–16)
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William (2007). The Bank of Amsterdam and the Leap to Central Bank Money. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97, p262-5
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William (2008). Domestic Coinage and the Bank of Amsterdam. (August 2008 Draft of Chapter 7 of the Wisselbankboek)
Van Nieuwkerk, Marius (ed.), (2009). The Bank of Amsterdam: on the Origins of Central Banking. (Amsterdam: Sonsbeek Publishers)
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William (2010). How Amsterdam Got Fiat Money. (Working Paper 2010-17, December 2010)
Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William (2012). The Bank of Amsterdam through the Lens of Monetary Competition. (Working Paper 2012-14, September 2012)

Johnson, Hazel J. (2000). Banking Alliances, p. 7
Gillard, Lucien (2004)


Quinn, Stephen; Roberds, William (2014). Death of a Reserve Currency. (Working Paper 2014-17, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta)
Westbrook, Ian (2014)
Joseph de la Vega, Confusión de Confusiones, 1688

Nison, Steve (1994). Beyond Candlesticks: New Japanese Charting Techniques Revealed, John Wiley and Sons, p. 14. ISBN 0-471-00720-X
The birth of the VOC is often considered to be the beginning of the rise of modern corporations as significant political-economic forces that affect human lives in every corner of the world today.
Theodore Roosevelt once said “I believe in corporations. They are indispensable instruments of our modern civilization…” .
  In “The Age of Uncertainty” (1977), John Kenneth Galbraith, writes, “The institution that most changes our lives we least understand or, more correctly, seek most elaborately to misunderstand. That is the modern corporation. Week by week, month by month, year by year, it exercises a greater influence on our livelihood and the way we live than unions, universities, politicians, the government.”

Kennedy, Paul (1989). The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers
Bindemann, Kirsten (1999). The Future of European Financial Centres
Cassis, Youssef (2010), p. 9



Israel, Jonathan (1989). Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585-1740, p. 114
Israel, Jonathan (1997). Conflicts of Empires: Spain, the Low Countries and the Struggle for World Supremacy, 1585-1713
Burch, Kurt; Denemark, Robert A.; Thomas, Kenneth P.; Tétreault, Mary Ann (2003). Rethinking International Political Economy: Emerging Issues, Unfolding Odysseys (RIPE Series in Global Political Economy)

Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, "The Origins of Mutual Funds," Yale ICF Working Paper No. 04-48 (December 12, 2004), p. 5.
William Buckels
Willem Beuckelszoon
Herring



www.Belgiangenever.com]
Satre, Lowell Joseph (2005). Chocolate on Trial: Slavery, Politics, and the Ethics of Business, p. 14
Grivetti, Louis E.; Shapiro, Howard-Yana (2011). Chocolate: History, Culture, and Heritage
Wilson, Philip K.; Hurst, William Jeffrey (2012). Chocolate as Medicine: A Quest Over the Centuries, p. 81

Ensminger, Marion Eugene; Ensminger, Audrey H. (1994). Foods & Nutrition Encyclopedia, 2 Volumes, p. 435
Varnam, Alan; Sutherland, Jane M. (1999). Beverages: Technology, Chemistry and Microbiology (Food Products Series), p. 257
Barham, Peter (2001). The Science of Cooking, p. 213
Weinberg, Bennett Alan; Bealer, Bonnie K. (2001). The World of Caffeine: The Science and Culture of the World's Most Popular Drug, p. 59
Wolfe, David; Holdstock, Sharon (2005). Naked Chocolate: The Astonishing Truth About the World's Greatest Food, p. 19
Smith, Andrew F. (2006). Encyclopedia of Junk Food and Fast Food, p. 48
Morganelli, Adrianna (2006). The Biography of Chocolate, p. 18
Afoakwa, Emmanuel Ohene (2010). Chocolate Science and Technology
Engoron, Ed; Goodbody, Mary (2011). Choclatique: 150 Simply Elegant Desserts, p. 250
Krebs, John (2013). Food: A Very Short Introduction, p. 20
Afoakwa, Emmanuel Ohene (2014). Cocoa Production and Processing Technology, p. 11


Milun, Kathryn (2011). The Political Uncommons: The Cross-Cultural Logic of the Global Commons, p. 77-79
Anand, Ram Prakash (1987). International Law and the Developing Countries: Confrontation Or Cooperation?, p. 5-9, p. 53-62
Milun, Kathryn (2011). The Political Uncommons: The Cross-Cultural Logic of the Global Commons, p.12, p. 77-79
O'Brien, John (2001). International Law, p. 9-11
Boczek, Boleslaw Adam (2005). International Law: A Dictionary, p. 9-10
Malone, Linda A. (2008). International Law, p. 2
Darwall, Stephen (2013). Grotius at the Creation of Modern Moral Philosophy in Honor, History, and Relationship: Essays in Second-Personal Ethics II, p. 157
Friedrich, Carl Joachim (1963). The Philosophy of Law in Historical Perspective, p. 65-66
Crowe, Michael Bertram (1977). The Changing Profile of the Natural Law, p. 223-224
Anderson, Owen (2012). The Natural Moral Law: The Good After Modernity, p. 96
Boas, Gideon (2012). Public International Law: Contemporary Principles and Perspectives, p. 12-13
Scharf, Michael P. (2013). Customary International Law in Times of Fundamental Change: Recognizing Grotian Moments, p. 19-20
Arend, Anthony Clark; Beck, Robert J. (2014). International Law and the Use of Force: Beyond the U.N. Charter Paradigm, p. 15
Wacks, Raymond (2014). Philosophy of Law: A Very Short Introduction, p. 6


Tierney, Brian (1997). The Idea of Natural Rights: Studies on Natural Rights, Natural Law, and Church Law, 1150-1625 (Emory University Studies in Law and Religion), p. 317-341
Janis, Mark W.; Evans, Carolyn Maree (1999). Religion and International Law, p. 217-218
Boucher, David (2009). The Limits of Ethics in International Relations: Natural Law, Natural Rights, and Human Rights in Transition
Shimko, Keith (2012). International Relations: Perspectives, Controversies and Readings, p. 216
Kuiper, Kathleen (2010). The Britannica Guide to Theories and Ideas That Changed the Modern World, p. 275, p. 321-322
Franck, Thomas M. (1999). The Empowered Self − Law and Society in the Age of Individualism. (Oxford University Press)
Bull, Hedley Hugo Grotius and International Relations, 1992


Excluding the Faroe Islands and Greenland.
Excluding Aruba, Curaçao and St Maarten.
Excluding Tokelau, Niue and the Cook Islands.
Excluding Northern Ireland. The Scottish parliament has passed a bill that allows same-sex marriages to take place from October 2014.



Macey, Samuel L. (1994) . Encyclopedia of Time, p. 123-126
Windelspecht, Michael (2002), Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries of the 17th Century (Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions and Discoveries through the Ages) , p. 187-190
Carlisle, Rodney (2004). Scientific American Inventions and Discoveries : All the Milestones in Ingenuity From the Discovery of Fire to the Invention of the Microwave Oven, p. 193-194
Haven, Kendall (2006). 100 Greatest Science Inventions of All Time, p. 63-65
Boyd, Martin M. (2007). High Precision Spectroscopy of Strontium in an Optical Lattice: Towards a New Standard for Frequency and Time, p. 2
Mäkikalli, Aino (2007). From Eternity to Time: Conceptions of Time in Daniel Defoe's Novels, p. 160-161
Perman, Stacy (2013). A Grand Complication: The Race to Build the World's Most Legendary Watch, p. 145



Biró, Tamás Sándor (2011). Is There a Temperature?: Conceptual Challenges at High Energy, Acceleration and Complexity (Fundamental Theories of Physics), p. 9
Wei, James (2012). Great Inventions that Changed the World, p. 237


Macey, Samuel L. (1994) . Encyclopedia of Time, p. 125-126
Perman, Stacy (2013). A Grand Complication: The Race to Build the World's Most Legendary Watch, p. 150








Milham 1945, p.226






T.D. McGee (1988) Principles and Methods of Temperature Measurement page 3, ISBN 0-471-62767-4
J.E. Drinkwater (1832)Life of Galileo Galilei page 41
The Galileo Project: Santorio Santorio
Lydolph, Paul E. (1985). Weather and Climate, p. 13
Allaby, Michael (2002). Encyclopedia of Weather and Climate, p. 204
Don Rittner (2003). A to Z of Scientists in Weather and Climate, p. 53-54
Richard Myers (2003). The Basics of Chemistry, p. 104
Allaby, Michael (2004). A Chronology of Weather, p. 92
Haven, Kendall (2005). 100 Greatest Science Inventions of All Time, p. 66


Snellen, H. A. (1995). Willem Einthoven (1860–1927), Father of Electrocardiography: Life and Work, Ancestors and Contemporaries
Bud, Robert; Warner, Deborah Jean (1998). Instruments of Science: An Historical Encyclopedia, p. 204-206
Stein, Emanuel (1999). Rapid Analysis of Electrocardiograms: A Self-Study Program, p. 5
Oberg, P. Ake; Togawa, Tatsuo; Spelman, Francis A. (2004). Sensors Applications: Sensors in Medicine and Health Care, volume 3 p. 3-5
Jevon, Philip (2009). ECGs for Nurses, p. 11
Gacek, Adam; Pedrycz, Witold (2011). ECG Signal Processing, Classification and Interpretation: A Comprehensive, p. 21
Smith, Denise L.; Fernhall, Bo (2011). Advanced Cardiovascular Exercise Physiology, p. 59
de Luna, Antoni Bayés (2012). Clinical Electrocardiography: A Textbook, p. 13


Katz, Jay; Capron, Alexander Morgan (1975). Catastrophic Diseases: Who Decides What?, p.35-36
Simmons, John G. (2002). Doctors and Discoveries: Lives that Created Today's Medicine, p. 275-279
Lindsay, Robert M. (2004). Daily and Nocturnal Hemodialysis, p. 2
Somasundaran, P. (2006). Encyclopedia of Surface and Colloid Science, p. 3565
Hakim, Nadey S. (2009). Artificial Organs, p. 44
Stam, Lawrence E. (2010). 100 Questions & Answers About Kidney Dialysis
Tal, Joseph (2011). Strategy and Statistics in Clinical Trials: A Non-Statisticians Guide to Thinking, Designing and Executing, p. 204-205
Johnson, Arthur T. (2011). Biology for Engineers, p. 569-570
Wei, James (2012). Great Inventions that Changed the World
Kallenbach, Judith Z. (2012). Review of Hemodialysis for Nurses and Dialysis Personnel
Ratner, Buddy D.; Hoffman, Allan S.; Schoen, Frederick J.; Lemons, Jack E. (2012). Biomaterials Science: An Introduction to Materials in Medicine
Lerma, Edgar V.; Rosner, Mitchell (2013). Clinical Decisions in Nephrology, Hypertension and Kidney Transplantation, p. 333
Orlando, Giuseppe (2013). Regenerative Medicine Applications in Organ Transplantation, p. 3
Mead, Walter Russell (2007). God and Gold: Britain, America and the Making of the Modern World

Kraska, James (2011). Maritime Power and the Law of the Sea: Expeditionary Operations in World Politics, p. 46-50
Eizenstat, Stuart E. (2012). The Future of the Jews: How Global Forces are Impacting the Jewish People, Israel, and Its Relationship with the United States, p. 12. As Eizenstat observes, “since the Dutch invented modern capitalism in the seventeenth century, global powers have thrived by combining economic and military forces.”
Glete, Jan (2000). Warfare at Sea, 1500-1650: Maritime Conflicts and the Transformation of Europe. (Routledge)
Glete, Jan (2001). The Dutch Navy, Dutch State Formation and the Rise of Dutch Maritime Supremacy. (Paper for the Anglo-American Conference for Historians:The Sea, 4–6 July 2001, University of London, Institute of Historical Research)
Mead, Walter Russell (2007). God and Gold: Britain, America and the Making of the Modern World. “That Dutch system was like version 1.0 of the operating software on which much of the world still runs. At the turn of eighteenth century the British introduced version 2.0; there were several incremental upgrades along the way until the Americans introduced version 3.0 after the Second World War.”

Tuchman, Barbara W. (1988). The First Salute: A View of the American Revolution





Steinmetz, George (1999). State/Culture: State-Formation after the Cultural Turn, p. 164-165
Gorski, Philip S. (2003). The Disciplinary Revolution: Calvinism and the Rise of the State in Early Modern Europe, p. 72-77
Weigley, Russell F. (2004). The Age of Battles: The Quest for Decisive Warfare from Breitenfeld to Waterloo, p. 9-17
Dolman, Everett C. (2005). The Warrior State: How Military Organization Structures Politics, p. 94-97
Weir, William (2006). 50 Military Leaders Who Changed the World, p.127-130
Lawrence, David R. (2009). The Complete Soldier: Military Books and Military Culture in Early Stuart England, 1603-1645 (History of Warfare), p. 137-156
Van Nimwegen, Olaf (2010). The Dutch Army and the Military Revolutions, 1588-1688
Andrade, Tonio (2011). Lost Colony: The Untold Story of China's First Great Victory Over the West, p. 125
Messenger, Charles (2013). Reader's Guide to Military History, p. 347-348
Karsten, Luchien (2013). Globalization and Time


Karsten, Luchien (2012). Globalization and Time
Apel, Willi (1969). Harvard Dictionary of Music, p. 523
Karp, Theodore (1973). Dictionary of Music, p. 238
Rona, Jeffrey Carl (1990). Synchronization from Reel to Reel: A Complete Guide for the Synchronization of Audio, Film and Video, p. 22
Lampl, Hans (1996). Turning Notes Into Music: An Introduction to Musical Interpretation, p. 39
Sembos, Evangelos C. (2006). Theory of Music, p. 29
Sembos, Evangelos C. (2006). Principles of Music Theory, p. 17
Rapoport, Katharine (2012). Violin For Dummies, 2nd Edition
Ullmann-Margalit, Edna; Margalit, Avishai (1991). Isaiah Berlin: A Celebration, p. 16
Russell, Bertrand (1945). A History of Western Philosophy


Feuer, Lewis S. (1987). Spinoza and the Rise of Liberalism
Dunthorne, H. (2004). The Dutch Republic: ‘that Mother Nation of Liberty’, in The Enlightenment World, M. Fitzpatrick, P. Jones, C. Knellwolf and I. McCalman eds. London: Routledge, pp. 87-103


Shorto, Russell (2013). Amsterdam: A History of the World's Most Liberal City




Frijhoff, Willem; Spies, Marijke (2004). Dutch Culture in a European Perspective 1: 1650: Hard-Won Unity, p. 294
Israel, Jonathan Irvine; Schwartz, Stuart B. (2007). The Expansion of Tolerance: Religion in Dutch Brazil (1624-1654), p. 13

Hogg, Jabez (1854). The Microscope: Its History, Construction, and Applications
Yenne, Bill; Grosser, Morton (1983). 100 Inventions That Shaped World History
Ruestow, Edward G. (1996). The Microscope in the Dutch Republic: The Shaping of Discovery
Huerta, Robert D. (2003). Giants of Delft: Johannes Vermeer and the Natural Philosophers: the Parallel Search for Knowledge During the Age of Discovery
Krebs, Robert E. (2004). Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance (Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions and Discoveries through the Ages), p. 217

Mumford, Lewis (2010). Technics and Civilization, p. 126

King, Henry C. (1955). The History of the Telescope
Haven, Kendall (2005), 100 Greatest Science Inventions of All Time, p. 57
Andersen, Geoff (2007). The Telescope: Its History, Technology, and Future
Schilling, Govert; Christensen, Lars Lindberg (2009)
Van Helden, Albert; Dupre, Sven; Van Gent, Rob; Zuidervaar, Huibt (2011), p. 9



[http://books.google.com/books?id=2lIwU313wgkC&pg;;=PA181&dq;=Huygens+eyepiece Philip S. Harrington, "Star Ware", page 181]
Thompson, Allyn J. (2003). Making Your Own Telescope, p. 133
Dijksterhuis, Fokko Jan (2004). Lenses and Waves: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematical Science of Optics in the Seventeenth Century, p. 64
Muktavat, Kshamata; Upadhayaya, Arun. K. (2010). Applied Physics, p. 303-304
Paolini, William (2013). Choosing and Using Astronomical Eyepieces, p. 5
astro-tom.com -Huygens


Burgess, Jeremy; Marten, Michael; Taylor, Rosemary (1990). Under the Microscope: A Hidden World Revealed, p. 186
Stafford, Barbara Maria; Terpak, Frances (2001). Devices of Wonder: From the World in a Box to Images on a Screen, p. 205
Mansuripur, Masud (2002). Classical Optics and Its Applications, p. 406-407
Windelspecht, Michael (2002). Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries of the 17th Century (Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions and Discoveries through the Ages), p. 168
Wheelis, Mark (2008). Principles of Modern Microbiology, p. 11-14
Blume, Frank (2005). Applied Calculus for Scientists and Engineers: A Journey in Dialogues, p. 634
Gindikin, Simon (2007). Tales of Mathematicians and Physicists, Christiaan Huygens and Pendulum Clocks, p. 79-91
Shell-Gellasch, Amy (2007). Hands on History: A Resource for Teaching Mathematics, p. 145-152
Bechmann, Gotthard (2009). The Social Integration of Science: Institutional and Epistemological Aspects of the Transformation of Knowledge in Modern Society, p. 266-268
Beatty, Millard F. (2010). Principles of Engineering Mechanics: Volume 2 Dynamics -- The Analysis of Motion, p. 277-278
Stillwell, John (2010). Mathematics and Its History, p. 258-259


Heilbron, J. L. (1979). Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries: A Study of Early Modern Physics, p. 309-316
Baigrie, Brian Scott (2007). Electricity and Magnetism: A Historical Perspective, p. 29
Janardhan, Vikram; Fesmire, Bob (2011). Energy Explained: Conventional Energy and Alternative, Volume 1, p. 140
Gregersen, Erik (2011). The Britannica Guide to Electricity and Magnetism, p. 6
Bard, Allen J.; Inzelt, György; Scholz, Fritz (2012). Electrochemical Dictionary, 2nd edition, p. 556
Deshpande, R. P. (2012). Capacitors: Technology and Trends, p.1
Saggio, Giovanni (2014). Principles of Analog Electronics, p. 122

Winner, David (2000). Brilliant Orange: The Neurotic Genius of Dutch Football
Kraba, Milile (2010). The Story Has Been Told, p. 99
Richards, Ted (2010). Soccer and Philosophy: Beautiful Thoughts on the Beautiful Game (Popular Culture and Philosophy)




With regards to role models, Brazilian football manager and former player Telê Santana has mentioned in one interview (1992) that he had no idols, though: “My greatest satisfaction would be to manage a team such as 1974 Holland. It was a team where you could pick [Johan] Cruyff and place him on the right wing. If I had to put him in the left-wing, he would still play [the same]. I could choose Neeskens, who played both to the right and to the left of the midfield. Thus, everyone played in any position.”
Jensen, Ric (2014). Looking at the extraordinary success of the ‘Clockwork Orange’: examining the brilliance of total football played by the Netherlands. [Special Issue: Heroes, Icons, Legends: Legacies of Great Men in World Soccer] (Soccer & Society'', Volume 15, Issue 5, 2014)









Carlisle, Rodney (2004). Scientific American Inventions and Discoveries: All the Milestones in Ingenuity From the Discovery of Fire to the Invention of the Microwave Oven, p. 93-94
Beniger, James R. (1986). The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information Society, p. 175
Kelly, Kevin (1994). Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, & the Economic World, p. 113-114
Polderman, Jan Willem; Willems, Jan C. (1998). Introduction to Mathematical Systems Theory: A Behavioral Approach, p. viii
Lucertini, Mario; Gasca, Ana Millàn; Nicolò, Fernando (2004). Technological Concepts and Mathematical Models in the Evolution of Modern Engineering Systems, p. 134
Moran, Jeffrey B. (2011). How Do We Know the Laws of Thermodynamics, p. 28-29
Stebbing, Tony (2011). A Cybernetic View of Biological Growth: The Maia Hypothesis, p. 46
Pfragner, Julius. “Index.” The Motion Picture: From Magic Lantern to Sound. Great Britain: Bailey Brothers and Swinfen Ltd. 226. Print.
Musser, Charles (1990). The Emergence of Cinema: The American Screen to 1907, Volume 1, p. 20
Hankins, Thomas L.; Silverman, Robert J. (1995). Instruments and the Imagination, p.43-46
Stafford, Barbara Maria; Terpak, Frances (2001). Devices of Wonder: From the World in a Box to Images on a Screen, p.297-298
During, Simon (2002). Modern Enchantments: The Cultural Power of Secular Magic, p. 262
Kittler, Friedrich (2002). Optical Media, p. 71-72
Swiderski, Richard M. (2012). X-Ray Vision: A Way of Looking, p. 21-22
Waddington, Damer. “Introduction.” Panoramas, Magic Lanterns and Cinemas. Channel Islands, NJ: Tocan Books. xiii-xv. Print.

McNeil, Ian (1990). An Encyclopedia of the History of Technology, p. 304-305
Mokyr, Joel (1990). The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress, p. 131
Inkster, Ian (2004). History of Technology, Volume 25, p. 145
Rockman, Howard B. (2004). Intellectual Property Law for Engineers and Scientists, p. 171
Singh, Onkar (2006). Applied Thermodynamics, p. 846
O'Brien, Martin (2008). A Crisis of Waste?: Understanding the Rubbish Society, p. 65
Linde, Arvid (2011). Preston Tucker & Others - Tales of Brilliant Automotive Innovators & Innovations, p. 135-136
Ewing, J. Alfred (1926). The Steam-Engine and Other Heat-Engines, p. 6-7
Arcoumanis, Constantine (1988). Internal Combustion Engines (Combustion Treatise Series), p. 2-3
Lay, M. G. (1992). Ways of the World: A History of the World's Roads and of the Vehicles that Used Them, p. 149
Kelly, Jack (2004). Gunpowder: Alchemy, Bombards, and Pyrotechnics: The History of the Explosive that Changed the World, p. 117
Andrews, John; Jelley, Nick (2013). Energy Science: Principles, Technologies, and Impacts (2nd Edition)
Galloway, Robert Lindsay (1881). "The Steam Engine and Its Inventors", p. 22

Galloway, Robert Lindsay (1881). "The Steam Engine and Its Inventors", p. 21
Galloway, Robert Lindsay (1881). "The Steam Engine and Its Inventors", p. 24




Okamura, Sōgo (1994). History of Electron Tubes, p. 108
Huurdeman, Anton A. (2003). The Worldwide History of Telecommunications, p. 227
Iniewski, Krzysztof (2008). Wireless Technologies: Circuits, Systems, and Devices, p. 377
Nebeker, Frederik (2009). Dawn of the Electronic Age: Electrical Technologies in the Shaping of the Modern World, 1914 to 1945, p. 152
Dorf, Richard C. (1997). The Electrical Engineering Handbook (2nd Edition), p. 892
Lee, Thomas H. (2004). The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits (2nd Edition), p. 721
Buschow, K. H. J. (2011). Handbook of Magnetic Materials, p. 221
Callegaro, Luca (2013). Electrical Impedance: Principles, Measurement, and Applications, p .16

De Vries and Van der Woude, p. 244

Gereffi, Gary; Korzeniewicz, Miguel (1994). Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism (Contributions in Economics and Economic History), p. 25-26
Hoving, Ab; Emke, Cor (2000). The Ships of Abel Tasman, p. 34
Tellier, Luc-Normand (2009). Urban World History: An Economic and Geographical Perspective, p. 318
Headrick, Daniel R. (2012). Power over Peoples: Technology, Environments, and Western Imperialism, 1400 to the Present (The Princeton Economic History of the Western World), p. 41-42
Unger, Richard W. (2011). Shipping and Economic Growth 1350-1850, p. 210
Gereffi, Gary; Korzeniewicz, Miguel (1994). Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism (Contributions in Economics and Economic History), p. 26
Watts, Martin (2000). Water and Wind Power, p. 94
Morris, Neil (2006). Wind Power, p. 12
Curley, Robert (2009). The Britannica Guide to Inventions That Changed the Modern World, p. 151
Curley, Robert (2012). Renewable and Alternative Energy, p. 21
Karl Heinz Marquardt, The Global Schooner: Origins, Development, Design and Construction 1695-1845, Naval Institute Press (2003), p. 13
Marquardt, p. 21
Marquardt, p. 8
Boesky, Amy (1996). Founding Fictions: Utopias in Early Modern England, p. 56-57
Gray, Edwyn (1996). Few Survived: A History of Submarine Disasters, p. 18
Poluhowich, John (1999). Argonaut: The Submarine Legacy of Simon Lake, p. 25
Fontenoy, Paul E. (2007). Submarines: An Illustrated History of Their Impact (Weapons and Warfare), p. 1
Cartmell, Donald (2004). The Civil War Up Close: Thousands of Curious, Obscure, and Fascinating Facts, p. 117
Stefoff, Rebecca (2006). Submarines, p. 22-23
Kinder, Gary (2009). Ship of Gold in the Deep Blue Sea, p. 94
Curley, Robert (2009). The Britannica Guide to Inventions That Changed the Modern World, p. 284
Bishop, Farnham (2010). The History of the Submarine from the Beginning until WWI, p. 3-5
Curley, Robert (2011) War at Sea and in the Air, p. 55-56



Allen, Jim (2002). Four-Wheeler's Bible, p. 23
Putnam, William Lowell (2002). Percival Lowell's Big Red Car
Sobey, Ed (2009). A Field Guide to Automotive Technology, p. 112
Linde, Arvid (2011). Preston Tucker & Others - Tales of Brilliant Automotive Innovators & Innovations, p. 147
Mann, James (2011). Sports Cars, p. 224






Ridpath, Ian (1988). Star Tales, p. 9-10
Lankford, John (1997). History of Astronomy: An Encyclopedia, p. 161
Stephenson, Bruce; Bolt, Marvin; Friedman, Anna Felicity (2000). The Universe Unveiled: Instruments and Images Through History, p. 24
Kanas, Nick (2007). Star Maps: History, Artistry, and Cartography, p. 119-121
Gendler, Robert; Christensen, Lars Lindberg; Malin, David (2011). Treasures of the Southern Sky, p. 14
Simpson, Phil (2012). Guidebook to the Constellations: Telescopic Sights, Tales, and Myths, p. 559-561
Ridpath, Ian (2012). A Dictionary of Astronomy (Oxford Paperback Reference), p. 96
Brown, Robert Hanbury; Lebreton, Jean-Pierre; Waite, John H. (2009). Titan from Cassini-Huygens, p. 10


Cobb, Matthew (2006). Generation: The Seventeenth-Century Scientists Who Unraveled the Secrets of Sex, Life, and Growth. (New York: Bloomsbury)
Setchell, B. P. (1974) “The Contributions of Regnier de Graaf to Reproductive Biology,” European Journal of Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Volume 4, Issue 1, Pages 1-39, 1974
Hunter, R. H. F. (2003). Physiology of the Graafian Follicle and Ovulation. (Cambridge University Press)

Fensham, Peter J.; Gunstone, Richard F.; White, Richard Thomas (1994). The Content of Science: A Constructivist Approach to Its Teaching and Learning, p. 164-165
Aneja, K. R. (2003). Experiments in Microbiology, Plant Pathology and Biotechnology, p. 8
Huerta, Robert D. (2003). Giants of Delft: Johannes Vermeer and the Natural Philosophers. The Parallel Search for Knowledge During the Age of Discovery, p. 30
Cullen, Katherine E. (2006). Biology: The People Behind the Science, p. 24
Ghoshal, Sabari (2009). Fundamentals of Bioanalytical Techniques and Instrumentation, p. 19
Wayne, Randy O. (2009). Plant Cell Biology: From Astronomy to Zoology, p. 299
Maczulak, Anne (2010). Allies and Enemies: How the World Depends on Bacteria, p. 1-2
Huff, Toby E. (2010). Intellectual Curiosity and the Scientific Revolution: A Global Perspective, p. 198-205
Arp, Robert (2013). 1001 Ideas That Changed the Way We Think, p. 374


Huerta, Robert D. (2003). Giants of Delft: Johannes Vermeer and the Natural Philosophers: the Parallel Search for Knowledge During the Age of Discovery, p. 32
Ord, M.G.; Stocken, L.A. (1997). Further Milestones in Biochemistry (Foundations of Modern Biochemistry), p. 25
Blankenship, Robert E. (2002). Molecular Mechanisms of Photosynthesis, p. 28
McDonald, Maurice S. (2003). Photobiology of Higher Plants, p. 34
Rezende, Lisa (2006). Chronology of Science, p. 151
Stiles, Walter (2006). Principles of Plant Physiology, p. 162
Haven, Kendall (2007). 100 Greatest Science Discoveries of All Time, p. 45
Möller, Detlev (2010). Chemistry of the Climate System, p. 83-84
Magiels, Geerdt (2010). From Sunlight to Insight: Jan IngenHousz, the Discovery of Photosynthesis & Science in the Light of Ecology, p. 7
Rogers, Kara (2011). The Chemical Reactions of Life: From Metabolism to Photosynthesis, p. 182-184
Ihde, Aaron John (2012). The Development of Modern Chemistry, p. 419
Hill, Jane F. (2013). Chemical Research on Plant Growth: A translation of Théodore de Saussure's Recherches chimiques sur la Végétation
Stenesh , J. (1998). Biochemistry, p. 377
Khanna, Pragya (2008). Cell and Molecular Biology, p. 151
Burkhardt, Jr., Richard W. (2005). Patterns of Behavior: Konrad Lorenz, Niko Tinbergen, and the Founding of Ethology. (University of Chicago Press)
Daly, M & Wilson, M. (1983). Sex, evolution, and behaviour. Brooks-Cole.
Biography on Nobel prize website. Nobelprize.org (1911-03-01). Retrieved on 2013-11-8.

Kuiper, Kathleen (2010). The Britannica Guide to Theories and Ideas That Changed the Modern World, p. 56
Ungs, Michael (2010). The Theory of Quantum Torus Knots: Its Foundation in Differential Geometry, Volume II, p. 334
De Gloria, Alessandro (2014). Applications in Electronics Pervading Industry, Environment and Society, p. 91
[http://dz-srv1.sub.uni-goettingen.de/sub/digbib/loader?ht=VIEW&did;;=D28661 Georg-August-Universität Göttingen]


Hesseling, Dennis E. (2003). Gnomes in the Fog: The Reception of Brouwer's Intuitionism in the 1920s. (Birkhäuser Verlag)
Van Atten, Mark; Boldini, Pascal; Bourdeau, Michel; Heinzmann, Gerhard (2008). One Hundred Years of Intuitionism (1907-2007). (Birkhäuser Verlag)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0019-1035(03)00075-7
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2006.05.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01431160500104194

Ernst Mach, The Science of Mechanics (1919), e.g. p.143, p.172 and p.187 .
Westfall, Richard S. (1971). The Construction of Modern Science: Mechanisms and Mechanics, p. 130
Gindikin, Semyon Grigorevich (1988). Tales of Physicists and Mathematicians, p. 86-87
Jammer, Max (1997). Concepts of Mass in Classical and Modern Physics, p. 62-63
Jammer, Max (1999). Concepts of Force: A Study in the Foundations of Dynamics, p. 109-110
Graneau, Peter; Graneau Neal (2006). In the Grip of the Distant Universe: The Science of Inertia, p. 111-112
Ginzburg, Vladimir B.; Ginzburg, Tatyana V. (2007). Prime Elements of Ordinary Matter, Dark Matter & Dark Energy: Beyond Standard Model & String Theory , p. 82-83


Barbour, Julian B. (1989). Absolute or Relative Motion?: Volume 1, The Discovery of Dynamics: A Study from a Machian Point of View of the Discovery and the Structure of Dynamical Theories , p. 454
Matthews, Michael; Gauld, Colin F.; Stinner, Arthur (2006). The Pendulum: Scientific, Historical, Philosophical and Educational Perspectives, p. 9-10
Ginzburg, Vladimir B.; Ginzburg, Tatyana V. (2007). Prime Elements of Ordinary Matter, Dark Matter & Dark Energy: Beyond Standard Model & String Theory , p. 82
Snygg, John (2011). A New Approach to Differential Geometry using Clifford's Geometric Algebra, p. 195-202
Kautz, Richard (2011). Chaos: The Science of Predictable Random Motion, p. 69-70
Filippov, Aleksandr T. (2011). The Versatile Soliton, p. 68-69
Simonyi, Károly (2012). A Cultural History of Physics, p. 240-255
Knoebel, Arthur; Laubenbacher, Reinhard; Lodder, Jerry; Pengelley, David (2007). Mathematical Masterpieces: Further Chronicles by the Explorers. (Springer), p. 169. “The cycloid had already occupied the minds of great mathematicians and scientists such as Galileo, Torricelli, Mersenne, Roberval, Fermat, Descartes, Pascal, and others [18], yet none of them discovered its isochronous property.”
Struik, Dirk Jan (1986). A Source Book in Mathematics, 1200-1800. (Princeton University Press), p. 392
Farouki, Rida T. (2007). Pythagorean-Hodograph Curves: Algebra and Geometry Inseparable. (Springer), p. 161. As Bernoulli noted: “We have a just admiration for Huygens, because he was the first to discover that a heavy point on an ordinary cycloid falls in the same time, whatever the position from which the motion begins.”

Fensham, Peter J.; Gunstone, Richard F.; White, Richard Thomas (1994). The Content of Science: A Constructivist Approach to Its Teaching and Learning, p. 164
Haven, Kendall (2007). 100 Greatest Science Discoveries of All Time, p. 29-30
Rogers, Kara (2011). Bacteria and Viruses (Biochemistry, Cells, and Life), p. 1-3
Goes, Frank Joseph (2013). The Eye in History, p. 338-341


Calisher, Charles H.; Horzinek, M.C. (1999). 100 Years of Virology: The Birth and Growth of a Discipline, p. 1-8
Creager, Angela N. H. (2002). The Life of a Virus: Tobacco Mosaic Virus as an Experimental Model, 1930-1965, p. 20-27
Feest, Uljana; Steinle, Friedrich (2003). Scientific Concepts and Investigative Practice, p. 204-208
Trigiano, Robert N.; Windham, Mark T.; Windham, Alan S. (2004). Plant Pathology: Concepts and Laboratory Exercises, p. 35
Dimmock, Nigel; Easton, Andrew; Leppard, Keith (2007). Introduction to Modern Virology, p. 4-5
Haven, Kendall (2007). 100 Greatest Science Discoveries of All Time, p. 101-102
Devasahayam, H. Lewin (2009). Illustrated Plant Pathology: Basic Concepts, p. 7
Shors, Teri (2013). Understanding Viruses, p. 628
Pommerville, Jeffrey C. (2014). ''Fundamentals of Microbiology, p. 453
Grove, David (2014). Tapeworms, Lice, and Prions: A Compendium of Unpleasant Infections, p. 429
Chareix, Fabien (2004). Huygens and Mechanics (ESA Science & Technology, University of Paris IV).
Meli, Domenico Bertoloni (2006). Thinking with Objects: The Transformation of Mechanics in the Seventeenth Century. (Johns Hopkins University Press), p. 206
Laermann, Karl-Hans (2000). Optical Methods in Experimental Solid Mechanics. (Springer), p. 198
Wayne, Randy O. (2014). Light and Video Microscopy. (Academic Press, Elsevier), p. 43
Buchwald, Jed Z. (1989). The Rise of the Wave Theory of Light: Optical Theory and Experiment in the Early Nineteenth Century, p. 4
Dijksterhuis, Fokko Jan (2006). Lenses and Waves: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematical Science of Optics in the Seventeenth Century , p. 159
Turner, Gerard L'Estrange (1983). Nineteenth-century Scientific Instruments, p. 149
Driggers, Ronald G. (2003). Encyclopedia of Optical Engineering, Volume 1, p. 183
Coulson, Kinsell (2012). Solar and Terrestrial Radiation: Methods and Measurements, p. 12
Sengers, Johanna Levelt (2002), p. 16
Sengers, Johanna Levelt (2002), p. 255-256
Van der Waals, J. D. (1873). On the Continuity of the Gaseous and Liquid States (Doctoral dissertation, Universiteit Leiden).
Parsegian, V. Adrian (2005). Van der Waals Forces: A Handbook for Biologists, Chemists, Engineers, and Physicists, p. 2
Wadhwani, Navina (2007). Electricity And Magnetism, p. 78
Andriesse, Cornelis Dirk (2008). Dutch Messengers: A History of Science Publishing, 1930-1980, p. 12
Miyazaki, Terunobu; Jin, Hanmin (2012). The Physics of Ferromagnetism, p. 3
See, for example, Jackson p777-8.
. These authors use the Lorentz force in tensor form as definer of the electromagnetic tensor F, in turn the fields E and B.

One universe, by Neil deGrasse Tyson, Charles Tsun-Chu Liu, and Robert Irion.
The magnetic compass mechanisms of birds and rodents are based on different physical principles. Journal of the Royal Society
Matricon, Jean; Waysand, Georges (1994). The Cold Wars: A History of Superconductivity, p. 23
Shachtman, Tom (1999). Absolute Zero and the Conquest of Cold , p. 186
Blundell, Stephen J. (2009). Superconductivity: A Very Short Introduction, p. 23-24
Vidali, Gianfranco (1993). Superconductivity: The Next Revolution?, p. 30-38
Matricon, Jean; Waysand, Georges (1994). The Cold Wars: A History of Superconductivity
Shachtman, Tom (1999). Absolute Zero and the Conquest of Cold, p. 233
Buckel, Werner; Kleiner, Reinhold (2004). Superconductivity: Fundamentals and Applications

Phillips (1999), p. 92.
Carroll (1996), p. 274–276.
Carroll (1996), p. 274.
Kramers, H. A., Proc. Amsterdam Acad. 33, 959 (1930)


Regularization and Renormalization of Gauge Fields by 't Hooft and Veltman (PDF)



Grimbly, Shona (2001). Atlas of Exploration, p. 47
Mills, William J. (2003). Exploring Polar Frontiers: A Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1, p. 62-65
Pletcher, Kenneth (2010). The Britannica Guide to Explorers and Explorations That Changed the Modern World, p. 162



Arlov (1994): 9
Arlov (1994): 10




Arlov (1994): 12
Arlov (1994): 13
Arlov (1994): 14
Novaya Zemlya in: 



"Search for Barents: Evaluation of Possible Burial Sites on North Novaya Zemlya, Russia", Jaapjan J. Zeeberg et al., Arctic Vol. 55, No. 4 (December 2002) p. 329–338
J.P. Sigmond and L.H. Zuiderbaan (1979) Dutch Discoveries of Australia. Rigby Ltd, Australia. pp. 19–30 ISBN 0-7270-0800-5
McIntyre, K.G. (1977) The Secret Discovery of Australia, Portuguese ventures 200 years before Cook, Souvenir Press, Menindie ISBN 0-285-62303-6
Robert J. King, "The Jagiellonian Globe, a Key to the Puzzle of Jave la Grande", The Globe: Journal of the Australian Map Circle, No. 62, 2009, pp. 1–50.
Robert J. King, "Regio Patalis: Australia on the map in 1531?", The Portolan, Issue 82, Winter 2011, pp. 8–17.

Credit for the discovery of Australia was given to Frenchman Binot Paulmier de Gonneville (1504) in 
In the early 20th century, Lawrence Hargrave argued from archaeological evidence that Spain had established a colony in Botany Bay in the 16th century.

This claim was made by Allan Robinson in his self-published In Australia, Treasure is not for the Finder (1980); for discussion, see 
Day, Alan (2003). The A to Z of the Discovery and Exploration of Australia, p. 115
Seddon, George (2005). The Old Country: Australian Landscapes, Plants and People, p. 28
McHugh, Evan (2006). 1606: An Epic Adventure, p. 16

Grimbly, Shona (2001). Atlas of Exploration, p. 107-108

Davison, Hirst and Macintyre, p. 233.

Mills, William J. (2003). Exploring Polar Frontiers: A Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1, p. 332-333

Garden 1977, p.8.
J.R Macneil and william H. Neil, The Human Web, a bird's-eye of World history, W.W. Norton and Company 2003, p 214
Fenton, James (1884). A History of Tasmania: From Its Discovery in 1642 to the Present Time
Pletcher, Kenneth (2010). The Britannica Guide to Explorers and Explorations That Changed the Modern World, p. 122-125
Kirk, Robert W. (2012). Paradise Past: The Transformation of the South Pacific, 1520-1920, p. 31

"The Tamil Bell", Te Papa


Kerry R. Howe (2003). The Quest for Origins: Who First Discovered and Settled New Zealand and the Pacific Islands? pp 144-5 Auckland:Penguin.



"Calculate the Date of Easter Sunday", Astronomical Society of South Australia. Retrieved 7 February 2013.
An English translation of the originally Dutch journal by Jacob Roggeveen, with additional significant information from the log by Cornelis Bouwman, was published in: Andrew Sharp (ed.), The Journal of Jacob Roggeveen (Oxford 1970).
ROUTLEDGE, Katherine. 1919. The Mystery of Easter Island. The story of an expedition. London. page 201







Brienen, Rebecca Parker (2006). Visions of Savage Paradise: Albert Eckcourt, Court Painter in Colonial Dutch Brazil, 1637-1644
Van Groesen, Michiel (2014). The Legacy of Dutch Brazil

Franklin, Wayne (1979). Discoverers, Explorers, Settlers: The Diligent Writers of Early America, p. 21-22
Jacobs, Jaap (2009). The Colony of New Netherland: A Dutch Settlement in Seventeenth-Century America, p. 2
Jameson, John (2009). Narratives of New Netherland, 1609-1664, p. 288-291
Huigen, Siegfried; de Jong, Jan L. (2010). The Dutch Trading Companies as Knowledge Networks, p. 103
Van der Donck, Adriaen (2010). Description of the New Netherlands
Lach, Donald F.; Van Kley, Edwin J. (1993). Asia in the Making of Europe, Volume III: A Century of Advance. Book 1: Trade, Missions, Literature, p. 487
Lee, Peter H. (1996). Sourcebook of Korean Civilization: Volume 2: From the Seventeenth Century to the Modern Period, p. 109
Lee, Kenneth B. (1997). Korea and East Asia: The Story of a Phoenix, p. 122
Brook, Timothy (2009). Vermeer's Hat: The Seventeenth Century and the Dawn of the Global World, p. 199-200
Seth, Michael J. (2011). A History of Korea: From Antiquity to the Present, p. 227-228
Walker, Hugh Dyson (2012). East Asia: A New History, p. 316






Lach, Donald F.; Van Kley, Edwin J. (1993). Asia in the Making of Europe, Volume III: A Century of Advance. Book 1: Trade, Missions, Literature, p. 486-487
Gunn, Geoffrey C. (2003). First Globalization: The Eurasian Exchange, 1500-1800, p. 152-153
Nahm, Andrew C.; Hoare, James (2004). Historical Dictionary of the Republic of Korea, p. 241




