


Weyl character formula




Weyl character formula

In mathematics, the Weyl character formula in representation theory describes the characters of irreducible representations of compact Lie groups in terms of their highest weights. It was proved by .
By definition, the character of a representation r of G is the trace of r(g), as a function of a group element g in G. The irreducible representations in this case are all finite-dimensional (this is part of the Peter–Weyl theorem); so the notion of trace is the usual one from linear algebra. Knowledge of the character χ of r is a good substitute for r itself, and can have algorithmic content. Weyl's formula is a closed formula for the χ, in terms of other objects constructed from G and its Lie algebra. The representations in question here are complex, and so without loss of generality are unitary representations; irreducible therefore means the same as indecomposable, i.e. not a direct sum of two subrepresentations.
Statement of Weyl character formula
The character of an irreducible representation

 
  of a complex semisimple Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is given by



where



 
  is the Weyl group;




 
  is the subset of the positive roots of the root system

 
 ;


 
  is the half sum of the positive roots;


 
  is the highest weight of the irreducible representation 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  is the determinant of the action of 
 
 
 
  on the Cartan subalgebra

 
 . This is equal to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the length of the Weyl group element, defined to be the minimal number of reflections with respect to simple roots such that 
 
 
 
  equals the product of those reflections.

The character of an irreducible representation 
 
 
 
  of a compact connected Lie group 
 
 
 
  is given by



where 
 
 
 
  is the character on 
 
 
 
  with differential 
 
 
 
  on the Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  of the maximal Torus 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is the differential of a character of 
 
 
 
 , e.g. if 
 
 
 
  is simply connected, this can be reformulated as



Weyl denominator formula
In the special case of the trivial 1-dimensional representation the character is 1, so the Weyl character formula becomes the Weyl denominator formula:



For special unitary groups, this is equivalent to the expression


 
  for the dimension of a finite dimensional representation VΛ with highest weight Λ. (As usual, ρ is the Weyl vector and the products run over positive roots α.) The specialization is not completely trivial, because both the numerator and denominator of the Weyl character formula vanish to high order at the identity element, so it is necessary to take a limit of the trace of an element tending to the identity.
Freudenthal's formula
Hans Freudenthal's formula is a recursive formula for the weight multiplicities that is equivalent to the Weyl character formula, but is sometimes easier to use for calculations as there can be far fewer terms to sum. It states






= 2 \sum_{\alpha \in \Delta^{+}}\sum_{j\ge 1} (\lambda+j\alpha, \alpha)\dim V_{\lambda+j\alpha}
where

Λ is a highest weight,
λ is some other weight,
dim Vλ is the multiplicity of the weight λ
ρ is the Weyl vector
The first sum is over all positive roots α.

Weyl–Kac character formula
The Weyl character formula also holds for integrable highest weight representations of Kac–Moody algebras, when it is known as the Weyl–Kac character formula. Similarly there is a denominator identity for Kac–Moody algebras, which in the case of the affine Lie algebras is equivalent to the Macdonald identities. In the simplest case of the affine Lie algebra of type A1 this is the Jacobi triple product identity



The character formula can also be extended to integrable highest weight representations of generalized Kac–Moody algebras, when the character is given by



Here S is a correction term given in terms of the imaginary simple roots by



where the sum runs over all finite subsets I of the imaginary simple roots which are pairwise orthogonal and orthogonal to the highest weight λ, and |I| is the cardinality of I and ΣI is the sum of the elements of I.
The denominator formula for the monster Lie algebra is the product formula








for the elliptic modular function j.
Peterson gave a recursion formula for the multiplicities mult(β) of the roots β of a symmetrizable (generalized) Kac–Moody algebra, which is equivalent to the Weyl–Kac denominator formula, but easier to use for calculations:








where the sum is over positive roots γ, δ, and








Harish-Chandra Character Formula
Harish-Chandra showed that Weyl's character formula admits a generalization to representations of a real, reductive group. Suppose 
 
 
 
  is an irreducible, admissible representation of a real, reductive group G with infinitesimal character

 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the Harish-Chandra character of 
 
 
 
 ; it is given by integration against an analytic function on the regular set. If H is a Cartan subgroup of G and H' is the set of regular elements in H, then








Here

W is the complex Weyl group of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 



 
  is the stabilizer of 
 
 
 
  in W

and the rest of the notation is as above.
The coefficients $a_w$ are still not well understood. Results on these coefficients may be found in papers of Herb, Adams, Schmid, and Schmid-Vilonen among others.
See also

Algebraic character
Demazure character formula

References

Infinite dimensional Lie algebras, V. G. Kac, ISBN 0-521-37215-1







"
Category:Representation theory of Lie groups


