


Periodic point




Periodic point

In mathematics, in the study of iterated functions and dynamical systems, a periodic point of a function is a point which the system returns to after a certain number of function iterations or a certain amount of time.
Iterated functions
Given an endomorphism f on a set X


 
  a point x in X is called periodic point if there exists an n so that


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the nth iterate of f. The smallest positive integer n satisfying the above is called the prime period or least period of the point x. If every point in X is a periodic point with the same period n, then f is called periodic with period n.
If there exists distinct n and m such that


 
  then x is called a preperiodic point. All periodic points are preperiodic.
If f is a diffeomorphism of a differentiable manifold, so that the derivative

 
  is defined, then one says that a periodic point is hyperbolic if



that it is attractive if



and it is repelling if



If the dimension of the stable manifold of a periodic point or fixed point is zero, the point is called a source; if the dimension of its unstable manifold is zero, it is called a sink; and if both the stable and unstable manifold have nonzero dimension, it is called a saddle or saddle point.
Examples

A period-one point is called a fixed point.

Dynamical system
Given a real global dynamical system (R, X, Φ) with X the phase space and Φ the evolution function,


 
  a point x in X is called periodic with period t if there exists a t > 0 so that


 
  The smallest positive t with this property is called prime period of the point x.
Properties

Given a periodic point x with period p, then 
 
 
 
  for all t in R
Given a periodic point x then all points on the orbit

 
  through x are periodic with the same prime period.

Examples
The logistic map



exhibits periodicity for various values of the parameter r. For r between 0 and 1, 0 is the sole periodic point, with period 1 (giving the sequence 0, 0, 0, ..., which attracts all orbits). For r between 1 and 3, the value 0 is still periodic but is not attracting, while the value (r-1)/r is an attracting periodic point of period 1. With r greater than 3 but less than 1 + √6, there are a pair of period-2 points which together form an attracting sequence, as well as the non-attracting period-1 points 0 and (r-1)/r and a non-attracting period-2 cycle between two periodic points. As the value of parameter r rises toward 4, there arise groups of periodic points with any positive integer for the period; for some values of r one of these repeating sequences is attracting while for others none of them are (with almost all orbits being chaotic).
See also

Limit cycle
Limit set
Stable set
Sharkovsky's theorem
Stationary point
Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings

"
Category:Limit sets


