


Paris' law




Paris' law

(Figure)
Schematic plot of the typical relationship between the crack growth rate and the range of the stress intensity factor. In practice, the Paris law is calibrated to model the linear interval around the center.

Paris' law (also known as the Paris-Erdogan law) relates the stress intensity factor range to sub-critical crack growth under a fatigue stress regime. As such, it is the most popular fatigue crack growth model used in materials science and fracture mechanics. The basic formula reads1


 
 , where a is the crack length and N is the number of load cycles. Thus, the term on the left side, known as the crack growth rate,2 denotes the infinitesimal crack length growth per increasing number of load cycles. On the right hand side, C and m are material constants, and 
 
 
 
  is the range of the stress intensity factor, i.e., the difference between the stress intensity factor at maximum and minimum loading


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the maximum stress intensity factor and 
 
 
 
  is the minimum stress intensity factor.3
History and use
The formula was introduced by P.C. Paris in 1961.4 Being a power law relationship between the crack growth rate during cyclic loading and the range of the stress intensity factor, the Paris law can be visualized as a linear graph on a log-log plot, where the x-axis is denoted by the range of the stress intensity factor and the y-axis is denoted by the crack growth rate.
Paris' law can be used to quantify the residual life (in terms of load cycles) of a specimen given a particular crack size. Defining the stress intensity factor as


 
 , where 

 is a uniform tensile stress perpendicular to the crack plane and Y is a dimensionless parameter that depends on the geometry, the range of the stress intensity factor follows as


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the range of cyclic stress amplitude. Y takes the value 1 for a center crack in an infinite sheet. The remaining cycles can be found by substituting this equation in the Paris law


 
 . For relatively short cracks, Y can be assumed as independent of a and the differential equation can be solved via separation of variables


 
  and subsequent integration


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the remaining number of cycles to fracture, 
 
 
 
  is the critical crack length at which instantaneous fracture will occur, and 
 
 
 
  is the initial crack length at which fatigue crack growth starts for the given stress range 
 
 
 
 . If Y strongly depends on a, numerical methods might be required to find reasonable solutions.
For the application to adhesive joints in composites, it is more useful to express the Paris Law in terms of fracture energy rather than stress intensity factors.5
Recently, an improvement of the celebrated Paris’ Law is proposed by using Moving Least Squares.6
References


"
Category:Materials science Category:Fracture mechanics






P.C. Paris, M.P. Gomez, and W.E. Anderson. A rational analytic theory of fatigue. The Trend in Engineering, 1961, 13: p. 9-14.
Wahab, M.M.A., I.A. Ashcroft, A.D. Crocombe, and P.A. Smith, Fatigue crack propagation in adhesively bonded joints. Key Engineering Materials, 2003, 251-252: p. 229-234





