


Elliptic coordinate system




Elliptic coordinate system

 In geometry, the elliptic coordinate system is a two-dimensional orthogonal coordinate system in which the coordinate lines are confocal ellipses and hyperbolae. The two foci

 
  and 
 
 
 
  are generally taken to be fixed at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, on the 
 
 
 
 -axis of the Cartesian coordinate system.
Basic definition
The most common definition of elliptic coordinates 
 
 
 
  is






where 
 
 
 
  is a nonnegative real number and 
 
 

On the complex plane, an equivalent relationship is



These definitions correspond to ellipses and hyperbolae. The trigonometric identity



shows that curves of constant 
 
 
 
  form ellipses, whereas the hyperbolic trigonometric identity



shows that curves of constant 
 
 
 
  form hyperbolae.
Scale factors
In an orthogonal coordinate system the lengths of the basis vectors are known as scale factors. The scale factors for the elliptic coordinates 
 
 
 
  are equal to



Using the double argument identities for hyperbolic functions and trigonometric functions, the scale factors can be equivalently expressed as



Consequently, an infinitesimal element of area equals



and the Laplacian reads



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
Alternative definition
An alternative and geometrically intuitive set of elliptic coordinates 
 
 
 
  are sometimes used, where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Hence, the curves of constant 
 
 
 
  are ellipses, whereas the curves of constant 
 
 
 
  are hyperbolae. The coordinate 
 
 
 
  must belong to the interval [-1, 1], whereas the 
 
 
 
  coordinate must be greater than or equal to one.
The coordinates 
 
 
 
  have a simple relation to the distances to the foci 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For any point in the plane, the sum

 
  of its distances to the foci equals 
 
 
 
 , whereas their difference

 
  equals 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the distance to 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , whereas the distance to 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . (Recall that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are located at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.)
A drawback of these coordinates is that the points with Cartesian coordinates (x,y) and (x,-y) have the same coordinates 
 
 
 
 , so the conversion to Cartesian coordinates is not a function, but a multifunction.






Alternative scale factors
The scale factors for the alternative elliptic coordinates 
 
 
 
  are






Hence, the infinitesimal area element becomes



and the Laplacian equals



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
Extrapolation to higher dimensions
Elliptic coordinates form the basis for several sets of three-dimensional orthogonal coordinates. The elliptic cylindrical coordinates are produced by projecting in the 
 
 
 
 
 -direction. The prolate spheroidal coordinates are produced by rotating the elliptic coordinates about the 
 
 
 
 -axis, i.e., the axis connecting the foci, whereas the oblate spheroidal coordinates are produced by rotating the elliptic coordinates about the 
 
 
 
 -axis, i.e., the axis separating the foci.
Applications
The classic applications of elliptic coordinates are in solving partial differential equations, e.g., Laplace's equation or the Helmholtz equation, for which elliptic coordinates are a natural description of a system thus allowing a separation of variables in the partial differential equations. Some traditional examples are solving systems such as electrons orbiting a molecule or planetary orbits that have an elliptical shape.
The geometric properties of elliptic coordinates can also be useful. A typical example might involve an integration over all pairs of vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  that sum to a fixed vector 
 
 
 
 
 , where the integrand was a function of the vector lengths 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . (In such a case, one would position 
 
 
 
  between the two foci and aligned with the 
 
 
 
 -axis, i.e., 
 
 
 
 
 .) For concreteness, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  could represent the momenta of a particle and its decomposition products, respectively, and the integrand might involve the kinetic energies of the products (which are proportional to the squared lengths of the momenta).
See also

Curvilinear coordinates
Generalized coordinates
Mean motion

References


Korn GA and Korn TM. (1961) Mathematical Handbook for Scientists and Engineers, McGraw-Hill.
Weisstein, Eric W. "Elliptic Cylindrical Coordinates." From MathWorld — A Wolfram Web Resource. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/EllipticCylindricalCoordinates.html

"
Category:Coordinate systems


