


Bipolar cylindrical coordinates




Bipolar cylindrical coordinates

(Figure)
Coordinate surfaces of the bipolar cylindrical coordinates. The yellow crescent corresponds to σ, whereas the red tube corresponds to τ and the blue plane corresponds to z=1. The three surfaces intersect at the point P (shown as a black sphere).

Bipolar cylindrical coordinates are a three-dimensional orthogonal coordinate system that results from projecting the two-dimensional bipolar coordinate system in the perpendicular 
 
 
 
 -direction. The two lines of foci

 
  and 
 
 
 
  of the projected Apollonian circles are generally taken to be defined by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, (and by 
 
 
 
 ) in the Cartesian coordinate system.
The term "bipolar" is often used to describe other curves having two singular points (foci), such as ellipses, hyperbolas, and Cassini ovals. However, the term bipolar coordinates is never used to describe coordinates associated with those curves, e.g., elliptic coordinates.
Basic definition
The most common definition of bipolar cylindrical coordinates 
 
 
 
  is









where the 
 
 
 
  coordinate of a point 
 
 
 
  equals the angle 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  coordinate equals the natural logarithm of the ratio of the distances 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to the focal lines



(Recall that the focal lines 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are located at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.)
Surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  correspond to cylinders of different radii



that all pass through the focal lines and are not concentric. The surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  are non-intersecting cylinders of different radii



that surround the focal lines but again are not concentric. The focal lines and all these cylinders are parallel to the 
 
 
 
 -axis (the direction of projection). In the 
 
 
 
  plane, the centers of the constant-
 
 
 
  and constant-
 
 
 
  cylinders lie on the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  axes, respectively.
Scale factors
The scale factors for the bipolar coordinates 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are equal



whereas the remaining scale factor 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the infinitesimal volume element equals



and the Laplacian is given by



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
Applications
The classic applications of bipolar coordinates are in solving partial differential equations, e.g., Laplace's equation or the Helmholtz equation, for which bipolar coordinates allow a separation of variables (in 2D). A typical example would be the electric field surrounding two parallel cylindrical conductors.
Bibliography





External links

MathWorld description of bipolar cylindrical coordinates

"
Category:Coordinate systems


