


List of common coordinate transformations




List of common coordinate transformations

This is a list of some of the most commonly used coordinate transformations.
2-Dimensional
Let (x, y) be the standard Cartesian coordinates, and r and θ the standard polar coordinates.
To cartesian from polar coordinates












To polar coordinates coordinates from cartesian





 
  Note: solving for 
 
 
 
  returns the resultant angle in the first quadrant (
 
 
 
 
 ). To find 
 
 
 
 , one must refer to the original Cartesian coordinate, determine the quadrant in which 
 
 
 
  lies (ex (3,-3) [Cartesian] lies in QIV), then use the following to solve for 
 
 
 
 :

For 
 
 
 
  in QI:
 





For 
 
 
 
  in QII:
 





For 
 
 
 
  in QIII:
 





For 
 
 
 
 
  in QIV:
 




The value for 
 
 
 
  must be solved for in this manner because for all values of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is only defined for 
 
 
 
 
 , and is periodic (with period 
 
 
 
 ). This means that the inverse function will only give values in the domain of the function, but restricted to a single period. Hence, the range of the inverse function is only half a full circle.
Note that one can also use






To Cartesian coordinates from log-polar coordinates



By using complex numbers 
 
 
 
 
 , the transformation can be written as



i.e. it is given by the complex exponential function.
To log-polar coordinates from Cartesian coordinates



To Cartesian coordinates from bipolar coordinates






To Cartesian coordinates from two-center bipolar coordinates






To polar coordinates from two-center bipolar coordinates






Where 2c is the distance between the poles.
To Cartesian coordinates from Cesàro equation






Arc length and curvature from Cartesian coordinates




Arc length and curvature from polar coordinates




3-Dimensional
Let (x, y, z) be the standard Cartesian coordinates, and (ρ, θ, φ) the spherical coordinates, with θ the angle measured away from the +Z axis. As φ has a range of 360° the same considerations as in polar (2 dimensional) coordinates apply whenever an arctangent of it is taken. θ has a range of 180°, running from 0° to 180°, and does not pose any problem when calculated from an arccosine, but beware for an arctangent. If, in the alternative definition, θ is chosen to run from −90° to +90°, in opposite direction of the earlier definition, it can be found uniquely from an arcsine, but beware of an arccotangent. In this case in all formulas below all arguments in θ should have sine and cosine exchanged, and as derivative also a plus and minus exchanged.
All divisions by zero result in special cases of being directions along one of the main axes and are in practice most easily solved by observation.
To Cartesian coordinates
From spherical coordinates











 
  So for the volume element:



From cylindrical coordinates











 
  So for the volume element:



To Spherical coordinates
From Cartesian coordinates












So for the volume element:



From cylindrical coordinates















To Cylindrical Coordinates
From Cartesian Coordinates









Note that many computer systems may offer a more concise function for computing 
 
 
 
 , such as [[atan2]](y,x) in the C language.



from Spherical Coordinates















Arc length, curvature and torsion from cartesian coordinates









References


"
  Coordinate transformations Category:Coordinate systems Category:Hamiltonian mechanics


