


Bispherical coordinates




Bispherical coordinates

(Figure)
Illustration of bispherical coordinates, which are obtained by rotating a two-dimensional bipolar coordinate system about the axis joining its two foci. The foci are located at distance 1 from the vertical z-axis. The red self-intersecting torus is the σ=45° isosurface, the blue sphere is the τ=0.5 isosurface, and the yellow half-plane is the φ=60° isosurface. The green half-plane marks the x-z plane, from which φ is measured. The black point is located at the intersection of the red, blue and yellow isosurfaces, at Cartesian coordinates roughly (0.841, -1.456, 1.239).

Bispherical coordinates are a three-dimensional orthogonal coordinate system that results from rotating the two-dimensional bipolar coordinate system about the axis that connects the two foci. Thus, the two foci

 
  and 
 
 
 
  in bipolar coordinates remain points (on the 
 
 
 
 -axis, the axis of rotation) in the bispherical coordinate system.
Definition
The most common definition of bispherical coordinates 
 
 
 
 
  is









where the 
 
 
 
  coordinate of a point 
 
 
 
 
  equals the angle 
 
 
 
  and the 
 
 
 
  coordinate equals the natural logarithm of the ratio of the distances 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to the foci



Coordinate surfaces
Surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  correspond to intersecting tori of different radii



that all pass through the foci but are not concentric. The surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  are non-intersecting spheres of different radii



that surround the foci. The centers of the constant-
 
 
 
  spheres lie along the 
 
 
 
 -axis, whereas the constant-
 
 
 
  tori are centered in the 
 
 
 
  plane.
Inverse formulae
The formulae for the inverse transformation are:









where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Scale factors
The scale factors for the bispherical coordinates 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are equal



whereas the azimuthal scale factor equals



Thus, the infinitesimal volume element equals



and the Laplacian is given by



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
Applications
The classic applications of bispherical coordinates are in solving partial differential equations, e.g., Laplace's equation, for which bispherical coordinates allow a separation of variables. However, the Helmholtz equation is not separable in bispherical coordinates. A typical example would be the electric field surrounding two conducting spheres of different radii.
References
Bibliography






External links

MathWorld description of bispherical coordinates

"
Category:Coordinate systems


