


Prolate spheroidal coordinates




Prolate spheroidal coordinates

(Figure)
The three coordinate surfaces of prolate spheroidal coordinates. The red prolate spheroid (stretched sphere) corresponds to μ=1, and the blue two-sheet hyperboloid corresponds to ν=45°. The yellow half-plane corresponds to φ=-60°, which is measured relative to the x-axis (highlighted in green). The black sphere represents the intersection point of the three surfaces, which has Cartesian coordinates of roughly (0.831, -1.439, 2.182).

Prolate spheroidal coordinates are a three-dimensional orthogonal coordinate system that results from rotating the two-dimensional elliptic coordinate system about the focal axis of the ellipse, i.e., the symmetry axis on which the foci are located. Rotation about the other axis produces oblate spheroidal coordinates. Prolate spheroidal coordinates can also be considered as a limiting case of ellipsoidal coordinates in which the two smallest principal axes are equal in length.
Prolate spheroidal coordinates can be used to solve various partial differential equations in which the boundary conditions match its symmetry and shape, such as solving for a field produced by two centers, which are taken as the foci on the z-axis. One example is solving for the wavefunction of an electron moving in the electromagnetic field of two positively charged nuclei, as in the hydrogen molecular ion, H2+. Another example is solving for the electric field generated by two small electrode tips. Other limiting cases include areas generated by a line segment (μ=0) or a line with a missing segment (ν=0).
Definition
(Figure)
360 px|right|Prolate spheroidal coordinates μ and ν for a=1. The lines of equal values of μ and ν are shown on the x-z plane, i.e. for φ=0. The surfaces of constant μ and ν are obtained by rotation about the z axis, so that the diagram is valid for any plane containing the z axis: i.e. for any φ.

The most common definition of prolate spheroidal coordinates 
 
 
 
  is









where 
 
 
 
  is a nonnegative real number and 
 
 
 
 . The azimuthal angle 
 
 
 
  belongs to the interval 
 
 
 
 .
The trigonometric identity



shows that surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  form prolate spheroids, since they are ellipses rotated about the axis joining their foci. Similarly, the hyperbolic trigonometric identity



shows that surfaces of constant 
 
 
 
  form hyperboloids of revolution.
Scale factors
The scale factors for the elliptic coordinates 
 
 
 
  are equal



whereas the azimuthal scale factor equals



Consequently, an infinitesimal volume element equals



and the Laplacian can be written



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
Alternative definition
(Figure)
In principle, a definition of prolate spheroidal coordinates could be degenerate. In other words, a single set of coordinates might correspond to two points in Cartesian coordinates; this is illustrated here with two black spheres, one on each sheet of the hyperboloid and located at (x, y, ±z). However, neither of the definitions presented here are degenerate.

An alternative and geometrically intuitive set of prolate spheroidal coordinates 
 
 
 
  are sometimes used, where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Hence, the curves of constant 
 
 
 
  are prolate spheroids, whereas the curves of constant 
 
 
 
  are hyperboloids of revolution. The coordinate 
 
 
 
  belongs to the interval [-1, 1], whereas the 
 
 
 
  coordinate must be greater than or equal to one.
The coordinates 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have a simple relation to the distances to the foci 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For any point in the plane, the sum

 
  of its distances to the foci equals 
 
 
 
 , whereas their difference

 
  equals 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the distance to 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , whereas the distance to 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . (Recall that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are located at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.) This gives the following expressions for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 :









Unlike the analogous oblate spheroidal coordinates, the prolate spheroid coordinates (σ, τ, φ) are not degenerate; in other words, there is a unique, reversible correspondence between them and the Cartesian coordinates









Alternative scale factors
The scale factors for the alternative elliptic coordinates 
 
 
 
  are






while the azimuthal scale factor is now



Hence, the infinitesimal volume element becomes



and the Laplacian equals



Other differential operators such as 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in the coordinates 
 
 
 
  by substituting the scale factors into the general formulae found in orthogonal coordinates.
As is the case with spherical coordinates, Laplace's equation may be solved by the method of separation of variables to yield solutions in the form of prolate spheroidal harmonics, which are convenient to use when boundary conditions are defined on a surface with a constant prolate spheroidal coordinate (See Smythe, 1968).
References
Bibliography
No angles convention


Uses ξ1 = a cosh μ, ξ2 = sin ν, and ξ3 = cos φ.

Same as Morse & Feshbach (1953), substituting uk for ξk.


Uses coordinates ξ = cosh μ, η = sin ν, and φ.

Angle convention


Korn and Korn use the (μ, ν, φ) coordinates, but also introduce the degenerate (σ, τ, φ) coordinates.

Similar to Korn and Korn (1961), but uses colatitude θ = 90° - ν instead of latitude ν.

Moon and Spencer use the colatitude convention θ = 90° - ν, and rename φ as ψ.

Unusual convention


Treats the prolate spheroidal coordinates as a limiting case of the general ellipsoidal coordinates. Uses (ξ, η, ζ) coordinates that have the units of distance squared.

External links

MathWorld description of prolate spheroidal coordinates

"
Category:Coordinate systems


