


Saddle-node bifurcation




Saddle-node bifurcation

In the mathematical area of bifurcation theory a saddle-node bifurcation, tangential bifurcation or fold bifurcation is a local bifurcation in which two fixed points (or equilibria) of a dynamical system collide and annihilate each other. The term 'saddle-node bifurcation' is most often used in reference to continuous dynamical systems. In discrete dynamical systems, the same bifurcation is often instead called a fold bifurcation. Another name is blue skies bifurcation in reference to the sudden creation of two fixed points.
If the phase space is one-dimensional, one of the equilibrium points is unstable (the saddle), while the other is stable (the node).
Saddle-node bifurcations may be associated with hysteresis loops and catastrophes.
Normal form
A typical example of a differential equation with a saddle-node bifurcation is:



Here 
 
 
 
  is the state variable and 
 
 
 
  is the bifurcation parameter.

If 
 
 
 
  there are two equilibrium points, a stable equilibrium point at 
 
 
 
  and an unstable one at 
 
 
 
 .
At 
 
 
 
  (the bifurcation point) there is exactly one equilibrium point. At this point the fixed point is no longer hyperbolic. In this case the fixed point is called a saddle-node fixed point.
If 
 
 
 
  there are no equilibrium points.

(Figure)
Saddle node bifurcation

In fact, this is a normal form of a saddle-node bifurcation. A scalar differential equation 
 
 
 
  which has a fixed point at 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  is locally topological equivalent to 
 
 
 
 , provided it satisfies 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The first condition is the nondegeneracy condition and the second condition is the transversality condition.
Example in two dimensions
 An example of a saddle-node bifurcation in two-dimensions occurs in the two-dimensional dynamical system:






As can be seen by the animation obtained by plotting phase portraits by varying the parameter 
 
 
 
 ,

When 
 
 
 
  is negative, there are no equilibrium points.
When 
 
 
 
 , there is a saddle-node point.
When 
 
 
 
  is positive, there are two equilibrium points: that is, one saddle point and one node (either an attractor or a repellor),.

A saddle-node bifurcation also occurs in the consumer equation (see transcritical bifurcation) if the consumption term is changed from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , that is the consumption rate is constant and not in proportion to resource 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Pitchfork bifurcation
Transcritical bifurcation
Hopf bifurcation
Saddle point

Notes


References


.

..


"
Category:Bifurcation theory Category:Articles containing video clips


