


Nilpotent Lie algebra




Nilpotent Lie algebra

In mathematics, a Lie algebra is nilpotent if its lower central series eventually becomes zero.
It is a Lie algebra analog of a nilpotent group.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie algebra. Then 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent if the lower central series terminates, i.e. if  0}} for some 
 
 
 
 .
Directly from the definition of the lower central series, it follows that


 
  Thus  0}} for all 
 
 
 
 . The above holds, again by definition, for


 
  so that  0}}. From this follows that 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent, since the expansion of a 
 
 
 
 -fold nested bracket will have terms of this form. Since 
 
 
 
 
  is a Lie algebra homomorphism, one may write1


 
  and


 
 
  If 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent, the last expression is zero, and accordingly the first. Thus 
 
 
 
  is nilponent if and only if 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent. One can therefore equivalently define a nilpotentency in terms of the adjoint representation as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie algebra. Then 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent if, for some 
 
 
 
  that depends on 
 
 
 
 ,



The last expression implies the nilpotency of 
 
 
 
 . In particular,  0}} for all 
 
 
 
 . We call an element 
 
 
ad-nilpotent if ad 
 
 
 
  is a nilpotent endomorphism. The fact that this last condition implies the nilpotency of 
 
 
 
  is the content of Engel's theorem.
Examples

If 
 
 
 
  is the set of 
 
 
 
  matrices with entries in 
 
 
 
 , then the subalgebra consisting of strictly upper triangular matrices is a nilpotent Lie algebra.
If a Lie algebra

 
  has an automorphism of prime period with no fixed points except at 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent.
A Heisenberg algebra is nilpotent.
A Cartan subalgebra of a Lie algebra is nilpotent and self-normalizing.

Properties

Every nilpotent Lie algebra is solvable. This is useful in proving the solvability of a Lie algebra since, in practice, it is usually easier to prove nilpotency rather than solvability. However, in general, the converse of this property is false. For example, the subalgebra of 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) consisting of upper triangular matrices is solvable but not nilpotent.
If a Lie algebra

 
  is nilpotent, then all subalgebras and homomorphic images are nilpotent.
If the quotient algebra

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the center of 
 
 
 
 , is nilpotent, then so is 
 
 
 
 .
Engel's theorem: A Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  is nilpotent if and only if all elements of 
 
 
 
  are ad-nilpotent.
The Killing form of a nilpotent Lie algebra is 
 
 
 
 .
A nilpotent Lie algebra has an outer automorphism.

See also

Solvable Lie algebra

Notes
References





"
Category:Properties of Lie algebras



 Proposition 1.32.




