


Weak formulation




Weak formulation

Weak formulations are an important tool for the analysis of mathematical equations that permit the transfer of concepts of linear algebra to solve problems in other fields such as partial differential equations. In a weak formulation, an equation is no longer required to hold absolutely (and this is not even well defined) and has instead weak solutions only with respect to certain "test vectors" or "test functions". This is equivalent to formulating the problem to require a solution in the sense of a distribution.
We introduce weak formulations by a few examples and present the main theorem for the solution, the Lax–Milgram theorem.
General concept
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Banach space. We want to find the solution 
 
 
 
  of the equation


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  being the dual of 
 
 
 
 .
Calculus of variations tells us that this is equivalent to finding 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
  holds:


 
 .
Here, we call 
 
 
 
  a test vector or test function.
We bring this into the generic form of a weak formulation, namely, find 
 
 
 
  such that



by defining the bilinear form



Since this is very abstract, let us follow this by some examples.
Example 1: linear system of equations
Now, let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  a linear mapping. Then, the weak formulation of the equation



involves finding 
 
 
 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
  the following equation holds:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes an inner product.
Since 
 
 
 
  is a linear mapping, it is sufficient to test with basis vectors, and we get



Actually, expanding 
 
 
 
 , we obtain the matrix form of the equation



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The bilinear form associated to this weak formulation is



Example 2: Poisson's equation
Our aim is to solve Poisson's equation



on a domain 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  on its boundary, and we want to specify the solution space 
 
 
 
  later. We will use the 
 
 
 
 -scalar product



to derive our weak formulation. Then, testing with differentiable functions 
 
 
 
 , we get



We can make the left side of this equation more symmetric by integration by parts using Green's identity:



This is what is usually called the weak formulation of Poisson's equation; what's missing is the space 
 
 
 
 , which is beyond the scope of this article. The space must allow us to write down this equation. Therefore, we should require that the derivatives of functions in this space are square integrable. Now, there is actually the Sobolev space

 
  of functions with weak derivatives in 
 
 
 
  and with zero boundary conditions, which fulfills this purpose.
We obtain the generic form by assigning



and



The Lax–Milgram theorem
This is a formulation of the Lax–Milgram theorem which relies on properties of the symmetric part of the bilinear form. It is not the most general form.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hilbert space and 
 
 
 
  a bilinear form on 
 
 
 
 , which is

bounded

 
  and
coercive



Then, for any 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique solution 
 
 
 
  to the equation



and it holds



Application to example 1
Here, application of the Lax–Milgram theorem is definitely overkill, but we still can use it and give this problem the same structure as the others have.

Boundedness: all bilinear forms on 
 
 
 
  are bounded. In particular, we have
 
 


Coercivity: this actually means that the real parts of the eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
  are not smaller than 
 
 
 
 . Since this implies in particular that no eigenvalue is zero, the system is solvable.

Additionally, we get the estimate



where 
 
 
 
  is the minimal real part of an eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
 .
Application to example 2
Here, as we mentioned above, we choose 
 
 
 
  with the norm



where the norm on the right is the 
 
 
 
 -norm on 
 
 
 
  (this provides a true norm on 
 
 
 
  by the Poincaré inequality). But, we see that 
 
 
 
  and by the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, 
 
 
 
 .
Therefore, for any 
 
 
 
 , there is a unique solution 
 
 
 
  of Poisson's equation and we have the estimate



See also

Babuška–Lax–Milgram theorem
Lions–Lax–Milgram theorem

References




External links

MathWorld page on Lax–Milgram theorem

"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Numerical differential equations


