   Nitroso      Nitroso   (Figure)  thumb | right | Wire-frame model of nitroso moiety   Nitroso refers to a functional group in organic chemistry which has the NO group attached to an organic moiety. As such, various nitroso groups can be categorized as C-nitroso compounds (e.g., nitrosoalkanes; R-N=O), S-nitroso compounds (nitrosothiols; RS-N=O), N-nitroso compounds (e.g., nitrosamines, R 1 N(-R 2 )-N=O), and O-nitroso compounds (alkyl nitrites; RO-N=O).  Nitrosyls are non-organic compounds containing the NO group, for example directly bound to the metal via the N-atom, giving a metal-NO moiety. Alternatively, a non-metal example is the common reagent nitrosyl chloride (Cl-N=O).  Nitric oxide is a stable radical , having an unpaired electron.  Reduction of nitric oxide gives the hyponitrite  anion , NO − :   NO + e − → NO −    Oxidation of NO yields the nitrosonium  cation , NO + :   NO → NO + + e −    Nitrosyl as a ligand  Nitric oxide can serve as a ligand in complexes . The resulting complexes are called metal nitrosyls, and can bond to a metal atom in two extreme modes: as NO + and as NO − . It is generally assumed that NO + coordinates linearly, the M−N−O angle being 180°, whereas NO − forms a bent geometry, with an M−N−O angle of approximately 120°. However, the results of many studies have shown that the ionic descriptions of the NO ligand do not correlate with metal-NO geometry. A more realistic description of electron-counting in metal-nitrosyl chemistry is given by the Enemark-Feltham notation.  Organonitroso compounds  Nitroso compounds can be prepared by the reduction of nitro compounds or by the oxidation of hydroxylamines . A good example is (CH 3 ) 3 CNO, known formally as 2-methyl-2-nitrosopropane , or t -BuNO, which is prepared by the following sequence: 1   (CH 3 ) 3 CNH 2 → (CH 3 ) 3 CNO 2   (CH 3 ) 3 CNO 2 → (CH 3 ) 3 CNHOH  (CH 3 ) 3 CNHOH → (CH 3 ) 3 CNO   (CH 3 ) 3 CNO is blue and exists in solution in equilibrium with its dimer , which is colorless, m.p. 80–81 °C.  In the Fischer-Hepp rearrangement aromatic 4-nitroso-anilines are prepared from the corresponding nitrosamines . Another named reaction involving a nitroso compound is the Barton reaction .  Organonitroso compounds serve as a ligands for transition metals. 2  Nitrosation vs. nitrosylation  Nitrite can enter two kinds of reaction, depending on the physico-chemical environment.   Nitrosylation is adding a nitrosyl ion NO − to a metal (e.g. iron) or a thiol, leading to nitrosyl iron Fe-NO (e.g., in nitrosylated heme = nitrosylheme) or S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs).  Nitrosation is adding a nitrosonium ion NO + to an amine -NH 2 leading to a nitrosamine . This conversion occurs at acidic pH, particularly in the stomach, as shown in the equation for the formation of N-phenylnitrosamine:    NO 2 − + H +     ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   HONO  HONO + H +     ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   H 2 O + NO +   C 6 H 5 NH 2 + NO + → C 6 H 5 N(H)NO + H +    Many primary alkyl N-nitroso compounds, such as CH 3 N(H)NO, tend to be unstable with respect to hydrolysis to the alcohol. Those derived from secondary amines (e.g., (CH 3 ) 2 NNO derived from dimethylamine ) are more robust. It is these N-nitrosamines that are carcinogens in rodents.  In food  In foodstuffs and in the gastro-intestinal tract, nitrosation and nitrosylation do not have the same consequences on consumer health.   In cured meat : Meat processed by curing contains nitrite and has a pH of 5 approximately, where almost all nitrite is present as NO 2 − (99%). Cured meat is also added with sodium ascorbate (or erythorbate or Vitamin C). As demonstrated by S. Mirvish, ascorbate inhibits nitrosation of amines to nitrosamine, because ascorbate reacts with NO 2 − to form NO. 3 4 Ascorbate and pH 5 thus favor nitrosylation of heme iron, forming nitrosyl-heme, a red pigment when included inside myoglobin, and a pink pigment when it has been released by cooking. It participates to the "bacon flavor" of cured meat: nitrosyl-heme is thus considered a benefit for the meat industry and for consumers. 5    In the stomach : secreted Hydrogen Chloride makes an acidic environment (pH=2) and ingested nitrite (with food or saliva) leads to nitrosation of amines, that yields nitrosamines (potential carcinogens). Nitrosation is low if amine concentration is low (e.g., low-protein diet, no fermented food) or if Vitamin C concentration is high (e.g., high fruit diet). Then S-nitrosothiols are formed, that are stable at pH 2.    In the colon : neutral pH does not favor nitrosation. No nitrosamine is formed in stools, even after addition of a secondary amine or nitrite. 6 Neutral pH favors NO − release from S-nitrosothiols, and nitrosylation of iron. The previously called NOC (N-nitroso compounds) measured by Bingham's team in stools from red meat-fed volunteers 7 were, according to Bingham and Kuhnle, largely non-N-nitroso ATNC (Apparent Total Nitroso Compounds), e.g., S-nitrosothiols and nitrosyl iron (as nitrosyl heme). 8   See also   Nitrosamine , the functional group with the NO attached to an amine, such as R 2 N-NO  Nitrosobenzene  Nitric oxide  Nitroxyl   References    "  Category:Functional groups    Nitrosyl compounds     A. Calder, A. R. Forrester, and S. P. Hepburn "2-Methyl-2-nitrosopropane and Its Dimer" Organic Syntheses , Coll. Vol. 6, p.803; Vol. 52, p.77. Link ↩  Pilato, R. S.; McGettigan, C.; Geoffroy, G. L.; Rheingold, A. L.; Geib, S. J. "tert-Butylnitroso complexes. Structural characterization of W(CO) 5 (N(O)Bu-tert) and [CpFe(CO)(PPh 3 )(N(O)Bu-tert)] + " Organometallics 1990, vol. 9, pp. 312–17. ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     