


Jackson network




Jackson network
In queueing theory, a discipline within the mathematical theory of probability, a Jackson network (sometimes Jacksonian network1) is a class of queueing network where the equilibrium distribution is particularly simple to compute as the network has a product-form solution. It was the first significant development in the theory of networks of queues, and generalising and applying the ideas of the theorem to search for similar product-form solutions in other networks has been the subject of much research,2 including ideas used in the development of the Internet.3 The networks were first identified by James R. Jackson45 and his paper was re-printed in the journal Management Science’s ‘Ten Most Influential Titles of Management Sciences First Fifty Years.’6
Jackson was inspired by the work of Burke and Reich,7 though Jean Walrand notes "product-form results … [are] a much less immediate result of the output theorem than Jackson himself appeared to believe in his fundamental paper".8
An earlier product-form solution was found by R. R. P. Jackson for tandem queues (a finite chain of queues where each customer must visit each queue in order) and cyclic networks (a loop of queues where each customer must visit each queue in order).9
A Jackson network consists of a number of nodes, where each node represents a queue in which the service rate can be both node-dependent and state-dependent. Jobs travel among the nodes following a fixed routing matrix. All jobs at each node belong to a single "class" and jobs follow the same service-time distribution and the same routing mechanism. Consequently, there is no notion of priority in serving the jobs: all jobs at each node are served on a first-come, first-served basis.
Jackson networks where a finite population of jobs travel around a closed network also have a product-form solution described by the Gordon–Newell theorem.10
Definition
In an open network, jobs arrive from outside following a Poisson process with rate 
 
 
 
 . Each arrival is independently routed to node j with probability 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Upon service completion at node i, a job may go to another node j with probability 
 
 
 
  or leave the network with probability 
 
 
 
 .
Hence we have the overall arrival rate to node i, 
 
 
 
 , including both external arrivals and internal transitions:



Define 
 
 
 
 , then we can solve 
 
 
 
 .
All jobs leave each node also following Poisson process, and define 
 
 
 
  as the service rate of node i when there are 
 
 
 
  jobs at node i.
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the number of jobs at node i at time t, and 
 
 
 
 . Then the equilibrium distribution of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is determined by the following system of balance equations:




where 
 
 
 
  denote the 
 
 
unit vector.
Theorem
Suppose a vector of independent random variables 
 
 
 
  with each 
 
 
 
  having a probability mass function as



where 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  i.e. 
 
 
 
  is well defined, then the equilibrium distribution of the open Jackson network has the following product form:



for all 
 
 
 
 .⟩
It suffices to verify equation 
 
 
 
  is satisfied. By the product form and formula (3), we have:



Substituting these into the right side of 
 
 
 
  we get:



Then use 
 
 
 
 , we have:



Substituting the above into 
 
 
 
 , we have:



This can be verified by 
 
 
 
 . Hence both side of 
 
 
 
  are equal.⟨ 
This theorem extends the one shown on Jackson's Theorem page by allowing state-dependent service rate of each node. It relates the distribution of 
 
 
 
  by a vector of independent variable 
 
 
 
 .
Example
thumb|upright=1.5|A three-node open Jackson network Suppose we have a three-node Jackson shown in the graph, the coefficients are:






Then by the theorem, we can calculate:



According to the definition of 
 
 
 
 , we have:









Hence the probability that there is one job at each node is:



Since the service rate here does not depend on state, the 
 
 
 
 s simply follow a geometric distribution.
Generalized Jackson network
A generalized Jackson network allows renewal arrival processes that need not be Poisson processes, and independent, identically distributed non-exponential service times. In general, this network does not have a product-form stationary distribution, so approximations are sought.11
Brownian approximation
Under some mild conditions the queue-length process 
 
 
 
  of an open generalized Jackson network can be approximated by a reflected Brownian motion defined as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the drift of the process, 
 
 
 
  is the covariance matrix, and 
 
 
 
  is the reflection matrix. This is a two-order approximation obtained by relation between general Jackson network with homogeneous fluid network and reflected Brownian motion.
The parameters of the reflected Brownian process is specified as follows:





 
  with 
 
 




where the symbols are defined as:




Definitions of symbols in the approximation formula

symbol

Meaning







a J-vector specifying the arrival rates to each node.







a J-vector specifying the service rates of each node.







routing matrix.







effective arrival of 
 
 
 
  node.







variation of service time at 
 
 
 
  node.







variation of inter-arrival time at 
 
 
 
  node.







coefficients to specify correlation between nodes.{{hidden begin

toggle = left}} They are defined in this way: Let 
 
 
 
  be the arrival process of the system, then 
 
 
 
  in distribution, where 
 
 
 
  is a driftless Brownian process with covariate matrix 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , for any 
 
 




References
"
Category:Stochastic processes Category:Queueing theory


















