


Resolvent formalism




Resolvent formalism

In mathematics, the resolvent formalism is a technique for applying concepts from complex analysis to the study of the spectrum of operators on Banach spaces and more general spaces.
The resolvent captures the spectral properties of an operator in the analytic structure of the resolvent. Given an operator A, the resolvent may be defined as



Among other uses, the resolvent may be used to solve the inhomogeneous Fredholm integral equations; a commonly used approach is a series solution, the Liouville-Neumann series.
The resolvent of A can be used to directly obtain information about the spectral decomposition of A. For example, suppose 
 
 
 
  is an isolated eigenvalue in the spectrum of A. That is, suppose there exists a simple closed curve 
 
 
 
  in the complex plane that separates 
 
 
 
  from the rest of the spectrum of A. Then the residue



defines a projection operator onto the 
 
 
eigenspace of A.
The Hille-Yosida theorem relates the resolvent to an integral over the one-parameter group of transformations generated by A. Thus, for example, if A is Hermitian, then 
 
 
 
  is a one-parameter group of unitary operators. The resolvent can be expressed as the integral



History
The first major use of the resolvent operator was by Ivar Fredholm, in a landmark 1903 paper in Acta Mathematica that helped establish modern operator theory. The name resolvent was given by David Hilbert.
Resolvent identity
For all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the resolvent set of an operator 
 
 
 
 , we have that the first resolvent identity (also called Hilbert's identity) holds:1


 
  (Note that Dunford and Schwartz define the resolvent as 
 
 
 
  so that the formula above is slightly different from theirs.)
The second resolvent identity is a generalization of the first resolvent identity, useful for comparing the resolvents of two distinct operators. Given operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , both defined on the same linear space, and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  it holds that:2



Compact resolvent
When studying an unbounded operator

 
  on a Hilbert space

 
 , if there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a compact operator, we say that 
 
 
 
  has compact resolvent. The spectrum 
 
 
 
  of such 
 
 
 
  is a discrete subset of 
 
 
 
 . If furthermore 
 
 
 
  is self-adjoint, then 
 
 
 
  and there exists an orthonormal basis 
 
 
 
  of eigenvectors of 
 
 
 
  with eigenvalues 
 
 
 
  respectively. Also, 
 
 
 
  has no finite accumulation point.3
See also

Resolvent set
Stone's theorem
Holomorphic functional calculus
Spectral theory
Compact operator
Unbounded operator

References






.

.


"
Category:Fredholm theory Category:Formalism (deductive)



Dunford and Schwartz, Vol I, Lemma 6, p568.↩
Hille and Phillips, Theorem 4.82, p. 126↩
Taylor, p515.↩




