


Envelope theorem




Envelope theorem

The Envelope Theorem is a result about the differentiability properties of the objective function of a parameterized optimization problem. As we change parameters of the objective, the Envelope Theorem shows that, in a certain sense, changes in the optimizer of the objective do not contribute to the change in the objective function.
Statement
Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets
Let 
 
 
 
  denote the choice set and let the relevant parameter be 
 
 
 
 
 . Letting 
 
 
 
  denote the parameterized objective function, the value function 
 
 
 
  and the optimal choice correspondence (set-valued function) 
 
 
 
  are given by:


 
  (1)


 
  (2)
"Envelope theorems" describe sufficient conditions for the value function 
 
 
 
  to be differentiable in the parameter 
 
 
 
  and describe its derivative as


 
  (3)
Namely, the derivative of the value function with respect to the parameter equals the partial derivative of the objective function with respect to 
 
 
 
  holding the maximizer fixed at its optimal level. (The term derives from describing the graph of 
 
 
 
  as the "upper envelope" of the graphs of the parameterized family of functions 
 
 
 
 .)
Traditional envelope theorem derivations use the first-order condition for (1), which requires that the choice set 
 
 
 
  have the convex and topological structure, and the objective function 
 
 
 
  be differentiable in the variable 
 
 
 
 . (The argument is that changes in the maximizer have only a "second-order effect" at the optimum and so can be ignored.) However, in many applications such as the analysis of incentive constraints in contract theory and game theory, nonconvex production problems, and "monotone" or "robust" comparative statics, the choice sets and objective functions generally lack the topological and convexity properties required by the traditional envelope theorems.
Paul Milgrom and Segal (2002) observe that the traditional envelope formula holds for optimization problems with arbitrary choice sets at any differentiability point of the value function, provided that the objective function is differentiable in the parameter:
Theorem 1: Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . If both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  exist, the envelope formula (3) holds.
Proof: (1) implies that for 
 
 
 
 ,



Under the assumptions, the objective function of the displayed maximization problem is differentiable at 
 
 
 
 , and the first-order condition for this maximization is exactly (3). Q.E.D.
While differentiability of the value function in general requires strong assumptions, in many applications weaker conditions such as absolute continuity, differentiability almost everywhere, or left- and right- differentiability, suffice. In particular, Milgrom and Segal 's (2002) Theorem 2 offers a sufficient condition for 
 
 
 
  to be absolutely continuous, which means that it is differentiable almost everywhere and can be represented as an integral of its derivative:
Theorem 2: Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous for all 
 
 
 
 . Suppose also that there exists an integrable function 
 
 


 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and almost all 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous. Suppose, in addition, that 
 
 
 
  is differentiable for all 
 
 
 
 , and that 
 
 
 
  almost everywhere on 
 
 
 
 . Then for any selection 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  (4)
Proof: Using (1), observe that for any 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 

This implies that 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous. Therefore, 
 
 
 
  is differentiable almost everywhere, and using (3) yields (4). Q.E.D.
This result dispels the common misconception that nice behavior of the value function requires correspondingly nice behavior of the maximizer. Theorem 2 ensures the absolute continuity of the value function even though the maximizer may be discontinuous. In a similar vein, Milgrom and Segal's (2002) Theorem 3 implies that the value function must be differentiable at 
 
 
 
  and hence satisfy the envelope formula (3) when the family 
 
 
 
  is equi-differentiable at 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is single-valued and continuous at 
 
 
 
 , even if the maximizer is not differentiable at 
 
 
 
  (e.g., if 
 
 
 
  is described by a set of inequality constraints and the set of binding constraints changes at 
 
 
 
 
 ).
Applications of Envelope Theorems
Applications to Producer Theory
Theorem 1 implies Hotelling's lemma at any differentiability point of the profit function, and Theorem 2 implies the producer surplus formula. Formally, let 
 
 
 
  denote the profit function of a price-taking firm with production set 
 
 
 
  facing prices 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  denote the firm's supply function, i.e.,



Let 
 
 
 
  (the price of good 
 
 
 
 ) and fix the other goods' prices at 
 
 
 
 . Applying Theorem 1 to 
 
 
 
  yields 
 
 
 
 
  (the firm's optimal supply of good 
 
 
 
 ). Applying Theorem 2 (whose assumptions are verified when 
 
 
 
  is restricted to a bounded interval) yields


 
  i.e. the producer surplus 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by integrating under the firm's supply curve for good 
 
 
 
 .
Applications to Mechanism design and Auction Theory
Consider an agent whose utility function 
 
 
 
  over outcomes 
 
 
 
  depends on his type 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  represent the "menu" of possible outcomes the agent could obtain in the mechanism by sending different messages. The agent's equilibrium utility 
 
 
 
  in the mechanism is then given by (1), and the set 
 
 
 
  of the mechanism's equilibrium outcomes is given by (2). Any selection 
 
 
 
  is a choice rule implemented by the mechanism. Suppose that the agent's utility function 
 
 
 
  is differentiable and absolutely continuous in 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , and that 
 
 
 
  is integrable on 
 
 
 
 . Then Theorem 2 implies that the agent's equilibrium utility 
 
 
 
  in any mechanism implementing a given choice rule 
 
 
 
  must satisfy the integral condition (4).
The integral condition (4) is a key step in the analysis of mechanism design problems with continuous type spaces. In particular, in Myerson's (1981) analysis of single-item auctions, the outcome from the viewpoint of one bidder can be described as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the bidder's probability of receiving the object and 
 
 
 
  is his expected payment, and the bidder's expected utility takes the form 
 
 
 
 . In this case, letting 
 
 
 
  denote the bidder's lowest possible type, the integral condition (4) for the bidder's equilibrium expected utility 
 
 
 
  takes the form



(This equation can be interpreted as the producer surplus formula for the firm whose production technology for converting numeraire 
 
 
 
  into probability 
 
 
 
  of winning the object is defined by the auction and which resells the object at a fixed price 
 
 
 
 ). This condition in turn yields Myerson's (1981) celebrated Revenue Equivalence Theorem: the expected revenue generated in an auction in which bidders have independent private values is fully determined by the bidders' probabilities 
 
 
 
  of getting the object for all types 
 
 
 
  as well as by the expected payoffs 
 
 
 
  of the bidders' lowest types. Finally, this condition is a key step in Myerson's (1981) of optimal auctions.
For other applications of the envelope theorem to mechanism design see Mirrlees (1971), Holmstrom (1979), Laffont and Maskin (1980), Riley and Samuelson (1981), Fudenberg and Tirole (1991), and Williams (1999). While these authors derived and exploited the envelope theorem by restricting attention to (piecewise) continuously differentiable choice rules or even narrower classes, it may sometimes be optimal to implement a choice rule that is not piecewise continuously differentiable. (One example is the class of trading problems with linear utility described in chapter 6.5 of Myerson (1991).) Note that the integral condition (3) still holds in this setting and implies such important results as Holmstrom's lemma (Holmstrom, 1979), Myerson's lemma (Myerson, 1981), the revenue equivalence theorem (for auctions), the Green-Laffont-Holmstrom theorem (Green and Laffont, 1979; Holmstrom, 1979), the Myerson-Satterthwaite inefficiency theorem (Myerson and Satterthwaite,1983), the Jehiel-Moldovanu impossibility theorems (Jehiel and Moldovanu, 2001), the McAfee-McMillan weak-cartels theorem (McAfee and McMillan, 1992), and Weber's martingale theorem (Weber, 1983), etc. The details of these applications are provided in Chapter 3 of Milgrom (2004), who offers an elegant and unifying framework in auction and mechanism design analysis mainly based on the envelope theorem and other familiar techniques and concepts in demand theory.
Applications to Multidimensional Parameter Spaces
For a multidimensional parameter space 
 
 
 
 , Theorem 1 can be applied to partial and directional derivatives of the value function. If both the objective function 
 
 
 
  and the value function 
 
 
 
  are (totally) differentiable in 
 
 
 
 , Theorem 1 implies the envelope formula for their gradients
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 . While total differentiability of the value function may not be easy to ensure, Theorem 2 can be still applied along any smooth path connecting two parameter values 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Namely, suppose that functions 
 
 
 
  are differentiable for all 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

 
 . A smooth path from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is described by a differentiable mapping 
 
 
 
  with a bounded derivative, such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Theorem 2 implies that for any such smooth path, the change of the value function can be expressed as the path integral of the partial gradient 
 
 
 
  of the objective function along the path:



In particular, for 
 
 
 
 , this establishes that cyclic path integrals along any smooth path 
 
 
 
  must be zero:



This "integrability condition" plays an important role in mechanism design with multidimensional types, constraining what kind of choice rules 
 
 
 
  can be sustained by mechanism-induced menus 
 
 
 
 . In application to producer theory, with 
 
 
 
  being the firm's production vector and 
 
 
 
  being the price vector, 
 
 
 
 , and the integrability condition says that any rationalizable supply function 
 
 
 
  must satisfy



When 
 
 
 
  is continuously differentiable, this integrability condition is equivalent to the symmetry of the substitution matrix

 
 
 . (In consumer theory, the same argument applied to the expenditure minimization problem yields symmetry of the Slutsky matrix.)
Applications to Parameterized Constraints
Suppose now that the feasible set 
 
 
 
  depends on the parameter, i.e.,






where 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 

Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a convex set, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are concave in 
 
 
 
 , and there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Under these assumptions, it is well known (see, e.g., Luenberger (1969) and Rockafellar(1970)) that the above constrained optimization program can be represented as a saddle-point problem for the Lagrangian 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the vector of Lagrange multipliers chosen by the adversary to minimize the Lagrangian. This allows the application of Milgrom and Segal's (2002, Theorem 4) envelope theorem for saddle-point problems, under the additional assumptions that 
 
 
 
  is a compact set in a normed linear space, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are continuous in 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are continuous in 
 
 
 
 . In particular, letting 
 
 
 
  denote the Lagrangian's saddle point for parameter value 
 
 
 
 , the theorem implies that 
 
 
 
  is absolutely continuous and satisfies



For the special case in which 
 
 
 
  is independent of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , the formula implies that 
 
 
 
  for a.e. 
 
 
 
 . That is, the Lagrange multiplier $y^{\ast
 }\left( t\right)$ on the constraint is its "shadow price" in the optimization program (see Rockafellar, 1970).
Other Applications
Milgrom and Segal (2002) demonstrate that the generalized version of the envelope theorems can also be applied to convex programming, continuous optimization problems, saddle-point problems, and optimal stopping problems.
See also

Maximum theorem
Danskin's theorem
Hotelling's lemma

References



















"
Category:Underlying principles of microeconomic behavior Category:Calculus of variations Category:Economics theorems Category:Theorems in analysis


