


Joukowsky transform




Joukowsky transform

(Figure)
Example of a Joukowsky transform. The circle above is transformed into the Joukowsky airfoil below

In applied mathematics, the Joukowsky transform, named after Nikolai Zhukovsky is a conformal map historically used to understand some principles of airfoil design.
The transform is



where 
 
 
 
  is a complex variable in the new space and 
 
 
 
  is a complex variable in the original space. This transform is also called the Joukowsky transformation, the Joukowski transform, the Zhukovsky transform and other variations.
In aerodynamics, the transform is used to solve for the two-dimensional potential flow around a class of airfoils known as Joukowsky airfoils. A Joukowsky airfoil is generated in the z plane by applying the Joukowsky transform to a circle in the 
 
 
 
  plane. The coordinates of the centre of the circle are variables, and varying them modifies the shape of the resulting airfoil. The circle encloses the point 
 
 
 
  = −1 (where the derivative is zero) and intersects the point 
 
 
 
  = 1. This can be achieved for any allowable centre position 
 
 
 
  by varying the radius of the circle.
Joukowsky airfoils have a cusp at their trailing edge. A closely related conformal mapping, the Kármán–Trefftz transform, generates the much broader class of Kármán–Trefftz airfoils by controlling the trailing edge angle. When a trailing edge angle of zero is specified, the Kármán–Trefftz transform reduces to the Joukowsky transform.
General Joukowsky transform
The Joukowsky transform of any complex number 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is as follows



So the real (x) and imaginary (y) components are:



Sample Joukowsky airfoil
The transformation of all complex numbers on the unit circle is a special case.



So the real component becomes 
 
 
 
  and the imaginary component becomes 
 
 

Thus the complex unit circle maps to a flat plate on the real number line from −2 to +2.
Transformation from other circles make a wide range of airfoil shapes.
Velocity field and circulation for the Joukowsky airfoil
The solution to potential flow around a circular cylinder is analytic and well known. It is the superposition of uniform flow, a doublet, and a vortex.
The complex velocity 
 
 
 
  around the circle in the 
 
 
 
  plane is



where



 
  is the complex coordinate of the centre of the circle


 
  is the freestream velocity of the fluid


 
  is the angle of attack of the airfoil with respect to the freestream flow
R is the radius of the circle, calculated using 
 
 



 
  is the circulation, found using the Kutta condition, which reduces in this case to









The complex velocity W around the airfoil in the z plane is, according to the rules of conformal mapping and using the Joukowsky transformation:



Here 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the velocity components in the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  directions, respectively (
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  real-valued). From this velocity, other properties of interest of the flow, such as the coefficient of pressure or lift can be calculated.
A Joukowsky airfoil has a cusp at the trailing edge.
The transformation is named after Russian scientist Nikolai Zhukovsky. His name has historically been romanized in a number of ways, thus the variation in spelling of the transform.
Kármán–Trefftz transform
 The Kármán–Trefftz transform is a conformal map closely related to the Joukowsky transform. While a Joukowsky airfoil has a cusped trailing edge, a Kármán–Trefftz airfoil—which is the result of the transform of a circle in the ς-plane to the physical z-plane, analogue to the definition of the Joukowsky airfoil—has a non-zero angle at the trailing edge, between the upper and lower airfoil surface. The Kármán–Trefftz transform therefore requires an additional parameter: the trailing-edge angle α. This transform is equal to:1


 
   (A)
with n slightly smaller than 2. The angle α, between the tangents of the upper and lower airfoil surface, at the trailing edge is related to n by:2



The derivative 
 
 
 
 , required to compute the velocity field, is equal to:



Background
First, add and subtract two from the Joukowsky transform, as given above:



Dividing the left and right hand sides gives:



The right hand side contains (as a factor) the simple second-power law from potential flow theory, applied at the trailing edge near 
 
 
 
  From conformal mapping theory this quadratic map is known to change a half plane in the 
 
 
 
 -space into potential flow around a semi-infinite straight line. Further, values of the power less than two will result in flow around a finite angle. So, by changing the power in the Joukowsky transform—to a value slightly less than two—the result is a finite angle instead of a cusp. Replacing 2 by n in the previous equation gives:3



which is the Kármán–Trefftz transform. Solving for z gives it in the form of equation (A).
Notes
References




External links

Joukowski Transform Module by John H. Mathews
Joukowski Transform NASA Applet

"
Category:Conformal mapping Category:Aerodynamics



↩






