


Reduction of order




Reduction of order

Reduction of order is a technique in mathematics for solving second-order linear ordinary differential equations. It is employed when one solution 
 
 
 
  is known and a second linearly independent solution 
 
 
 
  is desired. The method also applies to n-th order equations. In this case the ansatz will yield a (n-1)-th order equation for 
 
 
 
 .
Second-order linear ordinary differential equations
An Example
Consider the general homogeneous second-order linear constant coefficient ODE



where 
 
 
 
  are real non-zero coefficients, Furthermore, assume that the associated characteristic equation



has repeated roots (i.e. the discriminant, 
 
 
 
 , vanishes). Thus we have



Thus our one solution to the ODE is



To find a second solution we take as a guess



where 
 
 
 
  is an unknown function to be determined. Since 
 
 
 
  must satisfy the original ODE, we substitute it back in to get



Rearranging this equation in terms of the derivatives of 
 
 
 
  we get



Since we know that 
 
 
 
  is a solution to the original problem, the coefficient of the last term is equal to zero. Furthermore, substituting 
 
 
 
  into the second term's coefficient yields (for that coefficient)



Therefore we are left with



Since 
 
 
 
  is assumed non-zero and 
 
 
 
  is an exponential function and thus never equal to zero we simply have



This can be integrated twice to yield



where 
 
 
 
  are constants of integration. We now can write our second solution as



Since the second term in 
 
 
 
  is a scalar multiple of the first solution (and thus linearly dependent) we can drop that term, yielding a final solution of



Finally, we can prove that the second solution 
 
 
 
  found via this method is linearly independent of the first solution by calculating the Wronskian



Thus 
 
 
 
  is the second linearly independent solution we were looking for.
General method
Given the general non-homogeneous linear differential equation



and a single solution 
 
 
 
  of the homogeneous equation [
 
 
 
 ], let us try a solution of the full non-homogeneous equation in the form:



where 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary function. Thus



and



If these are substituted for 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  in the differential equation, then



Since 
 
 
 
  is a solution of the original homogeneous differential equation, 
 
 
 
 , so we can reduce to



which is a first-order differential equation for 
 
 
 
  (reduction of order). Divide by 
 
 
 
 , obtaining


 
 .
Integrating factor
 
 
 
 .
Multiplying the differential equation with the integrating factor 
 
 
 
 , the equation for 
 
 
 
  can be reduced to


 
 .
After integrating the last equation, 
 
 
 
  is found, containing one constant of integration. Then, integrate 
 
 
 
  to find the full solution of the original non-homogeneous second-order equation, exhibiting two constants of integration as it should:


 
 .
See also

Variation of parameters

References

W. E. Boyce and R. C. DiPrima, Elementary Differential Equations and Boundary Value Problems (8th edition), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005. ISBN 0-471-43338-1.

Eric W. Weisstein, Second-Order Ordinary Differential Equation Second Solution, From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource.

"
Category:Ordinary differential equations


