


Kernel method




Kernel method

In machine learning, kernel methods are a class of algorithms for pattern analysis, whose best known member is the support vector machine (SVM). The general task of pattern analysis is to find and study general types of relations (for example clusters, rankings, principal components, correlations, classifications) in datasets. For many algorithms that solve these tasks, the data in raw representation have to be explicitly transformed into feature vector representations via a user-specified feature map: in contrast, kernel methods require only a user-specified kernel, i.e., a similarity function over pairs of data points in raw representation.
Kernel methods owe their name to the use of kernel functions, which enable them to operate in a high-dimensional, implicit feature space without ever computing the coordinates of the data in that space, but rather by simply computing the inner products between the images of all pairs of data in the feature space. This operation is often computationally cheaper than the explicit computation of the coordinates. This approach is called the "kernel trick". Kernel functions have been introduced for sequence data, graphs, text, images, as well as vectors.
Algorithms capable of operating with kernels include the kernel perceptron, support vector machines (SVM), Gaussian processes, principal components analysis (PCA), canonical correlation analysis, ridge regression, spectral clustering, linear adaptive filters and many others. Any linear model can be turned into a non-linear model by applying the kernel trick to the model: replacing its features (predictors) by a kernel function.
Most kernel algorithms are based on convex optimization or eigenproblems and are statistically well-founded. Typically, their statistical properties are analyzed using statistical learning theory (for example, using Rademacher complexity).
Motivation and informal explanation
Kernel methods can be thought of as instance-based learners: rather than learning some fixed set of parameters corresponding to the features of their inputs, they instead "remember" the 
 
 
 
 -th training example 
 
 
 
  by learning a corresponding weight 
 
 
 
 . Prediction for unlabeled inputs, i.e., those not in the training set, is treated by the application of a similarity function

 
 , called a kernel, between the unlabeled input 
 
 
 
  and each of the training inputs 
 
 
 
 . For instance, a kernelized binary classifier typically computes a weighted sum of similarities


 
 ,
where



 
  is the kernelized binary classifier's predicted label for the unlabeled input 
 
 
 
  whose hidden true label 
 
 
 
  is of interest;


 
  is the kernel function that measures similarity between any pair of inputs 
 
 
 
 ;
the sum ranges over the 
 
 
 
  labeled examples 
 
 
 
  in the classifier's training set, with 
 
 
 
 ;
the 
 
 
 
  are the weights for the training examples, as determined by the learning algorithm;
the sign function

 
  determines whether the predicted classification 
 
 
 
  comes out positive or negative.

Kernel classifiers were described as early as the 1960s, with the invention of the kernel perceptron.1 They rose to great prominence with the popularity of the support vector machine (SVM) in the 1990s, when the SVM was found to be competitive with neural networks on tasks such as handwriting recognition.
Mathematics
The kernel trick avoids the explicit mapping that is needed to get linear learning algorithms to learn a nonlinear function or decision boundary. For all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the input space 
 
 
 
 , certain functions 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as an inner product in another space 
 
 
 
 . The function 
 
 
 
  is often referred to as a kernel or a kernel function; the word "kernel" is used in different ways throughout mathematics.
If one is insightful regarding a particular machine learning problem, one may manually construct a "feature map" 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  and verify that 
 
 
 
  is indeed an inner product. In fact, an explicit representation for 
 
 
 
  is not required: it suffices to show that 
 
 
 
  is an inner product space. Conveniently, based on Mercer's theorem, it suffices to equip 
 
 
 
  with one's choice of measure and verify that 
 
 
 
  satisfies Mercer's condition.
Mercer's theorem is stated in a general mathematical setting with implications in the theory of integral equations. However, the general statement is more than what is required for understanding the kernel trick. Given a finite observation set 
 
 
 
 , one can select the counting measure

 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Then the integral in Mercer's theorem reduces to a simple summation


 
  for all finite sequences of points 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  and all choices of 
 
 
 
  real-valued coefficients 
 
 
 
  (cf. positive definite kernel).
Some algorithms that depend on arbitrary relationships in the native space 
 
 
 
  would, in fact, have a linear interpretation in a different setting: the range space of 
 
 
 
 . The linear interpretation gives us insight about the algorithm. Furthermore, there is often no need to compute 
 
 
 
  directly during computation, as is the case with support vector machines. Some cite this running time shortcut as the primary benefit. Researchers also use it to justify the meanings and properties of existing algorithms.
Theoretically, a Gram matrix

 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  (sometimes also called a "kernel matrix"2), where 
 
 
 
 , must be positive semi-definite (PSD).3 Empirically, for machine learning heuristics, choices of a function 
 
 
 
  that do not satisfy Mercer's condition may still perform reasonably if 
 
 
 
  at least approximates the intuitive idea of similarity.4 Regardless of whether 
 
 
 
  is a Mercer kernel, 
 
 
 
  may still be referred to as a "kernel".
If the kernel function 
 
 
 
  is also a covariance function as used in Gaussian processes, then the Gram matrix 
 
 
 
  can also be called a covariance matrix.5
Finally, suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a square matrix. Then 
 
 
 
  is a PSD matrix.
Applications
Application areas of kernel methods are diverse and include geostatistics,6 kriging, inverse distance weighting, 3D reconstruction, bioinformatics, chemoinformatics, information extraction and handwriting recognition.
Popular kernels

Fisher kernel
Graph kernels
Polynomial kernel
RBF kernel
String kernels

See also

Kernel regression
Kernel smoothing
Kernel methods for vector output

Notes
References




External links

Kernel-Machines Org—community website
www.support-vector-machines.org (Literature, Review, Software, Links related to Support Vector Machines - Academic Site)
onlineprediction.net Kernel Methods Article

"
Category:Kernel methods for machine learning Category:Geostatistics Category:Classification algorithms



 Cited in 


http://www.svms.org/mercer/






