


Traian Lalescu




Traian Lalescu

Traian Lalescu (; 12 July 1882 – 15 June 1929) was a Romanian mathematician. His main focus was on integral equations and he contributed to work in the areas of functional equations, trigonometric series, mathematical physics, geometry, mechanics, algebra, and the history of mathematics.
Life
He went to the Carol I High School in Craiova, continuing high school in Roman and Iaşi. After entering the University of Iaşi, he completed his undergraduate studies in 1903 at the University of Bucharest.
He earned his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the University of Paris in 1908. His dissertation, Sur les équations de Volterra, was written under the direction of Émile Picard. In 1911, he published Introduction to the Theory of Integral Equations, the first book ever on the subject of integral equations.
He was a professor at the University of Bucharest, the Polytechnic University of Timișoara (where he was the first rector, in 1920), and the Polytechnic University of Bucharest.
The Lalescu sequence






Legacy
 There are several institutions bearing his name, including Colegiul Naţional de Informatică Traian Lalescu in Hunedoara and Liceul Teoretic Traian Lalescu in Reşiţa. There is also a Traian Lalescu Street in Timişoara. The National Mathematics Contest Traian Lalescu for undergraduate students is also named after him.
A statue of Lalescu, carved in 1930 by Cornel Medrea, is situated in front of the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, in Timişoara.
Work

T. Lalesco, Introduction à la théorie des équations intégrales. Avec une préface de É. Picard, Paris: A. Hermann et Fils, 1912. VII + 152 pp.1 JFM entry
Traian Lalescu, Introducere la teoria ecuaţiilor integrale, Editura Academiei Republicii Populare Romîne, 1956. 134 pp. (A reprint of the first edition [Bucharest, 1911], with a bibliography taken from the French translation [Paris, 1912]). 

References
External links


"Representative Figures of the Romanian Science and Technology"

[http://cnihd.licee.edu.ro/vezi.php?id=8&ce;;=stire "Traian Lalescu"], from Colegiul Naţional de Informatică Traian Lalescu, Hunedoara

"Cine a fost Traian Lalescu?", from Liceul Teoretic Traian Lalescu, Reşiţa

"Monumentul lui Traian Lalescu (1930)", at infotim.ro
A Class of Applications of AM-GM Inequality (From a 2004 Putnam Competition Problem to Lalescu’s Sequence) by Wladimir G. Boskoff and Bogdan Suceava, Australian Math. Society Gazette, 33 (2006), No.1, 51-56.

"
Category:20th-century mathematicians Category:Mathematical analysts Category:Members of the Romanian Academy elected post-mortem Category:People from Bucharest Category:Romanian mathematicians Category:Romanian textbook writers Category:Rectors of Politehnica University of Timișoara Category:University and college founders Category:University of Bucharest alumni Category:University of Bucharest faculty Category:Alexandru Ioan Cuza University alumni Category:University of Paris alumni Category:Politehnica University of Bucharest faculty Category:Carol I National College alumni Category:1882 births Category:1929 deaths








