


Vasicek model




Vasicek model

 In finance, the Vasicek model is a mathematical model describing the evolution of interest rates. It is a type of "one-factor model" (more precisely, one factor short rate model) as it describes interest rate movements as driven by only one source of market risk. The model can be used in the valuation of interest rate derivatives, and has also been adapted for credit markets, although its use in the credit market is in principle wrong, implying negative probabilities (see for example Brigo and Mercurio (2006), Section 21.1.1). It was introduced in 1977 by Oldřich Vašíček1 and can be also seen as a stochastic investment model.
Details
The model specifies that the instantaneous interest rate follows the stochastic differential equation:



where Wt is a Wiener process under the risk neutral framework modelling the random market risk factor, in that it models the continuous inflow of randomness into the system. The standard deviation parameter, 
 
 
 
 , determines the volatility of the interest rate and in a way characterizes the amplitude of the instantaneous randomness inflow. The typical parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , together with the initial condition 
 
 
 
 , completely characterize the dynamics, and can be quickly characterized as follows, assuming 
 
 
 
 
  to be non-negative:



 
 : "long term mean level". All future trajectories of 
 
 
 
  will evolve around a mean level b in the long run;


 
 : "speed of reversion". 
 
 
 
  characterizes the velocity at which such trajectories will regroup around 
 
 
 
 
  in time;


 
 : "instantaneous volatility", measures instant by instant the amplitude of randomness entering the system. Higher 
 
 
 
  implies more randomness

The following derived quantity is also of interest,



 
 : "long term variance". All future trajectories of 
 
 
 
  will regroup around the long term mean with such variance after a long time.



 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  tend to oppose each other: increasing 
 
 
 
  increases the amount of randomness entering the system, but at the same time increasing 
 
 
 
  amounts to increasing the speed at which the system will stabilize statistically around the long term mean 
 
 
 
  with a corridor of variance determined also by 
 
 
 
 
 . This is clear when looking at the long term variance,



which increases with 
 
 
 
  but decreases with 
 
 
 
 .
This model is an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck stochastic process. Making the long term mean stochastic to another SDE is a simplified version of the cointelation SDE.2
Discussion
Vasicek's model was the first one to capture mean reversion, an essential characteristic of the interest rate that sets it apart from other financial prices. Thus, as opposed to stock prices for instance, interest rates cannot rise indefinitely. This is because at very high levels they would hamper economic activity, prompting a decrease in interest rates. Similarly, interest rates can not decrease below 0. As a result, interest rates move in a limited range, showing a tendency to revert to a long run value.
The drift factor 
 
 
 
  represents the expected instantaneous change in the interest rate at time t. The parameter b represents the long-run equilibrium value towards which the interest rate reverts. Indeed, in the absence of shocks (
 
 
 
 
 ), the interest rate remains constant when rt = b. The parameter a, governing the speed of adjustment, needs to be positive to ensure stability around the long term value. For example, when rt is below b, the drift term 
 
 
 
  becomes positive for positive a, generating a tendency for the interest rate to move upwards (toward equilibrium).
The main disadvantage is that, under Vasicek's model, it is theoretically possible for the interest rate to become negative, an undesirable feature. This shortcoming was fixed in the Cox–Ingersoll–Ross model, exponential Vasicek model, Black–Derman–Toy model and Black–Karasinski model, among many others. The Vasicek model was further extended in the Hull–White model. The Vasicek model is also a canonical example of the affine term structure model, along with the Cox–Ingersoll–Ross model.
Asymptotic mean and variance
We solve the stochastic differential equation to obtain



Using similar techniques as applied to the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck stochastic process we get that state variable is distributed normally with mean



and variance



Consequently, we have


 
  and



See also

Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process.
Hull–White model
Cox–Ingersoll–Ross model

References






External links

Price of Zero Coupon Bond under Vasicek Model, Free Online Calculator, QuantCalc
The Vasicek Model, Bjørn Eraker, Wisconsin School of Business
Yield Curve Estimation and Prediction with the Vasicek Model, D. Bayazit, Middle East Technical University

"
Category:Finance theories Category:Interest rates Category:Mathematical finance Category:Fixed income analysis Category:Stochastic processes Category:Short-rate models









