


Krein–Milman theorem




Krein–Milman theorem

 In the mathematical theory of functional analysis, the Krein–Milman theorem is a proposition about convex sets in topological vector spaces. A particular case of this theorem, which can be easily visualized, states that given a convex polygon, one only needs the corners of the polygon to recover the polygon shape. The statement of the theorem is false if the polygon is not convex, as then there can be many ways of drawing a polygon having given points as corners.
Formally, let 
 
 
 
  be a locally convex topological vector space (assumed to be Hausdorff), and let 
 
 
 
  be a compact convex subset of 
 
 
 
 . Then, the theorem states that 
 
 
 
  is the closed convex hull of its extreme points.
The closed convex hull above is defined as the intersection of all closed convex subsets of 
 
 
 
  that contain 
 
 
 
  This turns out to be the same as the closure of the convex hull in the topological vector space. One direction in the theorem is easy; the main burden is to show that there are 'enough' extreme points.
The original statement proved by Mark Krein and David Milman was somewhat less general than this.
Hermann Minkowski had already proved that if 
 
 
 
  is finite-dimensional then 
 
 
 
  equals the convex hull of the set of its extreme points. The Krein–Milman theorem generalizes this to arbitrary locally-convex 
 
 
 
 , with a caveat: the closure may be needed.
Relation to the axiom of choice
The axiom of choice, or some weaker version of it, is needed to prove this theorem in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. This theorem together with the Boolean prime ideal theorem, though, can prove the axiom of choice.
Related results
Under the previous assumptions on 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is a subset of 
 
 
 
  and the closed convex hull of 
 
 
 
  is all of 
 
 
 
 , then every extreme point of 
 
 
 
  belongs to the closure of 
 
 
 
  This result is known as Milman's (partial) converse to the Krein–Milman theorem.
The Choquet–Bishop–de Leeuw theorem states that every point in 
 
 
 
  is the barycenter of a probability measure supported on the set of extreme points of 
 
 

Theo Buehler proved in 2006 that the Krein–Milman theorem also holds for CAT(0) spaces. 1
See also

Carathéodory's theorem (convex hull)
Shapley–Folkman lemma
Helly's theorem
Radon's theorem
Choquet theory
Banach–Alaoglu theorem

References

M. Krein, D. Milman (1940) On extreme points of regular convex sets, Studia Mathematica 9 133–138.

H. L. Royden. Real Analysis. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1988.
N. K. Nikol'skij (Ed.). Functional Analysis I. Springer-Verlag, 1992
H. Minkowski. Geometrie der Zahlen. Teubner, Leipzig, 1910

"
Category:Theorems in convex geometry Category:Theorems in discrete geometry Category:Topological vector spaces Category:Convex hulls Category:Oriented matroids Category:Theorems in functional analysis



↩




