


Density on a manifold




Density on a manifold

In mathematics, and specifically differential geometry, a density is a spatially varying quantity on a differentiable manifold which can be integrated in an intrinsic manner. Abstractly, a density is a section of a certain trivial line bundle, called the density bundle. An element of the density bundle at x is a function that assigns a volume for the parallelotope spanned by the n given tangent vectors at x.
From the operational point of view, a density is a collection of functions on coordinate charts which become multiplied by the absolute value of the Jacobian determinant in the change of coordinates. Densities can be generalized into s-densities, whose coordinate representations become multiplied by the s-th power of the absolute value of the jacobian determinant. On an oriented manifold 1-densities can be canonically identified with the n-forms on M. On non-orientable manifolds this identification cannot be made, since the density bundle is the tensor product of the orientation bundle of M and the n-th exterior product bundle of T*M (see pseudotensor.)
Motivation (Densities in vector spaces)
In general, there does not exist a natural concept of a "volume" for a parallelotope generated by vectors  in a n-dimensional vector space V. However, if one wishes to define a function  that assigns a volume for any such parallelotope, it should satisfy the following properties:

If any of the vectors vk is multiplied by , the volume should be multiplied by |λ|.
If any linear combination of the vectors v1, ..., ''vj''−1, ''vj''+1, ..., vn is added to the vector vj, the volume should stay invariant.

These conditions are equivalent to the statement that μ is given by a translation-invariant measure on V, and they can be rephrased as



Any such mapping  is called a density on the vector space V. The set Vol(V) of all densities on V forms a one-dimensional vector space, and any n-form ω on V defines a density 
 
 
 
  on V by



Orientations on a vector space
The set Or(V) of all functions  that satisfy



forms a one-dimensional vector space, and an orientation on V is one of the two elements  such that  for any linearly independent . Any non-zero n-form ω on V defines an orientation  such that



and vice versa, any  and any density  define an n-form ω on V by



In terms of tensor product spaces,



s-densities on a vector space
The s-densities on V are functions  such that



Just like densities, s-densities form a one-dimensional vector space Vols(V), and any n-form ω on V defines an s-density |ω|s on V by



The product of s1- and s2-densities μ1 and μ2 form an (s1+s2)-density μ by



In terms of tensor product spaces this fact can be stated as



Definition
Formally, the s-density bundle Vols(M) of a differentiable manifold M is obtained by an associated bundle construction, intertwining the one-dimensional group representation



of the general linear group with the frame bundle of M.
The resulting line bundle is known as the bundle of s-densities, and is denoted by


 
  A 1-density is also referred to simply as a density.
More generally, the associated bundle construction also allows densities to be constructed from any vector bundle E on M.
In detail, if (Uα,φα) is an atlas of coordinate charts on M, then there is associated a local trivialization of 
 
 




subordinate to the open cover Uα such that the associated GL(1)-cocycle satisfies



Integration
Densities play a significant role in the theory of integration on manifolds. Indeed, the definition of a density is motivated by how a measure dx changes under a change of coordinates .
Given a 1-density ƒ supported in a coordinate chart Uα, the integral is defined by


 
  where the latter integral is with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Rn. The transformation law for 1-densities together with the Jacobian change of variables ensures compatibility on the overlaps of different coordinate charts, and so the integral of a general compactly supported 1-density can be defined by a partition of unity argument. Thus 1-densities are a generalization of the notion of a volume form that does not necessarily require the manifold to be oriented or even orientable. One can more generally develop a general theory of Radon measures as distributional sections of 
 
 
 
  using the Riesz representation theorem.
The set of 1/p-densities such that 
 
 
 
  is a normed linear space whose completion 
 
 
 
  is called the intrinsic Lp space of M.
Conventions
In some areas, particularly conformal geometry, a different weighting convention is used: the bundle of s-densities is instead associated with the character


 
  With this convention, for instance, one integrates n-densities (rather than 1-densities). Also in these conventions, a conformal metric is identified with a tensor density of weight 2.
Properties

The dual vector bundle of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
Tensor densities are sections of the tensor product of a density bundle with a tensor bundle.

References


.



"
Category:Manifolds


