


Residue-class-wise affine group




Residue-class-wise affine group

In mathematics, specifically in group theory, residue-class-wise affine groups are certain permutation groups acting on 
 
 
 
  (the integers), whose elements are bijective residue-class-wise affine mappings.
A mapping 
 
 
 
  is called residue-class-wise affine if there is a nonzero integer 
 
 
 
  such that the restrictions of 
 
 
 
 
  to the residue classes (mod 
 
 
 
 ) are all affine. This means that for any residue class 
 
 
 
  there are coefficients 
 
 
 
  such that the restriction of the mapping 
 
 
 
  to the set

 
 
  is given by


 
 .
Residue-class-wise affine groups are countable, and they are accessible to computational investigations. Many of them act multiply transitively on 
 
 
 
  or on subsets thereof.
A particularly basic type of residue-class-wise affine permutations are the class transpositions: given disjoint residue classes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the corresponding class transposition is the permutation of 
 
 
 
  which interchanges 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
  and which fixes everything else. Here it is assumed that 
 
 
 
  and that 
 
 
 
 .
The set of all class transpositions of 
 
 
generates a countable simple group which has the following properties:

It is not finitely generated.
Every finite group, every free product of finite groups and every free group of finite rank embeds into it.
The class of its subgroups is closed under taking direct products, under taking wreath products with finite groups, and under taking restricted wreath products with the infinite cyclic group.
It has finitely generated subgroups which do not have finite presentations.
It has finitely generated subgroups with algorithmically unsolvable membership problem.
It has an uncountable series of simple subgroups which is parametrized by the sets of odd primes.

It is straightforward to generalize the notion of a residue-class-wise affine group to groups acting on suitable rings other than 
 
 
 
 , though only little work in this direction has been done so far.
See also the Collatz conjecture, which is an assertion about a surjective, but not injective residue-class-wise affine mapping.
References and external links

Stefan Kohl. Restklassenweise affine Gruppen. Dissertation, Universität Stuttgart, 2005. Archivserver der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek OPUS-Datenbank(Universität Stuttgart)
Stefan Kohl. RCWA – Residue-Class-Wise Affine Groups. GAP package. 2005.
Stefan Kohl. A Simple Group Generated by Involutions Interchanging Residue Classes of the Integers. Math. Z. 264 (2010), no. 4, 927–938. 1

"
Category:Infinite group theory Category:Number theory


