


Antiunitary operator




Antiunitary operator

In mathematics, an antiunitary transformation, is a bijective antilinear map



between two complex Hilbert spaces such that



for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , where the horizontal bar represents the complex conjugate. If additionally one has 
 
 
 
  then U is called an antiunitary operator.
Antiunitary operators are important in Quantum Theory because they are used to represent certain symmetries, such as time-reversal symmetry. Their fundamental importance in quantum physics is further demonstrated by Wigner's Theorem.
Invariance transformations
In Quantum mechanics, the invariance transformations of complex Hilbert space 
 
 
 
  leave the absolute value of scalar product invariant:



for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Due to Wigner's Theorem these transformations fall into two categories, they can be unitary or antiunitary.
Geometric Interpretation
Congruences of the plane form two distinct classes. The first conserves the orientation and is generated by translations and rotations. The second does not conserve the orientation and is obtained from the first class by applying a reflection. On the complex plane these two classes corresponds (up to translation) to unitaries and antiunitaries, respectively.
Properties



 
  holds for all elements 
 
 
 
  of the Hilbert space and an antiunitary 
 
 
 
 .
When 
 
 
 
  is antiunitary then 
 
 
 
  is unitary. This follows from





For unitary operator 
 
 
 
  the operator 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is complex conjugate operator, is antiunitary. The reverse is also true, for antiunitary 
 
 
 
  the operator 
 
 
 
  is unitary.
For antiunitary 
 
 
 
  the definition of the adjoint operator 
 
 
 
  is changed into



 
 .

The adjoint of an antiunitary 
 
 
 
  is also antiunitary and



 
  (This is not to be confused with the definition of unitary operators, as 
 
 
 
  is not complex linear.)
Examples

The complex conjugate operator 
 
 
 
  is an antiunitary operator on the complex plane.
The operator



 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the second Pauli matrix and 
 
 
 
  is the complex conjugate operator, is antiunitary. It satisfies 
 
 
 
 .
Decomposition of an antiunitary operator into a direct sum of elementary Wigner antiunitaries
An antiunitary operator on a finite-dimensional space may be decomposed as a direct sum of elementary Wigner antiunitaries 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . The operator 
 
 
 
  is just simple complex conjugation on C



For 
 
 
 
 , the operation 
 
 
 
  acts on two-dimensional complex Hilbert space. It is defined by



Note that for 
 
 




so such 
 
 
 
  may not be further decomposed into 
 
 
 
 's, which square to the identity map.
Note that the above decomposition of antiunitary operators contrasts with the spectral decomposition of unitary operators. In particular, a unitary operator on a complex Hilbert space may be decomposed into a direct sum of unitaries acting on 1-dimensional complex spaces (eigenspaces), but an antiunitary operator may only be decomposed into a direct sum of elementary operators on 1- and 2-dimensional complex spaces.
References



Wigner, E. "Normal Form of Antiunitary Operators", Journal of Mathematical Physics Vol 1, no 5, 1960, pp. 409–412
Wigner, E. "Phenomenological Distinction between Unitary and Antiunitary Symmetry Operators", Journal of Mathematical Physics Vol1, no5, 1960, pp.414–416

See also

Unitary operator
Wigner's Theorem
Particle physics and representation theory

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Functional analysis


