


Partial equivalence relation




Partial equivalence relation

In mathematics, a partial equivalence relation (often abbreviated as PER, in older literature also called restricted equivalence relation) 
 
 
 
  on a set 
 
 
 
  is a relation that is symmetric and transitive. In other words, it holds for all 
 
 
 
  that:

if 
 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  (symmetry)
if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  (transitivity)

If 
 
 
 
 
  is also reflexive, then 
 
 
 
  is an equivalence relation.
Properties and applications
In a set-theoretic context, there is a simple structure to the general PER 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 : it is an equivalence relation on the subset 
 
 
 
 . (
 
 
 
 
  is the subset of 
 
 
 
  such that in the complement of 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) no element is related by 
 
 
 
  to any other.) By construction, 
 
 
 
 
  is reflexive on 
 
 
 
  and therefore an equivalence relation on 
 
 
 
 . Notice that 
 
 
 
  is actually only true on elements of 
 
 
 
 : if 
 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  by symmetry, so 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  by transitivity. Conversely, given a subset Y of X, any equivalence relation on Y is automatically a PER on X.
PERs are therefore used mainly in computer science, type theory and constructive mathematics, particularly to define setoids, sometimes called partial setoids. The action of forming one from a type and a PER is analogous to the operations of subset and quotient in classical set-theoretic mathematics.
Every partial equivalence relation is a difunctional relation, but the converse does not hold.
The algebraic notion of congruence can also be generalized to partial equivalences, yielding the notion of subcongruence, i.e. a homomorphic relation that is symmetric and transitive, but not necessarily reflexive.1
Examples
A simple example of a PER that is not an equivalence relation is the empty relation 
 
 
 
  (unless 
 
 
 
 
 , in which case the empty relation is an equivalence relation (and is the only relation on 
 
 
 
 )).
Euclidean parallelism
In the Euclidean plane, two lines m and n are parallel lines when m ∩ n = ∅. The symmetry of this relation is obvious and the transitivity can be proven in the Euclidean plane, thus Euclidean parallelism is a partial equivalence relation. Nevertheless, mathematicians developing affine geometry prefer the facility of an equivalence relation and therefore sometimes revise the definition of parallelism to allow a line to be parallel to itself, making the new relation of "affine parallelism" that is a reflexive relation.
Kernels of partial functions
For another example of a PER, consider a set 
 
 
 
  and a partial function

 
  that is defined on some elements of 
 
 
 
  but not all. Then the relation 
 
 
 
 
  defined by


 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is defined at 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is defined at 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a partial equivalence relation but not an equivalence relation. It possesses the symmetry and transitivity properties, but it is not reflexive since if 
 
 
 
  is not defined then 
 
 
 
  — in fact, for such an 
 
 
 
  there is no 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . (It follows immediately that the subset of 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is an equivalence relation is precisely the subset on which 
 
 
 
  is defined.)
Functions respecting equivalence relations
Let X and Y be sets equipped with equivalence relations (or PERs) 
 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
 , define 
 
 
 
  to mean:



then 
 
 
 
  means that f induces a well-defined function of the quotients 
 
 
 
 . Thus, the PER 
 
 
 
  captures both the idea of definedness on the quotients and of two functions inducing the same function on the quotient.
References

Mitchell, John C. Foundations of programming languages. MIT Press, 1996.
D.S. Scott. "Data types as lattices". SIAM Journ. Comput., 3:523-587, 1976.

See also

Equivalence relation
Binary relation

"
Category:Mathematical relations



↩




