


Circulant graph




Circulant graph

 In graph theory, a circulant graph is an undirected graph that has a cyclic group of symmetries that includes a symmetry taking any vertex to any other vertex.
Equivalent definitions
Circulant graphs can be described in several equivalent ways:1

The automorphism group of the graph includes a cyclic subgroup that acts transitively on the graph's vertices.
The graph has an adjacency matrix that is a circulant matrix.
The 
 
 
 
  vertices of the graph can be numbered from 0 to 
 
 
 
  in such a way that, if some two vertices numbered 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are adjacent, then every two vertices numbered 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are adjacent.
The graph can be drawn (possibly with crossings) so that its vertices lie on the corners of a regular polygon, and every rotational symmetry of the polygon is also a symmetry of the drawing.
The graph is a Cayley graph of a cyclic group.2

Examples
Every cycle graph is a circulant graph, as is every crown graph whose number of vertices is 2 (mod 4).
The Paley graphs of order 
 
 
 
  (where 
 
 
 
  is a prime number congruent to ) is a graph in which the vertices are the numbers from 0 to 
 
 
 
 
  and two vertices are adjacent if their difference is a quadratic residue modulo 
 
 
 
 . Since the presence or absence of an edge depends only on the difference modulo 
 
 
 
  of two vertex numbers, any Paley graph is a circulant graph.
Every Möbius ladder is a circulant graph, as is every complete graph. A complete bipartite graph is a circulant graph if it has the same number of vertices on both sides of its bipartition.
If two numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are relatively prime, then the 
 
 
rook's graph (a graph that has a vertex for each square of an 
 
 
 
  chessboard and an edge for each two squares that a chess rook can move between in a single move) is a circulant graph. This is because its symmetries include as a subgroup the cyclic group . More generally, in this case, the tensor product of graphs between any 
 
 
 
 - and 
 
 
 
 -vertex circulants is itself a circulant.3
Many of the known lower bounds on Ramsey numbers come from examples of circulant graphs that have small maximum cliques and small maximum independent sets.4
A specific example
The circulant graph 
 
 
 
  with jumps 
 
 
 
 
  is defined as the graph with 
 
 
 
  nodes labeled 
 
 
 
  where each node i is adjacent to 2k nodes 
 
 
 
 .

The graph 
 
 
 
  is connected if and only if 
 
 
 
 
 .


If 
 
 
 
  are fixed integers then the number of spanning trees

 
  where 
 
 
 
  satisfies a recurrence relation of order 
 
 
 
 .
 
In particular, 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the n-th Fibonacci number.


Self-complementary circulants
A self-complementary graph is a graph in which replacing every edge by a non-edge and vice versa produces an isomorphic graph. For instance, a five-vertex cycle graph is self-complementary, and is also a circulant graph. More generally every Paley graph is a self-complementary circulant graph.5 Horst Sachs showed that, if a number 
 
 
 
  has the property that every prime factor of 
 
 
 
  is congruent to , then there exists a self-complementary circulant with 
 
 
 
  vertices. He conjectured that this condition is also necessary: that no other values of 
 
 
 
 
  allow a self-complementary circulant to exist.67 The conjecture was proven some 40 years later, by Vilfred.8
Ádám's conjecture
Define a circulant numbering of a circulant graph to be a labeling of the vertices of the graph by the numbers from 0 to 
 
 
 
  in such a way that, if some two vertices numbered 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are adjacent, then every two vertices numbered 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are adjacent. Equivalently, a circulant numbering is a numbering of the vertices for which the adjacency matrix of the graph is a circulant matrix.
Let 
 
 
 
  be an integer that is relatively prime to 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be any integer. Then the linear function that takes a number 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
  transforms a circulant numbering to another circulant numbering. András Ádám conjectured that these linear maps are the only ways of renumbering a circulant graph while preserving the circulant property: that is, if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are isomorphic circulant graphs, with different numberings, then there is a linear map that transforms the numbering for 
 
 
 
  into the numbering for 
 
 
 
 . However, Ádám's conjecture is now known to be false. A counterexample is given by graphs 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with 16 vertices each; a vertex 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is connected to the six neighbors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  (modulo 16), while in 
 
 
 
  the six neighbors are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 
  (modulo 16). These two graphs are isomorphic, but their isomorphism cannot be realized by a linear map.9
References
External links



"
Category:Graph families Category:Regular graphs



.↩
.↩

Small Ramsey Numbers, Stanisław P. Radziszowski, Electronic J. Combinatorics, dynamic survey updated 2009.↩
.↩








