


Laplace expansion




Laplace expansion

In linear algebra, the Laplace expansion, named after Pierre-Simon Laplace, also called cofactor expansion, is an expression for the determinant |B| of an n × n matrix B that is a weighted sum of the determinants of n sub-matrices of B, each of size (n−1) × (n−1). The Laplace expansion is of theoretical interest as one of several ways to view the determinant, as well as of practical use in determinant computation.
The i, j cofactor of B is the scalar Cij defined by



where Mij is the i, j minor matrix of B, that is, the determinant of the (n − 1) × (n − 1) matrix that results from deleting the i-th row and the j-th column of B.
Then the Laplace expansion is given by the following

Theorem. Suppose B = [bij] is an n × n matrix and fix any i, j ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}.
 

Then its determinant |B| is given by:



Examples
Consider the matrix


 
  The determinant of this matrix can be computed by using the Laplace expansion along any one of its rows or columns. For instance, an expansion along the first row yields:











Laplace expansion along the second column yields the same result:











It is easy to verify that the result is correct: the matrix is singular because the sum of its first and third column is twice the second column, and hence its determinant is zero.
Proof
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is an n × n matrix and 
 
 
 
  For clarity we also label the entries of 
 
 
 
  that compose its 
 
 
 
  minor matrix 
 
 
 
  as


 
  for 
 
 

Consider the terms in the expansion of 
 
 
 
  that have 
 
 
 
  as a factor. Each has the form



for some permutation  with 
 
 
 
 , and a unique and evidently related permutation 
 
 
 
 
  which selects the same minor entries as 
 
 
 
 . Similarly each choice of 
 
 
 
  determines a corresponding 
 
 
 
  i.e. the correspondence 
 
 
 
  is a bijection between 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  The permutation 
 
 
 
  can be derived from 
 
 
 
  as follows.
Define 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  and



Since the two cycles can be written respectively as 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
transpositions,



And since the map 
 
 
 
  is bijective,



from which the result follows.
Laplace expansion of a determinant by complementary minors
Laplaces cofactor expansion can be generalised as follows.
Example
Consider the matrix


 
  The determinant of this matrix can be computed by using the Laplace's cofactor expansion along the first two rows as follows. Firstly note that there are 6 sets of two distinct numbers in  namely let 
 
 
 
  be the aforementioned set.
By defining the complementary cofactors to be


 
 ,


 
 , and the sign of their permutation to be


 
 . The determinant of A can be written out as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the complementary set to 
 
 
 
 .
In our explicit example this gives us



As above, It is easy to verify that the result is correct: the matrix is singular because the sum of its first and third column is twice the second column, and hence its determinant is zero.
Computational expense
The Laplace expansion is computationally inefficient for high dimension because for N × N matrices, the computational effort scales with N!. Therefore, the Laplace expansion is not suitable for large N. Using a decomposition into triangular matrices as in the LU decomposition, one can determine determinants with effort N3/3.1
References



David Poole: Linear Algebra. A Modern Introduction. Cengage Learning 2005, ISBN 0-534-99845-3, p. 265-267 ()
Harvey E. Rose: Linear Algebra. A Pure Mathematical Approach. Springer 2002, ISBN 3-7643-6905-1, p. 57-60 ()

See also

Leibniz formula for determinants

External links

Laplace expansion at PlanetMath

de:Determinante#Laplacescher Entwicklungssatz"
Category:Matrix theory Category:Determinants Category:Articles containing proofs



Stoer Bulirsch: Introduction to Numerical Mathematics↩




