


Minkowski functional




Minkowski functional

In mathematics, in the field of functional analysis, a Minkowski functional is a function that recovers a notion of distance on a linear space.
Let K be a symmetric (i.e. if it contains x it also contains -x) convex body in a linear space V. We define a function p on V as



This is the Minkowski functional of K.1 Usually it is assumed that K is such that the set of 
 
 
 
  is never empty, but sometimes the set is allowed to be empty and then p(x) is defined as infinity.
Motivation
Example 1
Consider a normed vector space X, with the norm ||·||. Let K be the unit ball in X. Define a function p : X → R by



One can see that 
 
 
 
 
 , i.e. p is just the norm on X. The function p is a special case of a Minkowski functional.
Example 2
Let X be a vector space without topology with underlying scalar field K. Take ''φ ∈ X' '', the algebraic dual of X, i.e. φ : X → K is a linear functional on X. Fix a > 0. Let the set K be given by



Again we define



Then



The function p(x) is another instance of a Minkowski functional. It has the following properties:

It is subadditive: p(x + y) ≤ p(x) + p(y),
It is homogeneous: for all α ∈ K, p(α x) = |α| p(x),
It is nonnegative.

Therefore p is a seminorm on X, with an induced topology. This is characteristic of Minkowski functionals defined via "nice" sets. There is a one-to-one correspondence between seminorms and the Minkowski functional given by such sets. What is meant precisely by "nice" is discussed in the section below.
Notice that, in contrast to a stronger requirement for a norm, p(x) = 0 need not imply x = 0. In the above example, one can take a nonzero x from the kernel of φ. Consequently, the resulting topology need not be Hausdorff.
Definition
The above examples suggest that, given a (complex or real) vector space X and a subset K, one can define a corresponding Minkowski functional



by



which is often called the gauge of 
 
 
 
 .
It is implicitly assumed in this definition that 0 ∈ K and the set {r > 0: x ∈ r K} is nonempty. In order for pK to have the properties of a seminorm, additional restrictions must be imposed on K. These conditions are listed below.

The set K being convex implies the subadditivity of pK.
Homogeneity, i.e. pK(α x) = |α| pK(x) for all α, is ensured if K is balanced, meaning α K ⊂ K for all |α| ≤ 1.

A set K with these properties is said to be absolutely convex.
Convexity of K
A simple geometric argument that shows convexity of K implies subadditivity is as follows. Suppose for the moment that pK(x) = pK(y) = r. Then for all ε > 0, we have x, y ∈ (r + ε) K = '' K' ''. The assumption that K is convex means '' K' '' is also. Therefore ½ x + ½ y is in '' K' ''. By definition of the Minkowski functional pK, one has



But the left hand side is ½ pK(x + y), i.e. the above becomes



This is the desired inequality. The general case pK(x) > pK(y) is obtained after the obvious modification.
Note Convexity of K, together with the initial assumption that the set {r > 0: x ∈ r K} is nonempty, implies that K is absorbent.
Balancedness of K
Notice that K being balanced implies that



Therefore



See also

Hadwiger's theorem
Hugo Hadwiger
Morphological image processing

Notes
References



"
Category:Functional analysis Category:Convex analysis



Thompson (1996) p.17↩




