


Grassmann integral




Grassmann integral

In mathematical physics, a Grassmann integral, or, more correctly, Berezin integral, is a way to define integration for functions of Grassmann variables. It is not an integral in the Lebesgue sense; it is called integration because it has analogous properties and since it is used in physics as a sum over histories for fermions, an extension of the path integral. The technique was invented by the Russian mathematician Felix Berezin and developed in his textbook.1 Some earlier insights were made by the physicist David John Candlin2 in 1956.
Definition
The Berezin integral is defined to be a linear functional



where we define






so that :



These properties define the integral uniquely.



This is the most general function, because every homogeneous function of one Grassmann variable is either constant or linear.
Multiple variables
Integration over multiple variables is defined by Fubini's theorem:



Note that the sign of the result depends on the order of integration.
Suppose now we want to do a substitution:



where as usual (ξj) implies dependence on all ξj. Moreover the function θi has to be an odd function, i.e. contains an odd number of ξj in each summand. The Jacobian is the usual matrix



the substitution formula now reads as



Substitution formula
Consider now a mixture of even and odd variables, i.e. xa and θi. Again we assume a coordinate transformation as 
 
 
 
  where xa are even functions and θi are odd functions. We assume the functions xa and θi to be defined on an open set U in Rm. The functions xa map onto the open set U' in Rm.
The change of the integral will depend on the Jacobian



This matrix consists of four blocks:



A and D are even functions due to the derivation properties, B and C are odd functions. A matrix of this block structure is called even matrix.
The transformation factor itself depends on the oriented Berezinian of the Jacobian. This is defined as:



For further details see the article about the Berezinian.
The complete formula now reads as:



Gaussian integrals over Grassmann variables
The following formulas for Gaussian integrals are used often in the path integral formulation of quantum field theory:



with 
 
 
 
  being a 
 
 
 
  matrix.



with 
 
 
 
  being an 
 
 
 
  antisymmetric matrix. In the above formulas the notation 
 
 
 
  is used.
From the above formulas, other useful formulas follow:



with 
 
 
 
  being an invertible 
 
 
 
  matrix, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are Grassmann variables.



with 
 
 
 
  being an invertible 
 
 
 
  antisymmetric matrix, and 
 
 
 
  Grassmann variable.
See also

Berezin integral


Supermanifold

Literature

Theodore Voronov: Geometric integration theory on Supermanifolds, Harwood Academic Publisher, ISBN 3-7186-5199-8

References


"
Category:Quantum field theory Category:Supersymmetry



A. Berezin, The Method of Second Quantization, Academic Press, (1966)↩
↩




