


Background field method




Background field method

In theoretical physics, background field method is a useful procedure to calculate the effective action of a quantum field theory by expanding a quantum field around a classical "background" value B:


 
 . After this is done, the Green's functions are evaluated as a function of the background. This approach has the advantage that the gauge invariance is manifestly preserved if the approach is applied to gauge theory.
Method
We typically want to calculate expressions like


 
  where J(x) is a source, 
 
 
 
  is the Lagrangian density of the system, d is the number of dimensions and φ(x) is a field.
In the background field method, one starts by splitting this field into a classical background field B(x) and a field η(x) containing additional quantum fluctuations:


 
  Typically, B(x) will be a solution of the classical equations of motion


 
  where S is the action, i.e. the space integral of the Lagrangian density. Fields obeying these equations typically yield the greatest contribution in a path integral, so it is natural to expand around them. Switching on a source J(x) will change the equations into δS/δφ|φ = B + J = 0.
Then the action is expanded around the background B(x):


 
 
  The second term in this expansion is zero by the equations of motion. The first term does not depend on any fluctuating fields, so that it can be brought out of the path integral. The result is


 
  The path integral which now remains is (neglecting the corrections in the dots) of Gaussian form and can be integrated exactly:


 
  where "det" signifies a functional determinant and C is a constant. The power of minus one half will naturally be plus one for Grassmann fields.
The above derivation gives the Gaussian approximation to the functional integral. Corrections to this can be computed, producing a diagrammatic expansion.
See also
BF theory
References


Kleinert, Hagen, Path Integrals in Quantum Mechanics, Statistics, Polymer Physics, and Financial Markets, 4th edition, World Scientific (Singapore, 2009) (also available [http://users.physik.fu-berlin.de/~kleinert/kleinert/?p=booklist&details;;=11 online]. See Chapter 3, p. 321)
L. F. Abbott, Introduction to the Background Field Method, Acta Physica Polonica, Vol. B13, 1982, No 1-2. (also available online.)

"
Category:Quantum field theory


