


Christofides algorithm




Christofides algorithm

The goal of the Christofides approximation algorithm (named after Nicos Christofides) is to find a solution to the instances of the traveling salesman problem where the edge weights satisfy the triangle inequality. Let 
 
 
 
  be an instance of TSP, i.e. 
 
 
 
  is a complete graph on the set 
 
 
 
  of vertices with weight function 
 
 
 
  assigning a nonnegative real weight to every edge of 
 
 
 
 .
Algorithm
In pseudo-code:

Create a minimum spanning tree

 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of vertices with odd degree in 
 
 
 
  and find a perfect matching

 
  with minimum weight in the complete graph over the vertices from 
 
 
 
 .
Combine the edges of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to form a multigraph

 
 .
Form an Eulerian circuit in 
 
 
 
  (H is Eulerian because it is connected, with only even-degree vertices).
Make the circuit found in previous step Hamiltonian by skipping visited nodes (shortcutting).

Approximation ratio
The cost of the solution produced by the algorithm is within 3/2 of the optimum.
The proof is as follows:
Let  denote the edge set of the optimal solution of TSP for . Because  is connected, it contains some spanning tree  and thus . Further let 
 
 
 
  denote the edge set of the optimal solution of TSP for the complete graph over vertices from 
 
 
 
 . Because the edge weights are triangular (so visiting more nodes cannot reduce total cost), we know that . We show that there is a perfect matching of vertices from 
 
 
 
  with weight under  and therefore we have the same upper bound for 
 
 
 
  (because 
 
 
 
  is a perfect matching of minimum cost). Because 
 
 
 
  must contain an even number of vertices, a perfect matching exists. Let  be the (only) Eulerian path in 
 
 
 
 . Clearly both  and  are perfect matchings and the weight of at least one of them is less than or equal to . Thus  and from the triangle inequality it follows that the algorithm is 3/2-approximative.
Example



(Figure)
Metrischer Graph mit 5 Knoten.svg


Given: metric graph 
 
 
 
  with edge weights


(Figure)
Christofides MST.svg


Calculate minimum spanning tree

 
 .


(Figure)
V'.svg


Calculate the set of vertices 
 
 
 
  with odd degree in 
 
 
 
 .


(Figure)
G V'.svg


Reduce 
 
 
 
  to the vertices of 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ).


(Figure)
Christofides Matching.svg


Calculate matching 
 
 
 
  with minimum weight in 
 
 
 
 .


(Figure)
TuM.svg


Unite matching and spanning tree (
 
 
 
 ).


(Figure)
Eulertour.svg


Calculate Euler tour on 
 
 
 
  (A-B-C-A-D-E-A).


(Figure)
Eulertour bereinigt.svg


Remove reoccuring vertices and replace by direct connections (A-B-C-D-E-A). In metric graphs, this step can not lengthen the tour. This tour is the algorithm's output.



References

NIST Christofides Algorithm Definition
Nicos Christofides, Worst-case analysis of a new heuristic for the travelling salesman problem, Report 388, Graduate School of Industrial Administration, CMU, 1976.

"
Category:Travelling salesman problem Category:Graph algorithms Category:Spanning tree Category:Approximation algorithms


