


Herzog–Schönheim conjecture




Herzog–Schönheim conjecture

In mathematics, the Herzog–Schönheim conjecture is a combinatorial problem in the area of group theory, posed by Marcel Herzog and Jochanan Schönheim in 1974.1
Let 
 
 
 
  be a group, and let



be a finite system of left cosets of subgroups

 
  of 
 
 
 
 
 .
Herzog and Schönheim conjectured that if 
 
 
 
  forms a partition of 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , then the (finite) indices 
 
 
 
  cannot be distinct. In contrast, if repeated indices are allowed, then partitioning a group into cosets is easy: if 
 
 
 
 
  is any subgroup of 
 
 
 
  with index

 
  then 
 
 
 
  can be partitioned into 
 
 
 
  left cosets of 
 
 
 
 
 .
Subnormal subgroups
In 2004 Zhi-Wei Sun proved an extended version of the Herzog–Schönheim conjecture in the case where 
 
 
 
  are subnormal in 
 
 
 
 .2 A basic lemma in Sun's proof states that if 
 
 
 
  are subnormal and of finite index in 
 
 
 
 , then



and hence



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of prime divisors of 
 
 
 
 .
Mirsky–Newman theorem
When 
 
 
 
  is the additive group 
 
 
 
  of integers, the cosets of 
 
 
 
  are the arithmetic progressions. In this case, the Herzog–Schönheim conjecture states that every covering system, a family of arithmetic progressions that together cover all the integers, must either cover some integers more than once or include at least one pair of progressions that have the same difference as each other. This result was conjectured in 1950 by Paul Erdős and proved soon thereafter by Leon Mirsky and Donald J. Newman. However, Mirsky and Newman never published their proof. The same proof was also found independently by Harold Davenport and Richard Rado.3
In 1970, a geometric coloring problem equivalent to the Mirsky–Newman theorem was given in the Soviet mathematical olympiad: suppose that the vertices of a regular polygon are colored in such a way that every color class itself forms the vertices of a regular polygon. Then, there exist two color classes that form congruent polygons.4
References
"
Category:Combinatorial group theory Category:Conjectures



. As cited by .↩
.↩
.↩





