


Tube lemma




Tube lemma

In mathematics, particularly topology, the tube lemma is a useful tool in order to prove that the finite product of compact spaces is compact. It is in general, a concept of point-set topology.
Before giving the lemma, one notes the following terminology:

If X and Y are topological spaces and X × Y is the product space, a slice in X × Y is a set of the form {x} × Y for x ∈ X


A tube in X × Y is just a basis element, K × Y, in X × Y containing a slice in X × Y

Tube Lemma: Let X and Y be topological spaces with Y compact, and consider the product space X × Y. If N is an open set containing a slice in X × Y, then there exists a tube in X × Y containing this slice and contained in N.
Using the concept of closed maps, this can be rephrased concisely as follows: if X is any topological space and Y a compact space, then the projection map X × Y → X is closed.
Generalized Tube Lemma: Let X and Y be topological spaces and consider the product space X × Y. Let A be a compact subset of X and B be a compact subset of Y. If N is an open set containing A × B, then there exists U open in X and V open in Y such that 
 
 
 
 .
Examples and properties
1. Consider R × R in the product topology, that is the Euclidean plane, and the open set N = { (x, y) : |x·y| a} be an open cover of X × Y; for each x belonging to X, cover the slice {x} × Y by finitely many elements of {Ga} (this is possible since {x} × Y is compact being homeomorphic to Y). Call the union of these finitely many elements Nx. By the tube lemma, there is an open set of the form Wx × Y containing {x} × Y and contained in Nx. The collection of all Wx for x belonging to X is an open cover of X and hence has a finite subcover Wx1  ∪ ... ∪ Wxn. Then for each xi, Wxi × Y is contained in Nxi. Using the fact that each Nxi is the finite union of elements of Ga and that the finite collection (Wx1 × Y) ∪ ... ∪ (Wxn × Y) covers X × Y, the collection Nx1 ∪ ... ∪ Nxn is a finite subcover of X × Y.
3. By example 2 and induction, one can show that the finite product of compact spaces is compact.
4. The tube lemma cannot be used to prove the Tychonoff theorem, which generalizes the above to infinite products.
Proof
The tube lemma follows from the generalized tube lemma by taking 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It therefore suffices to prove the generalized tube lemma. By the definition of the product topology, for each 
 
 
 
  there are open sets 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Fix some 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  is an open cover of 
 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is compact, this cover has a finite subcover; namely, there is a finite 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Set 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
 
  is finite, 
 
 
 
  is open. Also 
 
 
 
  is open. Moreover, the construction of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
 
 . We now essentially repeat the argument to drop the dependence on 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a finite subset such that 
 
 
 
  and set 
 
 
 
 . It then follows by the above reasoning that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are open, which completes the proof.
See also

Tychonoff theorem
Compact space
Product topology

References



"
Category:Topology Category:Lemmas Category:Articles containing proofs


