   Sfermion      Sfermion   In particle physics , a sfermion is the spin -0 superpartner particle (or sparticle ) of its associated fermion . In supersymmetric extensions to the Standard Model (SM) each particle has a superpartner with spin that differs by    1  /  2      1  2    {1}/{2}   . Fermions in the SM have spin-    1  /  2      1  2    {1}/{2}    and therefore sfermions have spin 0.  In general the name sfermions is formed by prefixing an 's' to the name of its superpartner, denoting that it is a s calar particle with spin 0. For instance, the electron 's superpartner is the selectron and the top quark 's superpartner is the stop squark .  One corollary from supersymmetry is that sparticles have the same gauge numbers as their SM partners. This means that sparticle–particle pairs have the same color charge , weak isospin charge, and hypercharge (and consequently electric charge ). Unbroken supersymmetry also implies that sparticle–particle pairs have the same mass. This is evidently not the case, since these sparticles would have already been detected. Thus, sparticles must have different masses from the particle partners and supersymmetry is said to be broken.  Fundamental sfermions  Squarks  Squarks are the superpartners of quarks . These include the sup squark, sdown squark, scharm squark, sstrange squark, stop squark , and sbottom squark.      Squarks     Squark     First generation     Sup squark     Sdown squark     Second generation     Scharm squark     Sstrange squark     Third generation     Stop squark     Sbottom squark       Sleptons  Sleptons are the superpartners of leptons . These include the selectron, smuon, stau, and the sneutrinos.      Sleptons     Slepton     First generation     Selectron     Selectron sneutrino     Second generation     Smuon     Smuon sneutrino     Third generation     Stau     Stau sneutrino       See also   Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM)   References     "  Category:Bosons  Category:Supersymmetry  Category:Hypothetical elementary particles   