   4-Hydroxybenzoic acid      4-Hydroxybenzoic acid   4-Hydroxybenzoic acid is a monohydroxybenzoic acid , a phenolic derivative of benzoic acid. It is a white crystalline solid that is slightly soluble in water and chloroform but more soluble in polar organic solvents such as alcohols and acetone . 4-Hydroxybenzoic acid is primarily known as the basis for the preparation of its esters , known as parabens , which are used as preservatives in cosmetics and some ophthalmic solutions. It is isomeric with 2-hydroxybenzoic acid, known as salicylic acid , a precursor to aspirin .  Natural occurrences  It is found in plants of the genus Vitex such as V. agnus-castus or V. negundo , and in Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort). It is also found in Spongiochloris spongiosa , a freshwater green alga.  The compound is also found in Ganoderma lucidum , a medicinal mushroom with the longest record of use.  Cryptanaerobacter phenolicus is a bacterium species that produces benzoate from phenol via 4-hydroxybenzoate. 1  Occurrences in food  4-Hydroxybenzoic acid can be found naturally in Cocos nucifera . 2 It is one of the main catechins metabolites found in humans after consumption of green tea infusions. 3 It is also found in wine , 4 in vanilla , in Macrotyloma uniflorum (horse gram) and in Phyllanthus acidus (Otaheite gooseberry).  Açaí oil , obtained from the fruit of the açaí palm ( Euterpe oleracea ), is rich in p-hydroxybenzoic acid (892 ± 52 mg/kg). 5 It is also found in cloudy olive oil .  It is also found in the edible mushroom Russula virescens (green-cracking russula).  Related compounds  p -Hydroxybenzoic acid glucoside can be found in mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal roots of Norway spruces ( Picea abies ). 6  Violdelphin is an anthocyanin, a type of plant pigments, found in blue flowers and incorporating two p-hydroxy benzoic acid residues, one rutinoside and two glucosides associated with a delphinidin .  Agnuside is the ester of aucubin and p -hydroxybenzoic acid. 7  Metabolism  Biosynthesis  Chorismate lyase is an enzyme that transforms chorismate into 4-hydroxybenzoate and pyruvate. This enzyme catalyses the first step in ubiquinone biosynthesis in Escherichia coli and other Gram-negative bacteria.  Benzoate 4-monooxygenase is an enzyme that utilizes benzoate , NADPH, H + and O 2 to produce 4-hydroxybenzoate, NADP + and H 2 O. This enzyme can be found in Aspergillus niger .  As an intermediate  The enzyme 4-methoxybenzoate monooxygenase (O-demethylating) transforms 4-methoxybenzoate , an electron acceptor AH 2 and O 2 into 4-hydroxybenzoate, formaldehyde, the reduction product A and H 2 O. This enzyme participates in 2,4-dichlorobenzoate degradation in Pseudomonas putida .  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde dehydrogenase uses 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde , NAD + and H 2 O to produce 4-hydroxybenzoate, NADH and H + . This enzyme participates in toluene and xylene degradation in bacteria such as Pseudomonas mendocina . It is also found in carrots ( Daucus carota ).  The enzyme that 2,4'-dihydroxyacetophenone dioxygenase transforms 2,4'-dihydroxyacetophenone and O 2 into 4-hydroxybenzoate and formate . This enzyme participates in bisphenol A degradation. It can be found in Alcaligenes sp .  The enzyme 4-chlorobenzoate dehalogenase uses 4-chlorobenzoate and H 2 O to produce 4-hydroxybenzoate and chloride . It can be found in pseudomonas sp''.  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA thioesterase utilizes 4-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA and H 2 O to produce 4-hydroxybenzoate and CoA. This enzyme participates in 2,4-dichlorobenzoate degradation. It can be found in Pseudomonas sp .  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate nonaprenyltransferase uses nonaisoprenol diphosphate and 4-hydroxybenzoate to produce diphosphate and nonaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate . This enzyme participates in ubiquinone biosynthesis.  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate geranyltransferase utilizes geranyl diphosphate and 4-hydroxybenzoate to produce 3-geranyl-4-hydroxybenzoate and diphosphate. Biosynthetically, alkannin is produced in plants from the intermediates 4-hydroxybenzoic acid and geranyl pyrophosphate . This enzyme is involved in shikonin biosynthesis. It can be found in Lithospermum erythrorhizon .  The enzyme 3-hydroxybenzoate—CoA ligase uses ATP, 3-hydroxybenzoate and CoA to produce AMP, diphosphate and 3-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA . The enzyme works equally well with 4-hydroxybenzoate. It can be found in Thauera aromatica .  Biodegradation  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate 1-hydroxylase transforms 4-hydroxybenzoate, NAD(P)H, 2 H + and O 2 into hydroquinone , NAD(P) + , H 2 O and CO 2 . This enzyme participates in 2,4-dichlorobenzoate degradation. It can be found in Candida parapsilosis .  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate 3-monooxygenase transforms 4-hydroxybenzoate, NADPH, H + and O 2 into protocatechuate , NADP + and H 2 O. This enzyme participates in benzoate degradation via hydroxylation and 2,4-dichlorobenzoate degradation. It can be found in Pseudomonas putida and Pseudomonas fluorescens .  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate 3-monooxygenase (NAD(P)H) utilizes 4-hydroxybenzoate, NADH, NADPH, H + and O 2 to produce 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate ( protocatechuic acid ), NAD + , NADP + and H 2 O. This enzyme participates in benzoate degradation via hydroxylation and 2,4-dichlorobenzoate degradation. It can be found in Corynebacterium cyclohexanicum and in Pseudomonas sp .  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate decarboxylase uses 4-hydroxybenzoate to produce phenol and CO 2 . This enzyme participates in benzoate degradation via coa ligation. It can be found in Klebsiella aerogenes ( Aerobacter aerogenes ).  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate—CoA ligase transforms ATP, 4-hydroxybenzoate and CoA to produce AMP, diphosphate and 4-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA . This enzyme participates in benzoate degradation via coa ligation. It can be found in Rhodopseudomonas palustris .  Lecythophora hoffmannii is a plant pathogen that commonly inhabits fertile soil. It is known to metabolize aromatic compounds of low molecular weight, such as p-hydroxybenzoic acid.  Glycosylation  The enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoate 4-O-beta-D-glucosyltransferase transforms UDP-glucose and 4-hydroxybenzoate into UDP and 4-(beta-D-glucosyloxy)benzoate . It can be found in the pollen of Pinus densiflora .  Chemistry  The Hammett equation describes a linear free-energy relationship relating reaction rates and equilibrium constants for many reactions involving benzoic acid derivatives with meta- and para-substituents.  Chemical production  4-Hydroxybenzoic acid is produced commercially from potassium phenoxide and carbon dioxide in the Kolbe-Schmitt reaction . 8 It can also be produced in the laboratory by heating potassium salicylate with potassium carbonate to 240 °C, followed by treating with acid. 9  Chemical reactions  4-Hydroxybenzoic acid has about one tenth the acidity of benzoic acid , having an acid dissociation constant  K a = 3.3 x 10 −5 M at 19 °C. Its acid dissociation follows this equation:   HOC 6 H 4 CO 2 H    ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   HOC 6 H 4 CO 2 − + H +    Chemical use  Vectran is a manufactured fiber, spun from a liquid crystal polymer . Chemically it is an aromatic polyester produced by the polycondensation of 4-hydroxybenzoic acid and 6-hydroxynaphthalene-2-carboxylic acid .  4,4'-Dihydroxybenzophenone is generally prepared by the rearrangement of p-hydroxyphenylbenzoate. Alternatively, p-hydroxybenzoic acid can be converted to p-acetoxybenzoyl chloride . This acid chloride reacts with phenol to give, after deacetylation, 4,4'-dihydroxybenzophenone.  Safety  4-Hydroxybenzoic acid is a popular antioxidant in part because of its low toxicity. The  is 2200 mg/kg in mice (oral). 10  See also   Phenolic content in tea  Phenolic content in wine   References  External links  "  Category:Monomers  Category:Monohydroxybenzoic acids  Category:Phenolic human metabolites     Cryptanaerobacter phenolicus gen. nov., sp. nov., an anaerobe that transforms phenol into benzoate via 4-hydroxybenzoate. Pierre Juteau, Valérie Côté, Marie-France Duckett, Réjean Beaudet, François Lépine, Richard Villemur and Jean-Guy Bisaillon, IJSEM, January 2005, vol. 55, no. 1, pages 245-250, ↩  Profiling C6–C3 and C6–C1 phenolic metabolites in Cocos nucifera. Gargi Dey, Moumita Chakraborty and Adinpunya Mitra, Journal of Plant Physiology, Volume 162, Issue 4, 22 April 2005, Pages 375-381 ↩  Catechin metabolites after intake of green tea infusions. P. G. Pietta, P. Simonetti, C. Gardana, A. Brusamolino, P. Morazzoni and E. Bombardelli, BioFactors, 1998, Volume 8, Issue 1-2, pp. 111–118, ↩  Comparison of Phenolic Acids and Flavan-3-ols During Wine Fermentation of Grapes with Different Harvest Times. Rong-Rong Tian, Qiu-Hong Pan, Ji-Cheng Zhan, Jing-Ming Li, Si-Bao Wan, Qing-Hua Zhang and Wei-Dong Huang, Molecules, 2009, 14, pages 827-838, ↩  ↩  Phenolics of mycorrhizas and non-mycorrhizal roots of Norway spruce. Babette Münzenberger, Jürgen Heilemann, Dieter Strack, Ingrid Kottke and Franz Oberwinkler, Planta, Volume 182, Number 1, pages 142-148, ↩  ↩  Edwin Ritzer and Rudolf Sundermann "Hydroxycarboxylic Acids, Aromatic" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry 2002, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. ↩  ↩  ↩     