


Lomo LC-A




Lomo LC-A

The LOMO LC-A (Lomo Kompakt Automat) is a fixed lens, 35 mm film, leaf shutter, zone focus, compact camera introduced in 1984. The design is based on the Cosina CX-2.
In 2005, production of the original Lomo LC-A was discontinued. Its replacement, the LC-A+, was introduced in 2006 and production moved to China. The LC-A+ featured the original LC-A lens manufactured by LOMO in Russia. This changed in 2007 and lenses on subsequent models have been made in China.1 Some LC-As were sold badged as Zenith,2 this label was only a sticker underneath the lens. Zenit (Zenith in some countries) is a trademark of KMZ (Krasnogorsk Mechanical Works).
Operation
The only automatic function offered by the LC-A is exposure. Film loading, winding, rewinding, focus are accomplished manually. Aperture can also be set manually, the shutter speed being fixed at 
 
 
 
  s (this ability was removed from the LC-A+).
Exposure is completely automatic when the camera is set to "A"; the shutter speeds range from 2 minutes to 
 
 
 
  s. The aperture range is f/2.8 to f/16. The automatic exposure system compensates for changes in light levels after the shutter is opened by increasing or decreasing the shutter speed. This, in conjunction with the rear-curtain flash-sync, 1 results in interesting effects with flash photography in low ambient light levels.
The lens is focused by selecting one of four zones (0.8 m, 1.5 m, 3 m or ∞). Older versions of the camera feature viewfinder icons showing the currently selected focus zone, a feature omitted from later models.
A battery checking feature uses a LED inside the viewfinder; if there is sufficient power this illuminates whenever the shutter release button is lightly depressed. Another viewfinder LED illuminates whenever the camera's chosen shutter speed is below 
 
 
 
  s.
(Figure)
Lomo LC-A Viewfinder

Body design
The size and shape is very close to that of the Cosina CX-2, the main difference being that the lens bezel is fixed (unlike the rotating one of the CX-2). Power is supplied by three 1.5v Silver Oxide cells (S76, LR44).
See also

Lomography
Cosina
Minox, especially Minox 35 mm compact cameras
Olympus XA

References
External links

LOMO PLC
Lomographic Society International
LC-A manual
Another LC-A manual
The LCA story
We use Film

"
Category:Cameras



LC-A+ history
http://35mm-compact.com/images/lomo-lca.jpg




