


Cross-multiplication




Cross-multiplication

In mathematics, specifically in elementary arithmetic and elementary algebra, given an equation between two fractions or rational expressions, one can cross-multiply to simplify the equation or determine the value of a variable.
Given an equation like:



(where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not zero), one can cross-multiply to get:



In Euclidean geometry the same calculation can be achieved by considering the ratios as those of similar triangles.
Procedure
In practice, the method of cross-multiplying means that we multiply the numerator of each (or one) side by the denominator of the other side, effectively crossing the terms over.



The mathematical justification for the method is from the following longer mathematical procedure. If we start with the basic equation:



we can multiply the terms on each side by the same number and the terms will remain equal. Therefore, if we multiply the fraction on each side by the product of the denominators of both sides—
 
 
 
 —we get:



We can reduce the fractions to lowest terms by noting that the two occurrences of 
 
 
 
  on the left-hand side cancel, as do the two occurrences of 
 
 
 
  on the right-hand side, leaving:



and we can divide both sides of the equation by any of the elements—in this case we will use 
 
 
 
 —getting:



Another justification of cross-multiplication is as follows. Starting with the given equation:



multiply by 
 
 
 
  on the left and by 
 
 
 
  on the right, getting:



and so:



Cancel the common denominator 
 
 
 
 , leaving:



Each step in these procedures is based on a single, fundamental property of equations. Cross-multiplication is a shortcut, an easily understandable procedure that can be taught to students.
Use
This is a common procedure in mathematics, used to reduce fractions or calculate a value for a given variable in a fraction. If we have an equation like this, where 
 
 
 
  is a variable we are interested in solving for:



we can use cross multiplication to determine that:



For example, let's say that we want to know how far a car will get in 7 hours, if we happen to know that its speed is constant and that it already travelled 90 miles in the last 3 hours. Converting the word problem into ratios we get



Cross-multiplying yields:



and so:



Note that even simple equations like this:



are solved using cross multiplication, since the missing 
 
 
 
  term is implicitly equal to 1:



Any equation containing fractions or rational expressions can be simplified by multiplying both sides by the least common denominator. This step is called clearing fractions.
Rule of Three
The Rule of Three1 was a shorthand version for a particular form of cross-multiplication, often taught to students by rote. This rule was already known to Hebrews by the 15th century BCE as it is a special case of the Kal va-chomer (קל וחומר). It was also known by Indian (Vedic) mathematicians in the 6th century BCE and Chinese mathematicians prior to the 7th century CE,2 though it was not used in Europe until much later. The Rule of Three gained notoriety for being particularly difficult to explain: see Cocker's Arithmetick for an example of how the premier textbook in the 17th century approached the subject.
For an equation of the form:



where the variable to be evaluated is in the right-hand denominator, the Rule of Three states that:



In this context, 
 
 
 
  is referred to as the extreme of the proportion, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called the means.
For example, Cocker's Arithmetick introduces its discussion of the Rule of Three3 with the problem, "If 4 Yards of Cloth cost 12 Shillings, what will 6 Yards cost at that Rate?" The Rule of Three gives the answer to this problem directly; whereas in modern arithmetic, we would solve it by introducing a variable 
 
 
 
  to stand for the cost of 6 yards of cloth, writing down the equation:



and then using cross-multiplication to calculate 
 
 
 
 :



References


Further reading

'Dr Math', Rule of Three
'Dr Math', Abraham Lincoln and the Rule of Three
Pike's System of arithmetick abridged: designed to facilitate the study of the science of numbers, comprehending the most perspicuous and accurate rules, illustrated by useful examples: to which are added appropriate questions, for the examination of scholars, and a short system of book-keeping., 1827 - facsimile of the relevant section
Hersee J, Multiplication is vexation - an article tracing the history of the rule from 1781
The Rule of Three as applied by Michael of Rhodes in the fifteenth century
The Rule Of Three in Mother Goose
Rudyard Kipling: You can work it out by Fractions or by simple Rule of Three, But the way of Tweedle-dum is not the way of Tweedle-dee.

"
Category:Fractions (mathematics)



This was sometimes also referred to as the Golden Rule, though that usage is rare compared to other uses of Golden Rule. See 






