


Oscillatory integral




Oscillatory integral

In mathematical analysis an oscillatory integral is a type of distribution. Oscillatory integrals make rigorous many arguments that, on a naive level, appear to use divergent integrals. It is possible to represent approximate solution operators for many differential equations as oscillatory integrals.
Definition
An oscillatory integral 
 
 
 
  is written formally as



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  are functions defined on 
 
 
 
  with the following properties.

1) The function 
 
 
 
  is real valued, positive homogeneous of degree 1, and infinitely differentiable away from 
 
 
 
 . Also, we assume that 
 
 
 
  does not have any critical points on the support of 
 
 
 
 
 . Such a function, 
 
 
 
  is usually called a phase function. In some contexts more general functions are considered, and still referred to as phase functions.
 


2) The function 
 
 
 
  belongs to one of the symbol classes

 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . Intuitively, these symbol classes generalize the notion of positively homogeneous functions of degree 
 
 
 
 
 . As with the phase function 
 
 
 
 , in some cases the function 
 
 
 
  is taken to be in more general, or just different, classes.
 

When 
 
 
 
  the formal integral defining 
 
 
 
  converges for all 
 
 
 
 
  and there is no need for any further discussion of the definition of 
 
 
 
 . However, when 
 
 
 
  the oscillatory integral is still defined as a distribution on 
 
 
 
  even though the integral may not converge. In this case the distribution 
 
 
 
  is defined by using the fact that 
 
 
 
 
  may be approximated by functions that have exponential decay in 
 
 
 
 . One possible way to do this is by setting



where the limit is taken in the sense of tempered distributions. Using integration by parts it is possible to show that this limit is well defined, and that there exists a differential operator

 
  such that the resulting distribution 
 
 
 
  acting on any 
 
 
 
 
  in the Schwartz space is given by



where this integral converges absolutely. The operator 
 
 
 
  is not uniquely defined, but can be chosen in such a way that depends only on the phase function 
 
 
 
 , the order 
 
 
 
  of the symbol 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . In fact, given any integer 
 
 
 
  it is possible to find an operator 
 
 
 
  so that the integrand above is bounded by 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
  sufficiently large. This is the main purpose of the definition of the symbol classes.
Examples
Many familiar distributions can be written as oscillatory integrals.

1) The Fourier inversion theorem implies that the delta function, 
 
 
 
  is equal to
 










If we apply the first method of defining this oscillatory integral from above, as well as the Fourier transform of the Gaussian, we obtain a well known sequence of functions which approximate the delta function:
 










An operator 
 
 
 
  in this case is given for example by
 










where 
 
 
 
  is the Laplacian with respect to the 
 
 
 
  variables, and 
 
 
 
  is any integer greater than 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, with this 
 
 
 
 
  we have
 










and this integral converges absolutely.
 


2) The Schwartz kernel of any differential operator can be written as an oscillatory integral. Indeed if
 










where 
 
 
 
 , then the kernel of 
 
 
 
  is given by
 









Relation to Lagrangian distributions
Any Lagrangian distribution can be represented locally by oscillatory integrals (see ). Conversely any oscillatory integral is a Lagrangian distribution. This gives a precise description of the types of distributions which may be represented as oscillatory integrals.
See also

Riemann–Lebesgue lemma
van der Corput lemma

References






"
Category:Mathematical analysis


