


Empirical process




Empirical process

In probability theory, an empirical process is a stochastic process that describes the proportion of objects in a system in a given state. For a process in a discrete state space a population continuous time Markov chain12 or Markov population model3 is a process which counts the number of objects in a given state (without rescaling). In mean field theory, limit theorems (as the number of objects becomes large) are considered and generalise the central limit theorem for empirical measures. Applications of the theory of empirical processes arise in non-parametric statistics.4
Definition
For X1, X2, ... Xn independent and identically-distributed random variables in R with common cumulative distribution function F(x), the empirical distribution function is defined by


 
  where IC is the indicator function of the set C.
For every (fixed) x, Fn(x) is a sequence of random variables which converge to F(x) almost surely by the strong law of large numbers. That is, Fn converges to F pointwise. Glivenko and Cantelli strengthened this result by proving uniform convergence of Fn to F by the Glivenko–Cantelli theorem.5
A centered and scaled version of the empirical measure is the signed measure


 
  It induces a map on measurable functions f given by



By the central limit theorem, 
 
 
converges in distribution to a normal random variable N(0, P(A)(1 − P(A))) for fixed measurable set A. Similarly, for a fixed function f, 
 
 
 
  converges in distribution to a normal random variable 
 
 
 
 , provided that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  exist.
Definition


 
  is called an empirical process indexed by 
 
 
 
 , a collection of measurable subsets of S.


 
  is called an empirical process indexed by 
 
 
 
 , a collection of measurable functions from S to 
 
 
 
 .
A significant result in the area of empirical processes is Donsker's theorem. It has led to a study of Donsker classes: sets of functions with the useful property that empirical processes indexed by these classes converge weakly to a certain Gaussian process. While it can be shown that Donsker classes are Glivenko–Cantelli classes, the converse is not true in general.
Example
As an example, consider empirical distribution functions. For real-valued iid random variables X1, X2, ..., Xn they are given by



In this case, empirical processes are indexed by a class 
 
 
 
  It has been shown that 
 
 
 
  is a Donsker class, in particular,


 
  converges weakly in 
 
 
 
  to a Brownian bridge B(F(x)) .
See also

Khmaladze transformation
Weak convergence of measures
Glivenko–Cantelli theorem

References
Further reading










External links

Empirical Processes: Theory and Applications, by David Pollard, a textbook available online.
Introduction to Empirical Processes and Semiparametric Inference, by Michael Kosorok, another textbook available online.

"
Category:Probability theory   Category:Non-parametric statistics












