


Moment map




Moment map

In mathematics, specifically in symplectic geometry, the momentum map (or moment map) is a tool associated with a Hamiltonian action of a Lie group on a symplectic manifold, used to construct conserved quantities for the action. The moment map generalizes the classical notions of linear and angular momentum. It is an essential ingredient in various constructions of symplectic manifolds, including symplectic (Marsden–Weinstein) quotients, discussed below, and symplectic cuts and sums.
Formal definition
Let M be a manifold with symplectic form ω. Suppose that a Lie group G acts on M via symplectomorphisms (that is, the action of each g in G preserves ω). Let 
 
 
 
  be the Lie algebra of G, 
 
 
 
  its dual, and



the pairing between the two. Any ξ in 
 
 
 
  induces a vector field ρ(ξ) on M describing the infinitesimal action of ξ. To be precise, at a point x in M the vector 
 
 
 
  is



where 
 
 
 
  is the exponential map and 
 
 
 
  denotes the G-action on M.1 Let 
 
 
 
  denote the contraction of this vector field with ω. Because G acts by symplectomorphisms, it follows that 
 
 
 
  is closed for all ξ in 
 
 
 
 .
A moment map for the G-action on (M, ω) is a map 
 
 
 
  such that



for all ξ in 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  is the function from M to R defined by 
 
 
 
 . The moment map is uniquely defined up to an additive constant of integration.
A moment map is often also required to be G-equivariant, where G acts on 
 
 
 
  via the coadjoint action. If the group is compact or semisimple, then the constant of integration can always be chosen to make the moment map coadjoint equivariant; however in general the coadjoint action must be modified to make the map equivariant (this is the case for example for the Euclidean group). The modification is by a 1-cocycle on the group with values in 
 
 
 
 , as first described by Souriau (1970).
Hamiltonian group actions
The definition of the moment map requires 
 
 
 
  to be closed. In practice it is useful to make an even stronger assumption. The G-action is said to be Hamiltonian if and only if the following conditions hold. First, for every ξ in 
 
 
 
  the one-form 
 
 
 
  is exact, meaning that it equals 
 
 
 
  for some smooth function



If this holds, then one may choose the 
 
 
 
  to make the map 
 
 
 
  linear. The second requirement for the G-action to be Hamiltonian is that the map 
 
 
 
  be a Lie algebra homomorphism from 
 
 
 
  to the algebra of smooth functions on M under the Poisson bracket.
If the action of G on (M, ω) is Hamiltonian in this sense, then a moment map is a map 
 
 
 
  such that writing 
 
 
 
  defines a Lie algebra homomorphism 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  is the vector field of the Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 , defined by



Examples of moment maps
In the case of a Hamiltonian action of the circle 
 
 
 
 , the Lie algebra dual 
 
 
 
  is naturally identified with 
 
 
 
 , and the moment map is simply the Hamiltonian function that generates the circle action.
Another classical case occurs when 
 
 
 
  is the cotangent bundle of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the Euclidean group generated by rotations and translations. That is, 
 
 
 
  is a six-dimensional group, the semidirect product of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The six components of the moment map are then the three angular momenta and the three linear momenta.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth manifold and let 
 
 
 
  be its cotangent bundle, with projection map 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the tautological 1-form on 
 
 
 
 . Suppose 
 
 
 
  acts on 
 
 
 
 . The induced action of 
 
 
 
  on the symplectic manifold 
 
 
 
 , given by 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  is Hamiltonian with moment map 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the contraction of the vector field 
 
 
 
 , the infinitesimal action of 
 
 
 
 , with the 1-form

 
 .
The facts mentioned below may be used to generate more examples of moment maps.
Some facts about moment maps
Let 
 
 
 
  be Lie groups with Lie algebras 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
1. Let 
 
 
 
  be a coadjoint orbit. Then there exists a unique symplectic structure on 
 
 
 
  such that inclusion map 
 
 
 
  is a moment map.
2. Let 
 
 
 
  act on a symplectic manifold 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  a moment map for the action, and 
 
 
 
  be a Lie group homomorphism, inducing an action of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . Then the action of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is also Hamiltonian, with moment map given by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the dual map to 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  denotes the identity element of 
 
 
 
 ). A case of special interest is when 
 
 
 
  is a Lie subgroup of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the inclusion map.
3. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 -manifold and 
 
 
 
  a Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 -manifold. Then the natural action of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is Hamiltonian, with moment map the direct sum of the two moment maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes the projection map.
4. Let 
 
 
 
  be a Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 -manifold, and 
 
 
 
  a submanifold of 
 
 
 
  invariant under 
 
 
 
  such that the restriction of the symplectic form on 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  is non-degenerate. This imparts a symplectic structure to 
 
 
 
  in a natural way. Then the action of 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is also Hamiltonian, with moment map the composition of the inclusion map with 
 
 
 
 's moment map.
Symplectic quotients
Suppose that the action of a compact Lie group G on the symplectic manifold (M, ω) is Hamiltonian, as defined above, with moment map 
 
 
 
 . From the Hamiltonian condition it follows that 
 
 
 
  is invariant under G.
Assume now that 0 is a regular value of μ and that G acts freely and properly on 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  and its quotient

 
  are both manifolds. The quotient inherits a symplectic form from M; that is, there is a unique symplectic form on the quotient whose pullback to 
 
 
 
  equals the restriction of ω to 
 
 
 
 . Thus the quotient is a symplectic manifold, called the Marsden–Weinstein quotient, symplectic quotient or symplectic reduction of M by G and is denoted 
 
 
 
 . Its dimension equals the dimension of M minus twice the dimension of G.
See also: GIT quotient, Quantization commutes with reduction.
See also

Poisson-Lie group
Toric manifold
Geometric Mechanics
Kirwan map

Notes
References

J.-M. Souriau, Structure des systèmes dynamiques, Maîtrises de mathématiques, Dunod, Paris, 1970. ISSN 0750-2435.
S. K. Donaldson and P. B. Kronheimer, The Geometry of Four-Manifolds, Oxford Science Publications, 1990. ISBN 0-19-850269-9.
Dusa McDuff and Dietmar Salamon, Introduction to Symplectic Topology, Oxford Science Publications, 1998. ISBN 0-19-850451-9.



"
Category:Symplectic geometry Category:Hamiltonian mechanics Category:Group actions



The vector field ρ(ξ) is called sometimes the Killing vector field relative to the action of the one-parameter subgroup generated by ξ. See, for instance, ↩




