


Pseudo algebraically closed field




Pseudo algebraically closed field

In mathematics, a field

 
  is pseudo algebraically closed if it satisfies certain properties which hold for any algebraically closed field. The concept was introduced by James Ax in 1967.1
Formulation
A field K is pseudo algebraically closed (usually abbreviated by PAC2) if one of the following equivalent conditions holds:

Each absolutely irreducible variety 
 
 
 
  defined over 
 
 
 
  has a 
 
 
 
 
 -rational point.
For each absolutely irreducible polynomial 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and for each nonzero 
 
 
 
  there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Each absolutely irreducible polynomial 
 
 
 
  has infinitely many 
 
 
 
 -rational points.
If 
 
 
 
  is a finitely generated integral domain over 
 
 
 
 
  with quotient field which is regular over 
 
 
 
 , then there exist a homomorphism 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 


Examples

Algebraically closed fields and separably closed fields are always PAC.


Pseudo-finite fields and hyper-finite fields are PAC.


A non-principal ultraproduct of distinct finite fields is (pseudo-finite and hence3) PAC.4 Ax deduces this from the Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields.5


Infinite algebraic extensions of finite fields are PAC.6


The PAC Nullstellensatz. The absolute Galois group

 
 
  of a field 
 
 
 
  is profinite, hence compact, and hence equipped with a normalized Haar measure. Let 
 
 
 
  be a countable Hilbertian field and let 
 
 
 
  be a positive integer. Then for almost all 
 
 
 
 -tuple 
 
 
 
 
 , the fixed field of the subgroup generated by the automorphisms is PAC. Here the phrase "almost all" means "all but a set of measure zero".7 (This result is a consequence of Hilbert's irreducibility theorem.)


Let K be the maximal totally real Galois extension of the rational numbers and i the square root of -1. Then K(i) is PAC.

Properties

The Brauer group of a PAC field is trivial,8 as any Severi–Brauer variety has a rational point.9
The absolute Galois group of a PAC field is a projective profinite group; equivalently, it has cohomological dimension at most 1.10
A PAC field of characteristic zero is C1.11

References



"
Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Field theory



Fried & Jarden (2008) p.218

Fried & Jarden (2008) p.449
Fried & Jarden (2008) p.192

Fried & Jarden (2008) p.196
Fried & Jarden (2008) p.380
Fried & Jarden (2008) p.209

Fried & Jarden (2008) p.210
Fried & Jarden (2008) p.462




