


Yang–Baxter equation




Yang–Baxter equation

In physics, the Yang–Baxter equation (or star-triangle relation) is a consistency equation which was first introduced in the field of statistical mechanics. It depends on the idea that in some scattering situations, particles may preserve their momentum while changing their quantum internal states. It states that a matrix 
 
 
 
 , acting on two out of three objects, satisfies



In one dimensional quantum systems, 
 
 
 
  is the scattering matrix and if it satisfies the Yang–Baxter equation then the system is integrable. The Yang–Baxter equation also shows up when discussing knot theory and the braid groups where 
 
 
 
 
  corresponds to swapping two strands. Since one can swap three strands two different ways, the Yang–Baxter equation enforces that both paths are the same.
(Figure)
Illustration of Yang Baxter Equation

It takes its name from independent work of C. N. Yang from 1968, and R. J. Baxter from 1971.
Parameter-dependent Yang–Baxter equation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a unital associative algebra. The parameter-dependent Yang–Baxter equation is an equation for 
 
 
 
 , a parameter-dependent invertible element of the tensor product

 
  (here, 
 
 
 
  is the parameter, which usually ranges over real numbers ℝ in the case of an additive parameter, or over positive real numbers ℝ+ in the case of a multiplicative parameter). The Yang–Baxter equation is



for all values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , in the case of an additive parameter. At some value of the parameter 
 
 
 
  can turn into one dimensional projector, this gives rise to quantum determinant. For multiplicative parameter Yang–Baxter equation is



for all values of 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , for all values of the parameter 
 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are algebra morphisms determined by








 
  In some cases the determinant of 
 
 
 
  can vanish at specific values of the spectral parameter 
 
 
 
 . Some 
 
 
 
  matrices turn into one dimensional projector at 
 
 
 
 
 . In this case quantum determinant can be defined.
Parameter-independent Yang–Baxter equation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a unital associative algebra. The parameter-independent Yang–Baxter equation is an equation for 
 
 
 
 , an invertible element of the tensor product 
 
 
 
 . The Yang–Baxter equation is



where 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
Let 
 
 
 
  be a module of 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 
  be the linear map satisfying 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Then a representation of the braid group, 
 
 
 
 , can be constructed on 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . This representation can be used to determine quasi-invariants of braids, knots and links.
See also

Lie bialgebra
Yangian
Reidemeister move

References

H.-D. Doebner, J.-D. Hennig, eds, Quantum groups, Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Mathematical Physics, Arnold Sommerfeld Institute, Clausthal, FRG, 1989, Springer-Verlag Berlin, ISBN 3-540-53503-9.
Vyjayanthi Chari and Andrew Pressley, A Guide to Quantum Groups, (1994), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge ISBN 0-521-55884-0.
Jacques H.H. Perk and Helen Au-Yang, "Yang–Baxter Equations", (2006), .

External links



"
Category:Monoidal categories Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Equations of physics Category:Exactly solvable models Category:Conformal field theory


