


Musical isomorphism




Musical isomorphism

In mathematics, the musical isomorphism (or canonical isomorphism) is an isomorphism between the tangent bundle

 
  and the cotangent bundle  of a Riemannian manifold given by its metric. There are similar isomorphisms on symplectic manifolds. The term musical refers to the use of the symbols ♭ and ♯.1
It is also known as raising and lowering indices.
Discussion
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Riemannian manifold. Suppose is a local frame for the tangent bundle 
 
 
 
  with dual coframe  Then, locally, we may express the Riemannian metric (which is a 
 
 
 
 -covariant tensor field which is symmetric and positive-definite) as  gij dxi ⊗ dx j}} (where we employ the Einstein summation convention). Given a vector field  X i∂i}} we define its flat by



This is referred to as "lowering an index". Using the traditional diamond bracket notation for inner product defined by 
 
 
 
 , we obtain the somewhat more transparent relation



for all vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Alternatively, given a covector field  ωi dxi}} we define its sharp by



where  are the elements of the inverse matrix to . Taking the sharp of a covector field is referred to as "raising an index". In inner product notation, this reads



for 
 
 
 
  an arbitrary covector and 
 
 
 
  an arbitrary vector.
Through this construction we have two inverse isomorphisms



These are isomorphisms of vector bundles and hence we have, for each 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , inverse vector space isomorphisms between  and 
 
 
 
 .
The musical isomorphisms may also be extended to the bundles



It must be stated which index is to be raised or lowered. For instance, consider the 
 
 
 
  tensor field  Xij dxi ⊗ dx j}}. Raising the second index, we get the 
 
 
 
  tensor field



Trace of a tensor through a metric
Given a 
 
 
 
  tensor field  Xij dxi ⊗ dx j}}, we define the trace of 
 
 
 
  through the metric 
 
 
 
  by



Observe that the definition of trace is independent of the choice of index we raise since the metric tensor is symmetric.
See also

Duality (mathematics)
Raising and lowering indices
Bilinear products and dual spaces
Vector bundle
Flat (music) and Sharp (music) about the signs  and 

References
"
Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Symplectic geometry



http://mathoverflow.net/questions/69074/the-origin-of-the-musical-isomorphisms↩




