


Time dependent vector field




Time dependent vector field

In mathematics, a time dependent vector field is a construction in vector calculus which generalizes the concept of vector fields. It can be thought of as a vector field which moves as time passes. For every instant of time, it associates a vector to every point in a Euclidean space or in a manifold.
Definition
A time dependent vector field on a manifold M is a map from an open subset 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 












such that for every 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is an element of 
 
 
 
 .
For every 
 
 
 
  such that the set



is nonempty, 
 
 
 
  is a vector field in the usual sense defined on the open set 
 
 
 
 .
Associated differential equation
Given a time dependent vector field X on a manifold M, we can associate to it the following differential equation:



which is called nonautonomous by definition.
Integral curve
An integral curve of the equation above (also called an integral curve of X) is a map



such that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is an element of the domain of definition of X and


 
 .
Relationship with vector fields in the usual sense
A vector field in the usual sense can be thought of as a time dependent vector field defined on 
 
 
 
  even though its value on a point 
 
 
 
  does not depend on the component 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, given a time dependent vector field X defined on 
 
 
 
 , we can associate to it a vector field in the usual sense 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  such that the autonomous differential equation associated to 
 
 
 
  is essentially equivalent to the nonautonomous differential equation associated to X. It suffices to impose:



for each 
 
 
 
 , where we identify 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . We can also write it as:


 
 .
To each integral curve of X, we can associate one integral curve of 
 
 
 
 , and vice versa.
Flow
The flow of a time dependent vector field X, is the unique differentiable map



such that for every 
 
 
 
 ,



is the integral curve 
 
 
 
  of X that satisfies 
 
 
 
 .
Properties
We define 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 


If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 



 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a diffeomorphism with inverse

 
 .

Applications
Let X and Y be smooth time dependent vector fields and 
 
 
 
  the flow of X. The following identity can be proved:



Also, we can define time dependent tensor fields in an analogous way, and prove this similar identity, assuming that 
 
 
 
  is a smooth time dependent tensor field:



This last identity is useful to prove the Darboux theorem.
References

Lee, John M., Introduction to Smooth Manifolds, Springer-Verlag, New York (2003) ISBN 0-387-95495-3. Graduate-level textbook on smooth manifolds.

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Vector calculus


