


Diaeresis (diacritic)




Diaeresis (diacritic)

The diaeresis (, ; plural: diaereses), also spelled diæresis or dieresis and also known as the trema or the umlaut, is a diacritical mark that consists of two dots  placed over a letter, usually a vowel. When that letter is an i or a j, the diacritic replaces the tittle: ï.1
The diaeresis and the umlaut are diacritics marking two distinct phonological phenomena. The diaeresis represents the phenomenon also known as diaeresis or hiatus in which a vowel letter is not pronounced as part of a digraph or diphthong. The umlaut ( ), in contrast, indicates a sound shift. These two diacritics originated separately; the diaeresis is considerably older. Nevertheless, in modern computer systems using Unicode, the umlaut and diaeresis diacritics are identical, e.g.  represents both a-umlaut and a-diaeresis.
The same symbol is also used as a diacritic in other cases, distinct from both diaeresis and umlaut. For example, in Albanian, ë represents a schwa.
Names
The word diaeresis is from Greek diaíresis (), meaning "division", "separation", or "distinction".2
The word trema (plural: tremas or tremata), used in French linguistics and also classical scholarship, is from the Greek trēma () and means a "perforation", "orifice", or "pip" (as on dice),3 thus describing the form of the diacritic rather than its function.
Umlaut is the German name of the Germanic umlaut, a sound-law also known as i-mutation.
Diaeresis
The diaeresis indicates that two adjoining letters that would normally form a digraph and be pronounced as one are instead to be read as separate vowels in two syllables. The diaeresis indicates that a vowel should be pronounced apart from the letter that precedes it. For example, in the spelling coöperate, the diaeresis reminds the reader that the word has four syllables co-op-er-ate, not three, *coop-er-ate. In British English this usage has been obsolete for many years, and in US English, although it persisted for longer, it is also now considered archaic.4 Nevertheless, it is still used by the US magazine The New Yorker. In English language texts it is perhaps most familiar in the spellings naïve, Noël, and Chloë. Languages such as Dutch, Catalan, French, and Spanish make regular use of the diaeresis.
History
Greek alphabet
Two dots, called a trema, were used in the Hellenistic period on the letters ι and υ, most often at the beginning of a word, as in ϊδων, ϋιος, and ϋβριν, to separate them from a preceding vowel, as writing was scriptio continua, where spacing was not yet used as a word divider. (See Coptic alphabet, for example.) However, it was also used to indicate that a vowel formed its own syllable (in phonological hiatus), as in ηϋ and Αϊδι.56
In Modern Greek, αϊ and οϊ represent the diphthongs  and , and εϊ the disyllabic sequence , whereas αι, οι, and ει transcribe the simple vowels , , and . The diacritic can be the only one on a vowel, as in ακαδημαϊκός akadēmaïkos "academic", or in combination with an acute accent, as in πρωτεΐνη prōteïnē "protein".
Latin alphabet
The diaeresis was borrowed for this purpose in several languages of western and southern Europe, among them Occitan, Catalan, French, Dutch, Welsh, and (rarely) in English.
When a vowel in Greek was stressed, it did not assimilate to a preceding vowel but remained as a separate syllable. Such vowels were marked with an accent such as the acute, a tradition that has also been adopted by other languages, such as Spanish and Portuguese. For example, the Portuguese words saia  "skirt" and the imperfect saía  "I used to leave" differ in that the sequence  forms a diphthong in the former (synaeresis), but is a hiatus in the latter (diaeresis).
Hiatus
In Catalan, the digraphs ai, ei, oi, au, eu, and iu are normally read as diphthongs. To indicate exceptions to this rule (hiatus), a diaeresis mark is placed on the second vowel: without this the words raïm  ("grape") and diürn  ("diurnal") would be read * and *, respectively. The Occitan use of diaeresis is very similar to Catalan: ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou are diphthongs consisting of one syllable but aï, eï, oï, aü, eü, oü are groups consisting of two distinct syllables.
In Welsh, where the diaeresis appears, it is usually on the stressed vowel, and this is most often on the first of the two adjacent vowels; a typical example is copïo  (to copy), cf. mopio  (to mop). It is also used on the first of two vowels that would otherwise form a diphthong (crëir rather than creir) and on the first of three vowels to separate it from a following diphthong:crëwyd is pronounced kreh-oid rather than kreh-wid.
In Dutch, spellings such as coëfficiënt are necessary because the digraphs oe and ie normally represent the simple vowels  and , respectively. However, hyphenation is now preferred for compound words so that zeeëend (sea duck) is now spelled zee-eend.7
In German, diaeresis occurs in a few proper names, such as Ferdinand Piëch and Bernhard Hoëcker.
Non-silent vowels
As a further extension, some languages began to use a diaeresis whenever a vowel letter was to be pronounced separately. This included vowels that would otherwise form digraphs with consonants or simply be silent.
In the orthographies of Spanish, Catalan, French, Galician, and Occitan, the graphemes gu and qu normally represent a single sound,  or , before the front vowels e and i (or before nearly all vowels in Occitan). In the few exceptions where the u is pronounced, a diaeresis is added to it. Before the 1990 Orthographic Agreement, a diaeresis was also used in (mainly Brazilian) Portuguese in this manner, in words like sangüíneo  “sanguineous”. In French, in such cases the diaeresis is usually written over the following vowel.
Examples:

Spanish pingüino  "penguin"
Catalan aigües  "waters", qüestió  "matter, question"
Occitan lingüista  "linguist", aqüatic  "aquatic"
French aiguë or aigüe  "acute (fem.)" (note that the e is silent; without the diacritic, both it and the u would be silent)
Galician mingüei  "I shrank"
Luxembourgish chance  "opportunity", chancë  (before a consonant) "opportunities"
English Brontë  (see Brontë family)

This has been extended to Ganda, where a diaeresis separates y from n: anya , anÿa .
French
In French, some diphthongs that were written with pairs of vowel letters were later reduced to monophthongs, which led to an extension of the value of this diacritic. It often now indicates that the second vowel letter is to be pronounced separately from the first, rather than merge with it into a single sound. For example, the French words maïs  and naïve  would be pronounced  and , respectively, without the diaeresis mark, since the digraph ai is pronounced . The English spelling of Noël "Christmas" (French ) comes from this use. Ÿ occurs in French as a variant of ï in a few proper nouns, as in the name of the Parisian suburb of L'Haÿ-les-Roses .
The diaeresis is also used when a silent e is added to the sequence gu, to show that it is to be pronounced  rather than as a digraph for . For example, when the feminine -e is added to aigu  "sharp", the pronunciation does not change: aiguë . Similar is the feminine noun ciguë  "hemlock"; compare figue  "fig". In the ongoing French spelling reform of 1990, this was moved to the u (aigüe, cigüe), though the earlier orthography continues to be widely used. (In canoë  the e is not silent, and so is not affected by the spelling reform.)
In some names, a diaeresis is used to show what used to be two vowels in hiatus, although the second vowel has since fallen silent, as in Saint-Saëns  and de Staël .
English
The grave accent and the diaeresis are the only diacritics native to Modern English (apart from diacritics used in loanwords, such as the acute accent, the cedilla, or the tilde). The use of both, however, is considered to be largely archaic.89
The diaeresis mark is sometimes used in English personal first and last names to indicate that two adjacent vowels should be pronounced separately, rather than as a diphthong. Examples include the given names Chloë and Zoë, which otherwise might be pronounced with a silent e. To discourage a similar mispronunciation, the mark is also used in the surname Brontë. It may be used optionally for words that do not have a morphological break at the diaeresis point, such as naïve, Boötes, and Noël. However, it is far less commonly used in words such as coöperate and reënter except in a very few publications—notably The New Yorker.101112
Ÿ is sometimes used in transcribed Greek, where it represents the Greek letter υ (upsilon) in hiatus with α. For example, it can be seen in the transcription Artaÿctes of the Persian name  at the very end of Herodotus, or the name of Mount Taÿgetus on the southern Peloponnesus peninsula, which in modern Greek is spelled .
Umlaut
"Umlaut" refers to a historical sound shift in German.13 The German umlaut raises back vowels /a/, /o/ and /u/ to /e/, /ø/ and /y/, respectively. Affected vowels a, o and u in modern German orthography are written as ä, ö and ü, i.e. they are written with diacritical marks identical to the diaeresis mark. Therefore, in German (and in some languages influenced by German orthography), the name of the diacritical symbol is sometimes also given as umlaut.
History
(Figure)
New and old forms of umlaut

 German phonological umlaut is present in the Old High German period and continues to develop in Middle High German. From the Middle High German, it was sometimes denoted in written German by adding an e to the affected vowel, either after the vowel or, in small form, above it. This can still be seen in some names, e.g. Goethe, Goebbels, Staedtler.14
In blackletter handwriting as used in German manuscripts of the later Middle Ages, and also in many printed texts of the early modern period, the superscript  still had a form that would be recognisable to us as an , but in manuscript writing, umlauted vowels could be indicated by two dots since the late medieval period.
In the forms of handwriting that emerged in the early modern period (of which Sütterlin is the latest and best-known example) the letter  was composed of two short vertical lines very close together, and the superscript  looked like two tiny strokes. Even from the 16th century, the handwritten convention of indicating umlaut by two dots placed above the affected vowel is also found in printed texts.
In modern handwriting, the umlaut sometimes resembles a tilde, quotation mark, dash, miniature u or other small mark.
Unusual umlaut designs are sometimes also created for graphic design purposes, such as to fit an umlaut into tightly-spaced lines of text.15 This may include umlauts placed vertically or inside the body of the letter.161718
Printing conventions in German
When typing German, if umlaut letters are not available, it is usual to replace them with the underlying vowel followed by an . So, for example, "Schröder" becomes "Schroeder". As the pronunciation differs greatly between the normal letter and the umlaut, simply omitting the dots is incorrect. The result might often be a different word, as in schon 'already', schön 'beautiful'; schwul 'gay', schwül 'humid'; or a different grammatic form, e.g. Mutter 'mother', Mütter 'mothers'.
Despite this, the umlauted letters are not considered as separate letters of the alphabet proper in German, in contrast to other Germanic languages.
When alphabetically sorting German words, the umlaut is usually not distinguished from the underlying vowel, although if two words differ only by an umlaut, the umlauted one comes second, for example:

Schon
Schön
Schonen

There is a second system in limited use, mostly for sorting names (colloquially called "telephone directory sorting"), which treats ü like ue, and so on.

Schön
Schon
Schonen

Austrian telephone directories insert ö after oz.

Schon
Schonen
Schön

In Switzerland, capital umlauts are sometimes printed as digraphs, in other words, , , , instead of , ,  (see German alphabet for an elaboration.) This is because the Swiss typewriter keyboard contains the French accents on the same keys as the umlauts (selected by Shift). To write capital umlauts the ¨-key is pressed followed by the capital letter to which the umlaut should apply.
Borrowing of German umlaut notation
Some languages have borrowed some of the forms of the German letters Ä, Ö, or Ü, including Azerbaijani, Estonian, Finnish, Hungarian, Karelian, some of the Sami languages, Slovak, Swedish, and Turkish. This indicates sounds similar to the corresponding umlauted letters in German. In spoken Scandinavian languages the grammatical umlaut change is used (singular to plural, derivations etc.) but the character used differs between languages. In Finnish, a/ä and o/ö change systematically in suffixes according to the rules of vowel harmony. In Hungarian, where long vowels are indicated with an acute accent, the umlaut notation has been expanded with a version of the umlaut which looks like double acute accents, indicating a blend of umlaut and acute. Contrast: short ö; long ő. The Estonian alphabet has borrowed , , and  from German; Swedish and Finnish have  and ; and Slovak has . In Estonian, Swedish, Finnish, and Sami  and  denote  and , respectively. Hungarian has  and . The Slovak language uses the letter  to denote  (or a bit archaic but still correct ) – the sign is called dve bodky ("two dots"), and the full name of the letter ä is a s dvomi bodkami ("a with two dots"). In these languages, with the exception of Hungarian, the replacement rule for situations where the umlaut character is not available, is to simply use the underlying unaccented character instead. Hungarian follows the German rules and replaces  and  with  and  respectively – at least for telegrams and telex messages. The same rule is followed for the near-lookalikes  and .
In Luxembourgish (Lëtzebuergesch), the umlaut diacritic in  and  represents a stressed schwa. Since the Luxembourgish language uses the mark to show stress, it cannot be used to modify the u, which therefore has to be .
When Turkish switched from the Arabic to the Latin alphabet in 1928, it adopted a number of diacritics borrowed from various languages, including , which was taken from German (Turkey had a close relationship with Germany) and  from Swedish, which in turn had borrowed this symbol from German. These Turkish graphemes represent similar sounds to their values in German (see Turkish alphabet).
As the borrowed diacritic has lost its relationship to Germanic i-mutation, they are in some languages considered independent graphemes, and cannot be replaced with , , or  as in German. In Estonian and Finnish, for example, these latter diphthongs have independent meanings. Even some Germanic languages, such as Swedish (which does have a transformation analogous to the German umlaut, called omljud), treat them always as independent letters. In collation, this means they have their own positions in the alphabet, for example at the end ("A–Ö" or "A–Ü", not "A–Z") as in Swedish, Estonian and Finnish, which means that the dictionary order is different from German. The transformations ä → ae and ö → oe can therefore be considered less appropriate for these languages, although Swedish passports use the transformation to render ö and ä (and å as aa) in the machine-readable zone. In contexts of technological limitation e.g. in English based systems, Swedes can either be forced to omit the diacritics or use the two letter system.
When typing in Norwegian, the letters Æ and Ø might be replaced with Ä and Ö respectively if the former are not available. If ä is not available either, it is appropriate to use ae. The same goes for ö and oe. While ae has a great resemblance to the letter æ and therefore does not impede legibility, the digraph oe is likely to reduce the legibility of a Norwegian text. This especially applies to the digraph øy, which would be rendered in the more cryptic form oey. Also in Danish, Ö has been used in place of Ø in some older texts and to distinguish between open and closed ö-sounds and when confusion with other symbols could occur, e.g. on maps. The Danish/Norwegian Ø is like the German Ö a development of OE, to be compared with the French Œ.
Early Volapük used Fraktur a, o and u as different from Antiqua ones. Later, the Fraktur forms were replaced with umlauted vowels.
The usage of umlaut-like diacritic vowels, particularly ü, occurs in the transcription of languages that do not use the Roman alphabet, such as Chinese. For example, 女 (female) is transcribed as nǚ in proper Mandarin Chinese pinyin, while nv is sometimes used as a replacement for convenience since the letter v is not used in pinyin. Tibetan pinyin uses ä, ö, ü with approximately their German values.
The Cyrillic letters ӓ, ӧ, ӱ are used in Mari, Khanty, and other languages for approximately , , and . These directly parallel the German umlaut ä, ö, ü. Other vowels using a double dot to modify their values in various minority languages of Russia are ӛ, ӫ, and ӹ.
Use of the umlaut for special effect
The umlaut diacritic can be used in "sensational spellings" or foreign branding, for example in advertising, or for other special effects. Häagen-Dazs is an example of such usage.
Other uses
A double dot is also used as a diacritic in cases where it functions as neither a diaeresis nor an umlaut. In the International Phonetic Alphabet, a double dot is used for a centralized vowel, a situation more similar to umlaut than to diaeresis. In other languages it is used for vowel length, nasalization, tone, and various other uses where diaeresis or umlaut was available typographically.
Vowels

In Albanian and Kashubian,  represents a schwa [ə].
In Aymara, a double dot is used on    for vowel length.
In the Basque dialect of Soule,  represents another vowel —the main phonetic characteristic of those areas—, pronounced as in French "u" or German "ü".
In Ligurian official orthography,  is used to represent the sound .
In Māori a diaeresis (e.g. Mäori) was often used on computers in the past instead of the macron to indicate long vowels, as the diaeresis was relatively easy to produce on many systems, and the macron difficult or impossible.1920
In Seneca,   are nasal vowels, though  is , as in German umlaut.
In Vurës (Vanuatu),   encode respectively  and .
In the Pahawh Hmong script, a double dot is used as one of several tone marks.
The double dot was used in the early Cyrillic alphabet, which was used to write Old Church Slavonic. The modern Cyrillic Belarusian and Russian alphabets include the letter yo , although replacing it with the letter  without the diacritic is allowed in Russian unless doing so would create ambiguity. Since the 1870s, the letter yi (Ї, ї) has been used in the Ukrainian alphabet for iotated ; plain і is not iotated . In Udmurt, ӥ is used for uniotated , with и for iotated .
The form ÿ is common in Dutch handwriting and also occasionally used in printed text – but is a form of the digraph "ij" rather than a modification of the letter "y".
Komi language uses  (Cyrillic о with diaeresis) for . This letter is not present in most languages that use Cyrillic alphabet and may cause compatibility problems although it has a code point in Unicode.

Consonants
Jacaltec (a Mayan language) and Malagasy are among the very few languages with a diaeresis on the letter "n"; in both,  is the velar nasal .
In Udmurt, a double dot is also used with the consonant letters ӝ  (from ж ), ӟ  (from з ) and ӵ  (from ч ).
Ḧ and ẍ are used for  and  in the unified Kurdish alphabet. These are foreign sounds borrowed from Arabic.
Ẅ and ÿ: Ÿ is generally a vowel, but it is used as the (semi-vowel) consonant  (a  without the use of the lips) in Tlingit. This sound is also found in Coast Tsimshian, where it is written ẅ.
A number of languages in Vanuatu use double dots on consonants, to represent linguolabial (or apicolabial) phonemes in their orthography. Thus Araki contrasts bilabial p  with linguolabial p̈ ; bilabial m  with linguolabial m̈ ; and bilabial v  with linguolabial v̈ .
The letter ẗ is not used in any alphabet, but is sometimes seen for tāʾ marbūṭa ة in Arabic transliteration.
Syriac uses a two dots above a letter, called Siyame, to indicate that the word should be understood as plural. For instance, ܒܝܬܐ (bayta) means 'house', while ܒܝ̈ܬܐ (bayte) means 'houses'. The sign is used especially when no vowel marks are present, which could differentiate between the two forms. Although the origin of the Siyame is different from that of the Diaeresis sign, in modern computer systems both are represented by the same Unicode character. This, however, often leads to wrong rendering of the Syriac text.
Calculus
The derivative with respect to time (using Newton's notation) is often represented as a dot above a variable. Two dots represents the second derivative.






This may be contrasted with the more general notation for a derivative using a prime, which may also be used to refer specifically to the derivative with respect to space:






Computer usage
Character encoding generally treats the umlaut and the diaeresis as the same diacritic mark.
Keyboard input
 If letters with double dots are not present on the keyboard (or if they are not recognized by the operating system), there are a number of ways to input them into a computer system.
Using Microsoft Word for Windows, a letter with double dots can be produced by pressing Ctrl-Shift-:, then the letter.
Using Mac OS or OS X, a letter with double dots can be produced by pressing , then the letter. This works on English and other keyboards and is documented further in the supplied manuals.
X-based systems with a Compose key set in the system can usually insert characters with double dots by typing ,  (i.e. ") followed by the letter. ,  may also work, depending on the system's set-up. However, most modern UNIX-like systems also accept the sequence  to initiate the direct input of a Unicode value. Thus, typing , 00F6, finishing with  or , will insert ö into the document.
Microsoft Windows allows users to set their US layout keyboard language to International, which allows for something similar, by turning keys (rather characters) into dead keys. If the user enters ", nothing will appear on screen, until the user types another character, after which the characters will be merged if possible, or added independently at once if not.
On several operating systems, double-dotted letters can be written by entering Alt codes. On Microsoft Windows keyboard layouts that do not have double dotted characters, one can especially use Windows Alt keycodes. Double dots are then entered by pressing the left Alt key, and entering the full decimal value of the character's position in the Windows code page on the numeric keypad, provided that the compatible code page is used as a system code page. One can also use numbers from Code page 850; these lack a leading 0. On a Swedish/Finnish keyboard both letters å, ä and ö are present, as well as ¨ to combine with any vowel character, in the same way as ´`^ and ~ accentuation signs.




Character

Windows Code Page Code

CP850 Code





ä

Alt+0228

Alt+132



ë

Alt+0235

Alt+137



ï

Alt+0239

Alt+139



ö

Alt+0246

Alt+148



ü

Alt+0252

Alt+129



ÿ

Alt+0255

Alt+152



Ä

Alt+0196

Alt+142



Ë

Alt+0203

Alt+211



Ï

Alt+0207, Alt+02255

Alt+651



Ö

Alt+0214

Alt+153



Ü

Alt+0220

Alt+154



Ÿ

Alt+0159

N/A



Character encodings
The ISO 8859-1 character encoding includes the letters ä, ë, ï, ö, ü, and their respective capital forms, as well as ÿ in lower case only, with Ÿ added in the revised edition ISO 8859-15.
Unicode includes all of ISO-8859, and also provides the double dot as a combining character U+0308. Mainly for compatibility with older character encodings, dozens of codepoints with letters with double dots are available.
Both the combining character U+0308 and the precombined codepoints can be used as umlaut or diaeresis.
Sometimes, there's a need to distinguish between the umlaut sign and the diaeresis sign. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 2/WG 2 recommends the following for these cases:

To represent the umlaut use Combining Diaeresis (U+0308)
To represent the diaeresis use Combining Grapheme Joiner (CGJ, U+034F) + Combining Diaeresis (U+0308)

As of version 3.2.0, Unicode also provides "COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER E" at U+0364 which can produce the older umlaut typography.
HTML
In HTML, vowels with double dots can be entered with an entity reference of the form &?uml;, where ? can be any of a, e, i, o, u, y or their majuscule counterparts. With the exception of the uppercase Ÿ, these characters are also available in all of the ISO 8859 character sets and thus have the same codepoints in ISO-8859-1 (-2, -3, -4, -9, -10, -13, -14, -15, -16) and Unicode. The uppercase Ÿ is available in ISO 8859-15 and Unicode, and Unicode provides a number of other letters with double dots as well.


































































 Note: when replacing umlaut characters with plain ASCII, use ae, oe, etc. for German language, and the simple character replacements for all other languages.

TeX and LaTeX
TeX (and its derivatives, most notably LaTeX) also allows double dots to be placed over letters. The standard way is to use the control sequence \" followed by the relevant letter, e.g. \"u. It is good practice to set the sequence off with curly braces: {\"u} or \"{u}.
TeX's "German" package can be used: it adds the " control sequence (without the backslash) to produce the Umlaut. However, this can cause conflicts if the main language of the document is not German. Since the integration of Unicode through the development of XeTeX and XeLaTeX, it is also possible to input the Unicode character directly into the document, using one of the recognized methods such as Compose key or direct Unicode input.
TeX's traditional control sequences can still be used and will produce the same output (in very early versions of TeX these sequences would produce double dots that were too far above the letter's body).
All these methods can be used with all available font variations (italic, bold etc.).
The use of the diaeresis in mathematics is of course different (see above). To produce the diaeresis in math mode, use "\ddot{}".
See also

Diaeresis
Umlaut
Alt code
Dot (diacritic)
Double acute accent, a similar-looking diacritic
Metal umlaut
Macron
Tittle

References
External links

Diacritics Project – All you need to design a font with correct accents
Variant Umlauts (Florian Hardwig, German)
Variant compact umlaut
Keyboard Help – Learn how to create world language accent marks and other diacriticals on a computer

"
Category:Alphabetic diacritics Category:Latin alphabet ligatures Category:Greek alphabet






Harry Shaw, 1964. Punctuate It Right. [http://books.google.co.nz/books?id=kjisFLQK8-cC&pg;;=PT43 p. 43, Accent Marks: Dieresis]: "...it is much less used than formerly, having been largely replaced by the hyphen..."
William Johnson, 2004. Bookrolls and scribes in Oxyrhynchus, p 343; examples on pp 259, 315, 334, etc.
Roger Bagnall, 2009:262. The Oxford handbook of papyrology
[http://woordenlijst.org/zoek/?q=zee-eend&w;;=w Woordenlijst Nederlandse taal]

On Diacritics and Archaïsm. Flakery.org, June 18, 2006.
diaeresis: December 9, 1998. The Mavens' Word of the Day. Random House.
Umlauts in English?. General Questions. Straight Dope Message Board.

The phonological phenomenon of umlaut occurred historically in English as well (man ~ men; full ~ fill; goose ~ geese) in a way cognately parallel with German, but it has been further obscured by the later Great Vowel Shift and English orthography does not write the sound shift using the umlaut diacritic.
In medieval German manuscripts, other digraphs could also be written using superscripts: in bluome 'flower', for example, the  was frequently placed above the , although this letter survives now only in Czech. Compare also the development of the tilde as a superscript n.




Māori Orthographic Conventions, Māori Language Commission, accessed 11 June 2010.
"Māori language on the internet", Te Ara




