


Glivenko–Cantelli theorem




Glivenko–Cantelli theorem

In the theory of probability, the Glivenko–Cantelli theorem, named after Valery Ivanovich Glivenko and Francesco Paolo Cantelli, determines the asymptotic behaviour of the empirical distribution function as the number of independent and identically distributed observations grows.1 The uniform convergence of more general empirical measures becomes an important property of the Glivenko–Cantelli classes of functions or sets.2 The Glivenko–Cantelli classes arise in Vapnik–Chervonenkis theory, with applications to machine learning. Applications can be found in econometrics making use of M-estimators.
Assume that 
 
 
 
  are independent and identically-distributed random variables in 
 
 
 
  with common cumulative distribution function

 
 . The empirical distribution function for 
 
 
 
 
  is defined by



where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function of the set 
 
 
 
 . For every (fixed) 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of random variables which converge to 
 
 
almost surely by the strong law of large numbers, that is, 
 
 
 
  converges to 
 
 
pointwise. Glivenko and Cantelli strengthened this result by proving uniform convergence of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
 .
Theorem


 
  almost surely.3
This theorem originates with Valery Glivenko,4 and Francesco Cantelli,5 in 1933.
Remarks

If 
 
 
 
  is a stationary ergodic process, then 
 
 
 
  converges almost surely to 
 
 
 
 . The Glivenko–Cantelli theorem gives a stronger mode of convergence than this in the iid case.
An even stronger uniform convergence result for the empirical distribution function is available in the form of an extended type of law of the iterated logarithm.6 See asymptotic properties of the Empirical distribution function for this and related results.

Empirical measures
One can generalize the empirical distribution function by replacing the set 
 
 
 
 
  by an arbitrary set C from a class of sets 
 
 
 
  to obtain an empirical measure indexed by sets 
 
 



 
  Where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function of each set 
 
 
 
 
 .
Further generalization is the map induced by 
 
 
 
  on measurable real-valued functions f, which is given by



Then it becomes an important property of these classes that the strong law of large numbers holds uniformly on 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
Glivenko–Cantelli class
Consider a set 
 
 
 
 
  with a sigma algebra of Borel subsets A and a probability measure P. For a class of subsets,



and a class of functions



define random variables






where 
 
 
 
 
  is the empirical measure, 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding map, and


 
 , assuming that it exists.
Definitions

A class 
 
 
 
  is called a ''' Glivenko–Cantelli class ''' (or GC class) with respect to a probability measure P if any of the following equivalent statements is true.



1. 
 
 
 
  almost surely as 
 
 
 
 
 .
 
2. 
 
 
 
  in probability as 
 
 
 
 .
 
3. 
 
 
 
 , as 
 
 
 
  (convergence in mean).
 


The Glivenko–Cantelli classes of functions are defined similarly.
 


A class is called a universal Glivenko–Cantelli class if it is a GC class with respect to any probability measure P on (S,A).
A class is called uniformly Glivenko–Cantelli if the convergence occurs uniformly over all probability measures P on (S,A):












Theorem (Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 1968)7

''A class of sets 
 
 
 
  is uniformly GC if and only if it is a Vapnik–Chervonenkis class. ''
 

Examples

Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The classical Glivenko–Cantelli theorem implies that this class is a universal GC class. Furthermore, by Kolmogorov's theorem,



 
 , that is 
 
 
 
  is uniformly Glivenko–Cantelli class.

Let P be a nonatomic probability measure on S and 
 
 
 
  be a class of all finite subsets in S. Because 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 , we have that 
 
 
 
  and so 
 
 
 
  is not a GC class with respect to P.

See also

Donsker's theorem
Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality – strengthens Glivenko–Cantelli theorem by quantifying the rate of convergence.

Notes
References
Further reading

Dudley, R. M. (1999). Uniform Central Limit Theorems, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-46102-2.
Shorack, G.R., Wellner J.A. (1986) Empirical Processes with Applications to Statistics, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-86725-X.
van der Vaart, A.W. and Wellner, J.A. (1996) Weak Convergence and Empirical Processes, Springer. ISBN 0-387-94640-3.
Aad W. van der Vaart, Jon A. Wellner (1996) Glivenko-Cantelli Theorems, Springer.
Aad W. van der Vaart, Jon A. Wellner (2000) Preservation Theorems for Glivenko-Cantelli and Uniform Glivenko-Cantelli Classes, Springer

"
Category:Empirical process Category:Asymptotic statistical theory Category:Probability theorems Category:Statistical theorems






Glivenko, V. (1933). Sulla determinazione empirica della legge di probabilita. Giorn. Ist. Ital. Attuari 4, 92-99.
Cantelli, F. P. (1933). Sulla determinazione empirica delle leggi di probabilita. Giorn. Ist. Ital. Attuari 4, 221-424.






