


Table of Newtonian series




Table of Newtonian series

In mathematics, a Newtonian series, named after Isaac Newton, is a sum over a sequence

 
  written in the form



where



is the binomial coefficient and 
 
 
 
  is the rising factorial. Newtonian series often appear in relations of the form seen in umbral calculus.
List
The generalized binomial theorem gives



A proof for this identity can be obtained by showing that it satisfies the differential equation



The digamma function:



The Stirling numbers of the second kind are given by the finite sum



This formula is a special case of the kth forward difference of the monomial xn evaluated at x = 0:



A related identity forms the basis of the Nörlund–Rice integral:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Gamma function and 
 
 
 
  is the Beta function.
The trigonometric functions have umbral identities:



and



The umbral nature of these identities is a bit more clear by writing them in terms of the falling factorial

 
 . The first few terms of the sin series are



which can be recognized as resembling the Taylor series for sin x, with (s)n standing in the place of xn.
In analytic number theory it is of interest to sum


 
  where B are the Bernoulli numbers. Employing the generating function its Borel sum can be evaluated as


 
  The general relation gives the Newton series


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Hurwitz zeta function and 
 
 
 
  the Bernoulli polynomial. The series does not converge, the identity holds formally.
Another identity is 
 
 
 
  which converges for 
 
 
 
 . This follows from the general form of a Newton series for equidistant nodes (when it exists, i.e. is convergent)



See also

Binomial transform
List of factorial and binomial topics
Nörlund–Rice integral
Carlson's theorem

References

Philippe Flajolet and Robert Sedgewick, "Mellin transforms and asymptotics: Finite differences and Rice's integrals", Theoretical Computer Science 144 (1995) pp 101–124.

"
Category:Finite differences Category:Factorial and binomial topics Newton series


