


Binomial transform




Binomial transform

In combinatorics, the binomial transform is a sequence transformation (i.e., a transform of a sequence) that computes its forward differences. It is closely related to the Euler transform, which is the result of applying the binomial transform to the sequence associated with its ordinary generating function.
Definition
The binomial transform, T, of a sequence, {an}, is the sequence {sn} defined by



Formally, one may write (Ta)n = sn for the transformation, where T is an infinite-dimensional operator with matrix elements Tnk:



The transform is an involution, that is,



or, using index notation,



where 
 
 
 
  is the Kronecker delta. The original series can be regained by



The binomial transform of a sequence is just the nth  forward differences of the sequence, with odd differences carrying a negative sign, namely:















where Δ is the forward difference operator.
Some authors define the binomial transform with an extra sign, so that it is not self-inverse:



whose inverse is



Example
Binomial transforms can be seen in difference tables. Consider the following:




0

 

1

 

10

 

63

 

324

 

1485



 

1

 

9

 

53

 

261

 

1161



 

 

8

 

44

 

208

 

900



 

 

 

36

 

164

 

692



 

 

 

 

128

 

528



 

 

 

 

 

400



The top line 0, 1, 10, 63, 324, 1485,... (a sequence defined by (2n2 + n)3n − 2) is the (noninvolutive version of the) binomial transform of the diagonal 0, 1, 8, 36, 128, 400,... (a sequence defined by n22n − 1).
Shift states
The binomial transform is the shift operator for the Bell numbers. That is,



where the Bn are the Bell numbers.
Ordinary generating function
The transform connects the generating functions associated with the series. For the ordinary generating function, let



and



then



Euler transform
The relationship between the ordinary generating functions is sometimes called the Euler transform. It commonly makes its appearance in one of two different ways. In one form, it is used to accelerate the convergence of an alternating series. That is, one has the identity



which is obtained by substituting x=1/2 into the last formula above. The terms on the right hand side typically become much smaller, much more rapidly, thus allowing rapid numerical summation.
The Euler transform can be generalized (Borisov B. and Shkodrov V., 2007):


 
 ,
where p = 0, 1, 2,...
The Euler transform is also frequently applied to the Euler hypergeometric integral

 
 . Here, the Euler transform takes the form:



The binomial transform, and its variation as the Euler transform, is notable for its connection to the continued fraction representation of a number. Let 
 
 
 
  have the continued fraction representation



then



and



Exponential generating function
For the exponential generating function, let



and



then



The Borel transform will convert the ordinary generating function to the exponential generating function.
Integral representation
When the sequence can be interpolated by a complex analytic function, then the binomial transform of the sequence can be represented by means of a Nörlund–Rice integral on the interpolating function.
Generalizations
Prodinger gives a related, modular-like transformation: letting



gives



where U and B are the ordinary generating functions associated with the series 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
The rising k-binomial transform is sometimes defined as



The falling k-binomial transform is


 
 .
Both are homomorphisms of the kernel of the Hankel transform of a series.
In the case where the binomial transform is defined as



Let this be equal to the function 
 
 

If a new forward difference table is made and the first elements from each row of this table are taken to form a new sequence 
 
 
 
 , then the second binomial transform of the original sequence is,



If the same process is repeated k times, then it follows that,



Its inverse is,



This can be generalized as,



where 
 
 
 
  is the shift operator.
Its inverse is



See also

Newton series
Hankel matrix
Möbius transform
Stirling transform
Euler summation
List of factorial and binomial topics

References

John H. Conway and Richard K. Guy, 1996, The Book of Numbers
Donald E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming Vol. 3, (1973) Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Helmut Prodinger, 1992, Some information about the Binomial transform
Michael Z. Spivey and Laura L. Steil, 2006, The k-Binomial Transforms and the Hankel Transform
Borisov B. and Shkodrov V., 2007, Divergent Series in the Generalized Binomial Transform, Adv. Stud. Cont. Math., 14 (1): 77-82

External links

Binomial Transform,

"
Category:Transforms Category:Factorial and binomial topics Category:Hypergeometric functions


