


Polynomial transformations




Polynomial transformations

In mathematics, a polynomial transformation consists of computing the polynomial whose roots are a given function of the roots of polynomial. Polynomial transformations such as Tschirnhaus transformations are often used to simplify the solution of algebraic equations.
Simple examples
Translating the roots
Let


 
  be a polynomial, and


 
  be its complex roots (not necessarily distinct).
For a any constant 
 
 
 
 , the polynomial whose roots are


 
  is



If the coefficients of 
 
 
 
  are integers and the constant 
 
 
 
  is a rational number, the coefficients of 
 
 
 
  may be not integer, but the polynomial  has integers coefficients and has the same roots as 
 
 
 
 .
A special case is when 
 
 
 
  The resulting polynomial 
 
 
 
  does not have any term in .
Reciprocals of the roots
Let


 
  be a polynomial. The polynomial whose roots are the reciprocals of the roots of 
 
 
 
  as roots is its reciprocal polynomial



Scaling the roots
Let


 
  be a polynomial, and 
 
 
 
  be a non-zero constant. A polynomial whose roots are the product by 
 
 
 
  of the roots of 
 
 
 
  is


 
  The factor  appears here because, if 
 
 
 
  and the coefficients of 
 
 
 
  are integers or belong to some integral domain, the same is true for the coefficients of 
 
 
 
 .
In the special case where 
 
 
 
 , all coefficients of 
 
 
 
  are multiple of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is a monic polynomial, whose coefficients belong to any integral domain containing 
 
 
 
  and the coefficients of 
 
 
 
 . This polynomial transformation is often used to reduce questions on algebraic numbers to questions on algebraic integers.
Combining this with a translation of the roots by 
 
 
 
 , allows to reduce any question on the roots of a polynomial, such as root-finding, to a similar question on a simpler polynomial, which is monic and does not have a term of degree 
 
 
 
 . For examples of this, see Cubic function § Reduction to a depressed cubic or Quartic function § Converting to a depressed quartic.
Transformation by a rational function
All preceding examples are polynomial transformations by a rational function, also called Tschirnhaus transformations. Let


 
  be a rational function, where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are coprime polynomials. The polynomial transformation of a polynomial 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  is the polynomial 
 
 
 
  (defined up to the product by a non-zero constant) whose roots are the images by 
 
 
 
  of the roots of 
 
 
 
 .
Such a polynomial transformation may be computed as a resultant. In fact, the roots of the desired polynomial 
 
 
 
  are exactly the complex numbers

 
  such that there is a complex number 
 
 
 
  such one has simultaneously (if the coefficients of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not real or complex numbers, "complex number" has to be replaced by "element of an algebraically closed field containing the coefficients of the input polynomials")


 
 
  This is exactly the defining property of the resultant



This is generally difficult to compute this through a hand-written computation. However, as most computer algebra systems have a built-in function to compute resultants, it is straightforward to compute it with a computer.
Properties
If the polynomial 
 
 
 
  is irreducible, then either the resulting polynomial 
 
 
 
  is irreducible, or it is a power of an irreducible polynomial. Let 
 
 
 
  be a root of 
 
 
 
  and consider 
 
 
 
 , the field extension generated by 
 
 
 
 . The former case means that 
 
 
 
  is a primitive element of 
 
 
 
 , which has 
 
 
 
  as minimal polynomial. In the latter case, 
 
 
 
  belongs to a subfield of 
 
 
 
  and its minimal polynomial is the irreducible polynomial that has 
 
 
 
  as power.
Transformation for equation-solving
Polynomial transformations have been applied to the simplification of polynomial equations for solution, where possible, by radicals. Descartes introduced the transformation of a polynomial of degree d which eliminates the term of degree d−1 by a translation of the roots. Such a polynomial is termed "depressed": this already suffices to solve the quadratic by square roots. In the case of the cubic, Tschirnhaus transformations replace the variable by a quadratic function, thereby making it possible to eliminate two terms, and so can be used to eliminate the linear term in a depressed cubic to achieve the solution of the cubic by a combination of square and cube roots. The Bring–Jerrard transformation, which is quartic in the variable, brings a quintic into "principal" or Bring-Jerrard normal form with terms of degree 5,1 and zero.
References



"
Category:Algebra


