


Thorium fuel cycle




Thorium fuel cycle

(Figure)
A sample of thorium

The thorium fuel cycle is a nuclear fuel cycle that uses the isotope of thorium, , as the fertile material. In the reactor,  is transmuted into the fissile artificial uranium isotope  which is the nuclear fuel. Unlike natural uranium, natural thorium contains only trace amounts of fissile material (such as ), which are insufficient to initiate a nuclear chain reaction. Additional fissile material or another neutron source are necessary to initiate the fuel cycle. In a thorium-fueled reactor,  absorbs neutrons eventually to produce . This parallels the process in uranium breeder reactors whereby fertile  absorbs neutrons to form fissile . Depending on the design of the reactor and fuel cycle, the generated  either fissions in situ or is chemically separated from the used nuclear fuel and formed into new nuclear fuel.
The thorium fuel cycle claims several potential advantages over a uranium fuel cycle, including thorium's greater abundance, superior physical and nuclear properties, better resistance to nuclear weapons proliferation123 and reduced plutonium and actinide production.4
History
Concerns about the limits of worldwide uranium resources motivated initial interest in the thorium fuel cycle.5 It was envisioned that as uranium reserves were depleted, thorium would supplement uranium as a fertile material. However, for most countries uranium was relatively abundant and research in thorium fuel cycles waned. A notable exception was India's three-stage nuclear power programme.6 In the twenty-first century thorium's potential for improving proliferation resistance and waste characteristics led to renewed interest in the thorium fuel cycle.789
At Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the 1960s, the Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment used  as the fissile fuel as an experiment to demonstrate a part of the Molten Salt Breeder Reactor that was designed to operate on the thorium fuel cycle. Molten Salt Reactor (MSR) experiments assessed thorium's feasibility, using thorium(IV) fluoride dissolved in a molten salt fluid that eliminated the need to fabricate fuel elements. The MSR program was defunded in 1976 after its patron Alvin Weinberg was fired.10
In 2006, Carlo Rubbia proposed the concept of an energy amplifier or "accelerator driven system" (ADS), which he saw as a novel and safe way to produce nuclear energy that exploited existing accelerator technologies. Rubbia's proposal offered the potential to incinerate high-activity nuclear waste and produce energy from natural thorium and depleted uranium.1112
Kirk Sorensen, former NASA scientist and Chief Nuclear Technologist at Teledyne Brown Engineering, has been a long-time promoter of thorium fuel cycle and particularly liquid fluoride thorium reactors (LFTRs). He first researched thorium reactors while working at NASA, while evaluating power plant designs suitable for lunar colonies. In 2006 Sorensen started "energyfromthorium.com" to promote and make information available about this technology.13
A 2011 MIT study concluded that, although there is little in the way of barriers to a thorium fuel cycle, with current or near term light-water reactor designs there is also little incentive for any significant market penetration to occur. As such they conclude there is little chance of thorium cycles replacing conventional uranium cycles in the current nuclear power market, despite the potential benefits.14
Nuclear reactions with thorium
In the thorium cycle, fuel is formed when  captures a neutron (whether in a fast reactor or thermal reactor) to become . This normally emits an electron and an anti-neutrino () by  decay to become . This then emits another electron and anti-neutrino by a second  decay to become , the fuel:



Fission product wastes
Nuclear fission produces radioactive fission products which can have half-lives from days to greater than 200,000 years. According to some toxicity studies,15 the thorium cycle can fully recycle actinide wastes and only emit fission product wastes, and after a few hundred years, the waste from a thorium reactor can be less toxic than the uranium ore that would have been used to produce low enriched uranium fuel for a light water reactor of the same power. Other studies assume some actinide losses and find that actinide wastes dominate thorium cycle waste radioactivity at some future periods.16
Actinide wastes
In a reactor, when a neutron hits a fissile atom (such as certain isotopes of uranium), it either splits the nucleus or is captured and transmutes the atom. In the case of , the transmutations tend to produce useful nuclear fuels rather than transuranic wastes. When  absorbs a neutron, it either fissions or becomes . The chance of fissioning on absorption of a thermal neutron is about 92%; the capture-to-fission ratio of , therefore, is about 1:12 — which is better than the corresponding capture vs. fission ratios of  (about 1:6), or  or  (both about 1:3).1718 The result is less transuranic waste than in a reactor using the uranium-plutonium fuel cycle.  , like most actinides with an even number of neutrons, is not fissile, but neutron capture produces fissile . If the fissile isotope fails to fission on neutron capture, it produces , , , and eventually fissile  and heavier isotopes of plutonium. The  can be removed and stored as waste or retained and transmuted to plutonium, where more of it fissions, while the remainder becomes , then americium and curium, which in turn can be removed as waste or returned to reactors for further transmutation and fission.
However, the  (with a half-life of ) formed via (n,2n) reactions with  (yielding  that decays to ), while not a transuranic waste, is a major contributor to the long-term radiotoxicity of spent nuclear fuel.
Uranium-232 contamination
Uranium-232 is also formed in this process, via (n,2n) reactions between fast neutrons and , , and :








 
  Uranium-232 has a relatively short half-life (), and some decay products emit high energy gamma radiation, such as ,  and particularly . The full decay chain, along with half-lives and relevant gamma energies, is:  decays to  where it joins the decay chain of 
























Thorium-cycle fuels produce hard gamma emissions, which damage electronics, limiting their use in military bomb triggers.  cannot be chemically separated from  from used nuclear fuel; however, chemical separation of thorium from uranium removes the decay product  and the radiation from the rest of the decay chain, which gradually build up as  reaccumulates. The hard gamma emissions also create a radiological hazard which requires remote handling during reprocessing.
Nuclear fuel
As a fertile material thorium is similar to , the major part of natural and depleted uranium. The thermal neutron absorption cross section (σa) and resonance integral (average of neutron cross sections over intermediate neutron energies) for  are about three times and one third of the respective values for .
Advantages
Thorium is estimated to be about three to four times more abundant than uranium in Earth's crust,19 although present knowledge of reserves is limited. Current demand for thorium has been satisfied as a by-product of rare-earth extraction from monazite sands.
Although the thermal neutron fission cross section (σf) of the resulting  is comparable to  and , it has a much lower capture cross section (σγ) than the latter two fissile isotopes, providing fewer non-fissile neutron absorptions and improved neutron economy. Finally, the ratio of neutrons released per neutron absorbed (η) in  is greater than two over a wide range of energies, including the thermal spectrum; as a result, thorium-based fuels can be the basis for a thermal breeder reactor.20 A breeding reactor in the uranium - plutonium cycle needs to use a fast neutron spectrum, because in the thermal spectrum one neutron absorbed by  on average leads to less than two neutrons.
Thorium-based fuels also display favorable physical and chemical properties that improve reactor and repository performance. Compared to the predominant reactor fuel, uranium dioxide (), thorium dioxide () has a higher melting point, higher thermal conductivity, and lower coefficient of thermal expansion. Thorium dioxide also exhibits greater chemical stability and, unlike uranium dioxide, does not further oxidize.21
Because the  produced in thorium fuels is inevitably contaminated with , thorium-based used nuclear fuel possesses inherent proliferation resistance.  can not be chemically separated from  and has several decay products that emit high-energy gamma radiation. These high-energy photons are a radiological hazard that necessitate the use of remote handling of separated uranium and aid in the passive detection of such materials.  can be denatured by mixing it with natural or depleted uranium, requiring isotope separation before it could be used in nuclear weapons.
The long-term (on the order of roughly  to ) radiological hazard of conventional uranium-based used nuclear fuel is dominated by plutonium and other minor actinides, after which long-lived fission products become significant contributors again. A single neutron capture in  is sufficient to produce transuranic elements, whereas six captures are generally necessary to do so from . 98–99% of thorium-cycle fuel nuclei would fission at either  or , so fewer long-lived transuranics are produced. Because of this, thorium is a potentially attractive alternative to uranium in mixed oxide (MOX) fuels to minimize the generation of transuranics and maximize the destruction of plutonium.22
Disadvantages
There are several challenges to the application of thorium as a nuclear fuel, particularly for solid fuel reactors:
Unlike uranium, natural thorium contains no fissile isotopes; fissile material, generally ,  or plutonium, must be added to achieve criticality. This, along with the high sintering temperature necessary to make thorium-dioxide fuel, complicates fuel fabrication. Oak Ridge National Laboratory experimented with thorium tetrafluoride as fuel in a molten salt reactor from 1964–1969, which was expected to be easier to process and separate from contaminants that slow or stop the chain reaction.
In an open fuel cycle (i.e. utilizing  in situ), higher burnup is necessary to achieve a favorable neutron economy. Although thorium dioxide performed well at burnups of 170,000 MWd/t and 150,000 MWd/t at Fort St. Vrain Generating Station and AVR respectively,23 challenges complicate achieving this in light water reactors (LWR), which compose the vast majority of existing power reactors.
In a once-through thorium fuel cycle the residual  is a long-lived radioactive isotope in the waste.
Another challenge associated with the thorium fuel cycle is the comparatively long interval over which  breeds to . The half-life of  is about 27 days, which is an order of magnitude longer than the half-life of . As a result, substantial  develops in thorium-based fuels.  is a significant neutron absorber, and although it eventually breeds into fissile , this requires two more neutron absorptions, which degrades neutron economy and increases the likelihood of transuranic production.
Alternatively, if solid thorium is used in a closed fuel cycle in which  is recycled, remote handling is necessary for fuel fabrication because of the high radiation levels resulting from the decay products of . This is also true of recycled thorium because of the presence of , which is part of the  decay sequence. Further, unlike proven uranium fuel recycling technology (e.g. PUREX), recycling technology for thorium (e.g. THOREX) is only under development.
Although the presence of  complicates matters, there are public documents showing that  has been used once in a nuclear weapon test. The United States tested a composite -plutonium bomb core in the MET (Military Effects Test) blast during Operation Teapot in 1955, though with much lower yield than expected.24
Though thorium-based fuels produce far less long-lived transuranics than uranium-based fuels,25 some long-lived actinide products constitute a long-term radiological impact, especially .26
Advocates for liquid core and molten salt reactors such as LFTRs claim that these technologies negate thorium's disadvantages present in solid fueled reactors. As only two liquid-core fluoride salt reactors have been built (the ORNL ARE and MSRE) and neither have used thorium, it is hard to validate the exact benefits.27
Reactors
Thorium fuels have fueled several different reactor types, including light water reactors, heavy water reactors, high temperature gas reactors, sodium-cooled fast reactors, and molten salt reactors.28
List of thorium-fueled reactors
From IAEA TECDOC-1450 "Thorium Fuel Cycle - Potential Benefits and Challenges", Table 1: Thorium utilization in different experimental and power reactors.29 Additionally, Dresden 1 in the USA used "thorium oxide corner rods".30




|Name

|Country

|Reactor type

|Power

|Fuel

|Operation period



AVR

Germany

HTGR, experimental (pebble bed reactor)

015000 15 MW(e)

Th+ Driver fuel, coated fuel particles, oxide & dicarbides

1967–1988



THTR-300

Germany

HTGR, power (pebble type)

300000 300 MW(e)

Th+, Driver fuel, coated fuel particles, oxide & dicarbides

1985–1989



Lingen

Germany

BWR irradiation-testing

060000 60 MW(e)

Test fuel (Th,Pu)O2 pellets

1968-1973



Dragon (OECD-Euratom)

UK (also Sweden, Norway & Switzerland)

HTGR, Experimental (pin-in-block design)

020000 20 MWt

Th+ Driver fuel, coated fuel particles, oxide & dicarbides

1966–1973



Peach Bottom

USA

HTGR, Experimental (prismatic block)

040000 40 MW(e)

Th+ Driver fuel, coated fuel particles, oxide & dicarbides

1966–1972



Fort St Vrain

USA

HTGR, Power (prismatic block)

330000 330 MW(e)

Th+ Driver fuel, coated fuel particles, Dicarbide

1976–1989



MSRE ORNL

USA

MSR

007500 7.5 MWt

molten fluorides

1964–1969



BORAX-IV & Elk River Station

USA

BWR (pin assemblies)

002400 2.4 MW(e); 24 MW(e)

Th+235U Driver fuel oxide pellets

1963 - 1968



Shippingport

USA

LWBR, PWR, (pin assemblies)

100000 100 MW(e)

Th+ Driver fuel, oxide pellets

1977–1982



Indian Point 1

USA

LWBR, PWR, (pin assemblies)

285000 285 MW(e)

Th+ Driver fuel, oxide pellets

1962–1980



SUSPOP/KSTR KEMA

Netherlands

Aqueous homogenous suspension (pin assemblies)

001000 1 MWt

Th+HEU, oxide pellets

1974–1977



NRX & NRU

Canada

MTR (pin assemblies)

020000 20MW; 200MW (see)

Th+, Test Fuel

1947 (NRX) + 1957 (NRU); Irradiation–testing of few fuel elements



CIRUS; DHRUVA; & KAMINI

India

MTR thermal

040000 40 MWt; 100 MWt; 30 kWt (low power, research)

Al+ Driver fuel, ‘J’ rod of Th & ThO2, ‘J’ rod of ThO2

1960-2010 (CIRUS); others in operation



KAPS 1 &2; KGS 1 & 2; RAPS 2, 3 & 4

India

PHWR, (pin assemblies)

220000 220 MW(e)

ThO2 pellets (for neutron flux flattening of initial core after start-up)

1980 (RAPS 2) +; continuing in all new PHWRs



FBTR

India

LMFBR, (pin assemblies)

040000 40 MWt

ThO2 blanket

1985; in operation



See also

Radioactive waste
World energy resources and consumption
Peak uranium
Fuji MSR
Alvin Radkowsky
Weinberg Foundation
Flibe Energy
CANDU reactor
Advanced heavy water reactor
Thorium Energy Alliance

References
Further reading

Kasten, P. R. (1998). "Review of the Radkowsky Thorium reactor concept" Science & Global Security, 7(3), 237-269.
Duncan Clark (9 September 2011), "Thorium advocates launch pressure group. Huge optimism for thorium nuclear energy at the launch of the Weinberg Foundation", The Guardian

B.D. Kuz'minov, V.N. Manokhin, (1998) "Status of nuclear data for the thorium fuel cycle", IAEA translation from the Russian journal Yadernye Konstanty (Nuclear Constants) Issue No. 3-4, 1997
Thorium and uranium fuel cycles comparison by the UK National Nuclear Laboratory
Fact sheet on thorium at the World Nuclear Association.
Annotated bibliography for the thorium fuel cycle from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues

External links

International Thorium Energy Committee

"
Category:Nuclear chemistry Category:Nuclear fuels Category:Nuclear reprocessing Category:Nuclear technology Category:Actinides Category:Thorium



 1↩
Nuclear Materials FAQ↩
↩


↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
 Thermal neutron cross sections in barns (isotope, capture:fission, f/f+c, f/c) 233U 45.26:531.3 92.15% 11.74; 235U 98.69:585.0 85.57% 5.928; 239Pu 270.7:747.9 73.42% 2.763; 241Pu 363.0:1012 73.60% 2.788.↩
↩


↩

↩



↩

 They were manufactured by General Electric (assembly code XDR07G) and later sent to the Savannah River Site for reprocessing.↩




