


Pseudoconvexity




Pseudoconvexity

In mathematics, more precisely in the theory of functions of several complex variables, a pseudoconvex set is a special type of open set in the n-dimensional complex space Cn. Pseudoconvex sets are important, as they allow for classification of domains of holomorphy.
Let



be a domain, that is, an open connected subset. One says that 
 
 
 
  is pseudoconvex (or Hartogs pseudoconvex) if there exists a continuous plurisubharmonic function

 
  on 
 
 
 
  such that the set



is a relatively compact subset of 
 
 
 
  for all real numbers

 
  In other words, a domain is pseudoconvex if 
 
 
 
  has a continuous plurisubharmonic exhaustion function. Every (geometrically) convex set is pseudoconvex.
When 
 
 
 
  has a 
 
 
 
  (twice continuously differentiable) boundary, this notion is the same as Levi pseudoconvexity, which is easier to work with. More specifically, with a 
 
 
 
  boundary, it can be shown that 
 
 
 
  has a defining function; i.e., that there exists 
 
 
 
  which is 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . Now, 
 
 
 
  is pseudoconvex iff for every 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the complex tangent space at p that is,


 
  we have



If 
 
 
 
  does not have a 
 
 
 
  boundary, the following approximation result can come in useful.
Proposition 1 If 
 
 
 
  is pseudoconvex, then there exist bounded, strongly Levi pseudoconvex domains 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  (smooth) boundary which are relatively compact in 
 
 
 
 , such that



This is because once we have a 
 
 
 
  as in the definition we can actually find a C∞ exhaustion function.
==The case n = 1== In one complex dimension, every open domain is pseudoconvex. The concept of pseudoconvexity is thus more useful in dimensions higher than 1.
See also

Holomorphically convex hull
Stein manifold
Analytic polyhedron
Eugenio Elia Levi

References

Lars Hörmander, An Introduction to Complex Analysis in Several Variables, North-Holland, 1990. (ISBN 0-444-88446-7).
Steven G. Krantz. Function Theory of Several Complex Variables, AMS Chelsea Publishing, Providence, Rhode Island, 1992.

Further reading



"
Category:Several complex variables


