


Domain of holomorphy




Domain of holomorphy

 In mathematics, in the theory of functions of several complex variables, a domain of holomorphy is a set which is maximal in the sense that there exists a holomorphic function on this set which cannot be extended to a bigger set.
Formally, an open set

 
  in the n-dimensional complex space 
 
 
 
  is called a domain of holomorphy if there do not exist non-empty open sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is connected, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that for every holomorphic function

 
  on 
 
 
 
  there exists a holomorphic function 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 

In the 
 
 
 
  case, every open set is a domain of holomorphy: we can define a holomorphic function with zeros accumulating everywhere on the boundary of the domain, which must then be a natural boundary for a domain of definition of its inverse. For 
 
 
 
  this is no longer true, as it follows from Hartogs' lemma.
Equivalent conditions
For a domain 
 
 
 
  the following conditions are equivalent:



 
  is a domain of holomorphy


 
  is holomorphically convex


 
  is pseudoconvex


 
  is Levi convex - for every sequence 
 
 
 
  of analytic compact surfaces such that 
 
 
 
  for some set 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  cannot be "touched from inside" by a sequence of analytic surfaces)


 
  has local Levi property - for every point 
 
 
 
  there exist a neighbourhood 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  holomorphic on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  cannot be extended to any neighbourhood of 
 
 


Implications 
 
 
 
  are standard results (for 
 
 
 
 , see Oka's lemma). The main difficulty lies in proving 
 
 
 
 , i.e. constructing a global holomorphic function which admits no extension from non-extendable functions defined only locally. This is called the Levi problem (after E. E. Levi) and was first solved by Kiyoshi Oka, and then by Lars Hörmander using methods from functional analysis and partial differential equations (a consequence of 

 
 -problem).
Properties

If 
 
 
 
  are domains of holomorphy, then their intersection 
 
 
 
  is also a domain of holomorphy.
If 
 
 
 
  is an ascending sequence of domains of holomorphy, then their union 
 
 
 
  is also a domain of holomorphy (see Behnke-Stein theorem).
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are domains of holomorphy, then 
 
 
 
  is a domain of holomorphy.
The first Cousin problem is always solvable in a domain of holomorphy; this is also true, with additional topological assumptions, for the second Cousin problem.

See also

Behnke–Stein theorem
Levi pseudoconvex
solution of the Levi problem
Stein manifold

References

Steven G. Krantz. Function Theory of Several Complex Variables, AMS Chelsea Publishing, Providence, Rhode Island, 1992.
Boris Vladimirovich Shabat, Introduction to Complex Analysis, AMS, 1992

"
Category:Several complex variables


