


Spherical law of cosines




Spherical law of cosines

In spherical trigonometry, the law of cosines (also called the cosine rule for sides1) is a theorem relating the sides and angles of spherical triangles, analogous to the ordinary law of cosines from plane trigonometry.
 Given a unit sphere, a "spherical triangle" on the surface of the sphere is defined by the great circles connecting three points 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  on the sphere (shown at right). If the lengths of these three sides are 
 
 
 
  (from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  (from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ), and 
 
 
 
  (from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ), and the angle of the corner opposite 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , then the (first) spherical law of cosines states:23



Since this is a unit sphere, the lengths 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are simply equal to the angles (in radians) subtended by those sides from the center of the sphere (for a non-unit sphere, they are the distances divided by the radius). As a special case, for 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 , and one obtains the spherical analogue of the Pythagorean theorem:



A variation on the law of cosines, the second spherical law of cosines,4 (also called the cosine rule for angles5) states:



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the angles of the corners opposite to sides 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. It can be obtained from consideration of a spherical triangle dual to the given one.
If the law of cosines is used to solve for 
 
 
 
 , the necessity of inverting the cosine magnifies rounding errors when 
 
 
 
  is small. In this case, the alternative formulation of the law of haversines is preferable.6
Proof
A proof of the law of cosines can be constructed as follows.7 Let 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  denote the unit vectors from the center of the sphere to those corners of the triangle. Then, the lengths (angles) of the sides are given by the dot products:









To get the angle 
 
 
 
 , we need the tangent vectors  and  at 
 
 
 
  along the directions of sides 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. For example, the tangent vector  is the unit vector perpendicular to 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
  plane, whose direction is given by the component of 
 
 
 
  perpendicular to 
 
 
 
 . This means:



where for the denominator we have used the Pythagorean identity  1 − cos2(a)}} and where || || denotes the length of the vector in the denominator. Similarly,



Then, the angle 
 
 
 
  is given by:



from which the law of cosines immediately follows.
Proof without vectors
To the diagram above, add a plane tangent to the sphere at 
 
 
 
 , and extend radii from the center of the sphere 
 
 
 
  through 
 
 
 
  and through 
 
 
 
  to meet the plane at points 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . We then have two plane triangles with a side in common: the triangle containing 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and the one containing 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Sides of the first triangle are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , with angle 
 
 
 
  between them; sides of the second triangle are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , with angle 
 
 
 
  between them. By the law of cosines for plane triangles (and remembering that  of any angle is ),



So



Multiply both sides by 
 
 
 
  and rearrange.
Planar limit: small angles
For small spherical triangles, i.e. for small 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , the spherical law of cosines is approximately the same as the ordinary planar law of cosines,



To prove this, we'll use the small-angle approximation obtained from the Maclaurin series for the cosine and sine functions:



Substituting these expressions into the spherical law of cosines nets:



or after simplifying:



Remembering the properties of big O notation, we can discard summands where the lowest exponent for 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  is greater than 
 
 
 
 , so finally, the error in this approximation is:



See also

Half-side formula
Hyperbolic law of cosines
Solution of triangles

Notes


he:טריגונומטריה ספירית#משפט הקוסינוסים"
Category:Spherical trigonometry Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in geometry




Romuald Ireneus 'Scibor-Marchocki, [http://www.webcitation.org/query?url=http://www.geocities.com/ResearchTriangle/2363/trig02.html&date;;=2009-10-25+09:44:36 Spherical trigonometry], Elementary-Geometry Trigonometry web page (1997).
W. Gellert, S. Gottwald, M. Hellwich, H. Kästner, and H. Küstner, The VNR Concise Encyclopedia of Mathematics, 2nd ed., ch. 12 (Van Nostrand Reinhold: New York, 1989).


R. W. Sinnott, "Virtues of the Haversine", Sky and Telescope 68 (2), 159 (1984).





