


Grüneisen parameter




Grüneisen parameter

The Grüneisen parameter, γ, named after Eduard Grüneisen, describes the effect that changing the volume of a crystal lattice has on its vibrational properties, and, as a consequence, the effect that changing temperature has on the size or dynamics of the lattice. The term is usually reserved to describe the single thermodynamic property γ, which is a weighted average of the many separate parameters γi entering the original Grüneisen's formulation in terms of the phonon nonlinearities.1 __TOC__
Thermodynamic definitions
Because of the equivalences between many properties and derivatives within thermodynamics (e.g. see Maxwell Relations), there are many formulations of the Grüneisen parameter which are equally valid, leading to numerous distinct yet correct interpretations of its meaning.
Some formulations for the Grüneisen parameter include:



where V is volume, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the principal (i.e. per-mass) heat capacities at constant pressure and volume, E is energy, α is the volume thermal expansion coefficient, 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the adiabatic and isothermal bulk moduli, and ρ is density.
Gruneisen constant for perfect crystals with pair interactions
The expression for Gruneisen constant of a perfect crystal with pair interactions in 
 
 
 
 -dimmensional space has the form:2


where 
 
 
 
  is the interatomic potential, 
 
 
 
 
  is the equilibrium distance, 
 
 
 
  is the space dimensionality. Relations between the Gruneisen constant and parameters of Lennard-Jones, Morse, and Mie potentials are presented in the table below.




Lattice

Dimensionality

Lennard-Jones potential

Mie Potential

Morse potential





Chain



















Triangual lattice



















FCC, BCC



















"Hyperlattice"



















General formula





















The expression for Gruneisen constant of 1D chain with Mie potential exactly coincides with the results of McDonald and Roy3 Using the relation between Gruneisen parameter and interatomic potential one can derive simple necessary and sufficient condition for  Negative Thermal Expansion in perfect crystals with pair interactions:



See  this page for more details.
Microscopic definition via the phonon frequencies
The physical meaning of the parameter can also be extended by combining thermodynamics with a reasonable microphysics model for the vibrating atoms within a crystal. When the restoring force acting on an atom displaced from its equilibrium position is linear in the atom's displacement, the frequencies ωi of individual phonons do not depend on the volume of the crystal or on the presence of other phonons, and the thermal expansion (and thus γ) is zero.{{#tag:ref|Thermal expansion does occur in Harmonic crystals if the force constant is dependent on the lattice parameter, which is the usual case.|group=nb}} When the restoring force is non-linear in the displacement, the phonon frequencies ωi change with the volume 
 
 
 
 . The Grüneisen parameter of an individual vibrational mode 
 
 
 
  can then be defined as (the negative of) the logarithmic derivative of the corresponding frequency 
 
 
 
 
 :



Relationship between microscopic and thermodynamic models
Using the quasi-harmonic approximation for atomic vibrations, the macroscopic Grüneisen parameter (γ) can be related to the description of how the vibration frequencies (phonons) within a crystal are altered with changing volume (i.e. γi's). For example, one can show that



if one defines 
 
 
 
  as the weighted average



where 
 
 
 
 
 's are the partial vibrational mode contributions to the heat capacity, such that 
 
 

Proof
To prove this relation, it is easiest to introduce the heat capacity per particle 
 
 
 
 ; so one can write


 
 .
This way, it suffices to prove


 
 .
Left-hand side (def):



Right-hand side (def):



Furthermore (Maxwell relations):



Thus



This derivative is straightforward to determine in the quasi-harmonic approximation, as only the ωi are V-dependent.




By which it is proven that



Notes
See also

Debye model''
Negative thermal expansion
Mie-Gruneisen equation of state

External links

Definition from Eric Weisstein's World of Physics

Gruneisen parameter has no units
References
   
"
Category:Condensed matter physics Category:Dimensionless numbers of thermodynamics



E. Grüneisen, The state of a body. Handb. Phys., 10, 1-52. NASA translation RE2-18-59W






