


Subharmonic function




Subharmonic function

In mathematics, subharmonic and superharmonic functions are important classes of functions used extensively in partial differential equations, complex analysis and potential theory.
Intuitively, subharmonic functions are related to convex functions of one variable as follows. If the graph of a convex function and a line intersect at two points, then the graph of the convex function is below the line between those points. In the same way, if the values of a subharmonic function are no larger than the values of a harmonic function on the boundary of a ball, then the values of the subharmonic function are no larger than the values of the harmonic function also inside the ball.
Superharmonic functions can be defined by the same description, only replacing "no larger" with "no smaller". Alternatively, a superharmonic function is just the negative of a subharmonic function, and for this reason any property of subharmonic functions can be easily transferred to superharmonic functions.
Formal definition
Formally, the definition can be stated as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  be a subset of the Euclidean space

 
  and let



be an upper semi-continuous function. Then, 
 
 
 
  is called subharmonic if for any closed ball

 
  of center 
 
 
 
  and radius 
 
 
 
  contained in 
 
 
 
  and every real-valued continuous function

 
  on 
 
 
 
  that is harmonic in 
 
 
 
  and satisfies 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  on the boundary

 
  of 
 
 
 
  we have 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 

Note that by the above, the function which is identically −∞ is subharmonic, but some authors exclude this function by definition.
A function 
 
 
 
  is called superharmonic if 
 
 
 
  is subharmonic.
Properties

A function is harmonic if and only if it is both subharmonic and superharmonic.
If 
 
 
 
  is C2 (twice continuously differentiable) on an open set

 
  in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is subharmonic if and only if one has



 
  on 
 
 


where 
 
 
 
  is the Laplacian.
 


The maximum of a subharmonic function cannot be achieved in the interior of its domain unless the function is constant, this is the so-called maximum principle. However, the minimum of a subharmonic function can be achieved in the interior of its domain.
Subharmonic functions make a convex cone, that is, a linear combination of subharmonic functions with positive coefficients is also subharmonic.


The pointwise maximum of two subharmonic functions is subharmonic.


The limit of a decreasing sequence of subharmonic functions is subharmonic (or identically equal to 
 
 
 
 ).

Subharmonic functions in the complex plane
Subharmonic functions are of a particular importance in complex analysis, where they are intimately connected to holomorphic functions.
One can show that a real-valued, continuous function 
 
 
 
  of a complex variable (that is, of two real variables) defined on a set 
 
 
 
  is subharmonic if and only if for any closed disc 
 
 
 
  of center 
 
 
 
  and radius 
 
 
 
  one has



Intuitively, this means that a subharmonic function is at any point no greater than the average of the values in a circle around that point, a fact which can be used to derive the maximum principle.
If 
 
 
 
  is a holomorphic function, then


 
  is a subharmonic function if we define the value of 
 
 
 
  at the zeros of 
 
 
 
  to be −∞. It follows that


 
  is subharmonic for every α > 0. This observation plays a role in the theory of Hardy spaces, especially for the study of Hp when 0 f on a domain 
 
 
 
  that is constant in the imaginary direction is convex in the real direction and vice versa.
Harmonic majorants of subharmonic functions
If 
 
 
 
  is subharmonic in a region

 
  of the complex plane, and 
 
 
 
  is harmonic on 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a harmonic majorant of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 ≤
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Such an inequality can be viewed as a growth condition on 
 
 
 
 .1
Subharmonic functions in the unit disc. Radial maximal function
Let φ be subharmonic, continuous and non-negative in an open subset Ω of the complex plane containing the closed unit disc D(0, 1). The radial maximal function for the function φ (restricted to the unit disc) is defined on the unit circle by


 
  If Pr denotes the Poisson kernel, it follows from the subharmonicity that


 
  It can be shown that the last integral is less than the value at e iθ of the Hardy–Littlewood maximal function φ∗ of the restriction of φ to the unit circle T,


 
  so that 0 ≤ M φ ≤ φ∗. It is known that the Hardy–Littlewood operator is bounded on Lp(T) when 1  \|M \varphi\|_{L^2(\mathbf{T})}^2 \le C^2 \, \int_0^{2\pi} \varphi(\mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{i} \theta})^2 \, \mathrm{d}\theta.
If f is a function holomorphic in Ω and 0  | p/2. It can be deduced from these facts that any function F in the classical Hardy space Hp satisfies








With more work, it can be shown that F has radial limits F(e iθ) almost everywhere on the unit circle, and (by the dominated convergence theorem) that Fr, defined by Fr(e iθ) = F(r e iθ) tends to F in Lp(T).
Subharmonic functions on Riemannian manifolds
Subharmonic functions can be defined on an arbitrary Riemannian manifold.
Definition: Let M be a Riemannian manifold, and 
 
 
 
  an upper semicontinuous function. Assume that for any open subset 
 
 
 
 , and any harmonic function f1 on U, such that 
 
 
 
  on the boundary of U, the inequality 
 
 
 
  holds on all U. Then f is called subharmonic.
This definition is equivalent to one given above. Also, for twice differentiable functions, subharmonicity is equivalent to the inequality 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the usual Laplacian.2
See also

Plurisubharmonic function — generalization to several complex variables
Classical fine topology

Notes


References








"
Category:Subharmonic functions Category:Potential theory Category:Complex analysis Category:Types of functions



Rosenblum, Marvin; Rovnyak, James (1994), p.35 (see References)
, 




