


Ordered graph




Ordered graph

An ordered graph is a graph with a total order over its nodes.
In an ordered graph, the parents of a node are the nodes that are joined to it and precede it in the ordering. More precisely, 
 
 
 
  is a parent of 
 
 
 
  in the ordered graph 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The width of a node is the number of its parents, and the width of an ordered graph is the maximal width of its nodes.
The induced graph of an ordered graph is obtained by adding some edges to an ordering graph, using the method outlined below. The induced width of an ordered graph is the width of its induced graph.
Given an ordered graph, its induced graph is another ordered graph obtained by joining some pairs of nodes that are both parents of another node. In particular, nodes are considered in turn according to the ordering, from last to first. For each node, if two of its parents are not joined by an edge, that edge is added. In other words, when considering node 
 
 
 
 , if both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are parents of it and are not joined by an edge, the edge 
 
 
 
  is added to the graph. Since the parents of a node are always connected with each other, the induced graph is always chordal.
As an example, the induced graph of an ordered graph is calculated. The ordering is represented by the position of its nodes in the figures: a is the last node and d is the first.



(Figure)
Induced-1.svg

(Figure)
Induced-2.svg

(Figure)
Induced-3.svg




The original graph.

Edge added considering the parents of 
 
 


Edge added considering the parents of 
 
 




Node 
 
 
 
  is considered first. Its parents are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , as they are both joined to 
 
 
 
  and both precede 
 
 
 
  in the ordering. Since they are not joined by an edge, one is added.
Node 
 
 
 
  is considered second. While this node only has 
 
 
 
  as a parent in the original graph, it also has 
 
 
 
  as a parent in the partially built induced graph. Indeed, 
 
 
 
  is joined to 
 
 
 
  and also precede 
 
 
 
  in the ordering. As a result, an edge joining 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is added.
Considering 
 
 
 
  does not produce any change, as this node has no parents.
Processing nodes in order matters, as the introduced edges may create new parents, which are then relevant to the introduction of new edges. The following example shows that a different ordering produces a different induced graph of the same original graph. The ordering is the same as above but 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are swapped.



(Figure)
Induced-4.svg

(Figure)
Induced-5.svg




Same graph, but the order of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is swapped

Graph after considering 
 
 




As in the previous case, both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are parents of 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, an edge between them is added. According to the new order, the second node that is considered is 
 
 
 
 . This node has only one parent (
 
 
 
 ). Therefore, no new edge is added. The third considered node is 
 
 
 
 . Its only parent is 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not joined this time. As a result, no new edge is introduced. Since 
 
 
 
  has no parent as well, the final induced graph is the one above. This induced graph differs from the one produced by the previous ordering.
See also

Directed graph
Local consistency

References


ISBN 1-55860-890-7

"
Category:Constraint programming Category:Extensions and generalizations of graphs


