


Fundamental vector field




Fundamental vector field

In the study of mathematics and especially differential geometry, fundamental vector fields are an instrument that describes the infinitesimal behaviour of a smooth Lie group action on a smooth manifold. Such vector fields find important applications in the study of Lie theory, symplectic geometry, and the study of Hamiltonian group actions.
Motivation
Important to applications in mathematics and physics1 is the notion of a flow on a manifold. In particular, if 
 
 
 
  is a smooth manifold and 
 
 
 
  is a smooth vector field, one is interested in finding integral curves to 
 
 
 
 . More precisely, given 
 
 
 
  one is interested in curves 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  for which local solutions are guaranteed by the Existence and Uniqueness Theorem of Ordinary Differential Equations. If 
 
 
 
  is furthermore a complete vector field, then the flow of 
 
 
 
 , defined as the collection of all integral curves for 
 
 
 
 , is a diffeomorphism of 
 
 
 
 . The flow 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
  is in fact an action of the additive Lie group

 
  on 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, every smooth action 
 
 
 
  defines a complete vector field 
 
 
 
  via the equation


 
  It is then a simple result2 that there is a bijective correspondence between 
 
 
 
  actions on 
 
 
 
  and complete vector fields on 
 
 
 
 .
In the language of flow theory, the vector field 
 
 
 
  is called the infinitesimal generator.3 Intuitively, the behaviour of the flow at each point corresponds to the "direction" indicated by the vector field. It is a natural question to ask whether one may establish a similar correspondence between vector fields and more arbitrary Lie group actions on 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lie group with corresponding Lie algebra

 
 . Furthermore, let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth manifold endowed with a smooth action

 
 . Denote the map 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , called the orbit map of 
 
 
 
  corresponding to 
 
 
.4 For 
 
 
 
 , the fundamental vector field 
 
 
 
  corresponding to 
 
 
 
  is any of the following equivalent definitions:567











where 
 
 
 
  is the differential of a smooth map and 
 
 
 
  is the zero vector in the vector space

 
 .
The map 
 
 
 
  can then be shown to be a Lie algebra homomorphism.8
Applications
Lie groups
The Lie algebra of a Lie group 
 
 
 
  may be identified with either the left- or right-invariant vector fields on 
 
 
 
 . It is a well known result9 that such vector fields are isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 , the tangent space at identity. In fact, if we let 
 
 
 
  act on itself via right-multiplication, the corresponding fundamental vector fields are precisely the left-invariant vector fields.
Hamiltonian group actions
In the motivation, it was shown that there is a bijective correspondence between smooth 
 
 
 
  actions and complete vector fields. Similarly, there is a bijective correspondence between symplectic actions (the induced diffeomorphisms are all symplectomorphisms) and complete symplectic vector fields.
A closely related idea is that of Hamiltonian vector fields. Given a symplectic manifold 
 
 
 
 , we say that 
 
 
 
  is a Hamiltonian vector field if there exists a smooth function

 
  satisfying


 
  where the map 
 
 
 
  is the interior product. This motivatives the definition of a Hamiltonian group action as follows: If 
 
 
 
  is a Lie group with Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a group action of 
 
 
 
  on a smooth manifold 
 
 
 
 , then we say that 
 
 
 
  is a Hamiltonian group action if there exists a moment map

 
  such that for each 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the fundamental vector field of 
 
 

References


"
Category:Lie groups Category:Symplectic geometry Category:Hamiltonian mechanics Category:Smooth manifolds
















