


Heteroclinic orbit




Heteroclinic orbit

(Figure)
The phase portrait of the pendulum equation x'' + sin x = 0. The highlighted curve shows the heteroclinic orbit from (x, x') = (−π, 0) to (x, x') = (π, 0). This orbit corresponds with the (rigid) pendulum starting upright, making one revolution through its lowest position, and ending upright again.

In mathematics, in the phase portrait of a dynamical system, a heteroclinic orbit (sometimes called a heteroclinic connection) is a path in phase space which joins two different equilibrium points. If the equilibrium points at the start and end of the orbit are the same, the orbit is a homoclinic orbit.
Consider the continuous dynamical system described by the ODE








Suppose there are equilibria at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , then a solution 
 
 
 
  is a heteroclinic orbit from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  if








and








This implies that the orbit is contained in the stable manifold of 
 
 
 
  and the unstable manifold of 
 
 
 
 .
Symbolic dynamics
By using the Markov partition, the long-time behaviour of hyperbolic system can be studied using the techniques of symbolic dynamics. In this case, a heteroclinic orbit has a particularly simple and clear representation. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a finite set of M symbols. The dynamics of a point x is then represented by a bi-infinite string of symbols



A periodic point of the system is simply a recurring sequence of letters. A heteroclinic orbit is then the joining of two distinct periodic orbits. It may be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of symbols of length k, (of course, 
 
 
 
 ), and 
 
 
 
  is another sequence of symbols, of length m (likewise, 
 
 
 
 ). The notation 
 
 
 
 
  simply denotes the repetition of p an infinite number of times. Thus, a heteroclinic orbit can be understood as the transition from one periodic orbit to another. By contrast, a homoclinic orbit can be written as



with the intermediate sequence 
 
 
 
  being non-empty, and, of course, not being p, as otherwise, the orbit would simply be 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Heteroclinic connection
Heteroclinic cycle
Heteroclinic bifurcation
Homoclinic orbit

References

John Guckenheimer and Philip Holmes, Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector Fields, (Applied Mathematical Sciences Vol. 42), Springer

"
Category:Dynamical systems


