   Conjunctive grammar      Conjunctive grammar   Conjunctive grammars are a class of formal grammars studied in formal language theory. They extend the basic type of grammars, the context-free grammars , with a conjunction operation. Besides explicit conjunction, conjunctive grammars allow implicit disjunction represented by multiple rules for a single nonterminal symbol, which is the only logical connective expressible in context-free grammars. Conjunction can be used, in particular, to specify intersection of languages. A further extension of conjunctive grammars known as Boolean grammars additionally allows explicit negation .  The rules of a conjunctive grammar are of the form      A  →    α  1   &  …  &   α  m       normal-→  A     subscript  α  1   normal-…   subscript  α  m      A\to\alpha_{1}\And\ldots\And\alpha_{m}     where   A   A   A   is a nonterminal and    α  1     subscript  α  1    \alpha_{1}   , ...,    α  m     subscript  α  m    \alpha_{m}   are strings formed of symbols in   Σ   normal-Σ   \Sigma   and   N   N   N   (finite sets of terminal and nonterminal symbols respectively). Informally, such a rule asserts that every string   w   w   w   over   Σ   normal-Σ   \Sigma   that satisfies each of the syntactical conditions represented by    α  1     subscript  α  1    \alpha_{1}   , ...,    α  m     subscript  α  m    \alpha_{m}   therefore satisfies the condition defined by   A   A   A   .  Two equivalent formal definitions of the language specified by a conjunctive grammar exist. One definition is based upon representing the grammar as a system of language equations with union, intersection and concatenation and considering its least solution. The other definition generalizes Chomsky's generative definition of the context-free grammars using rewriting of terms over conjunction and concatenation.  Though the expressive means of conjunctive grammars are greater than those of context-free grammars, conjunctive grammars retain some practically useful properties of the latter. Most importantly, there are generalizations of the main context-free parsing algorithms, including the linear-time recursive descent , the cubic-time generalized LR , the cubic-time Cocke-Kasami-Younger , as well as Valiant's algorithm running as fast as matrix multiplication.  A number of theoretical properties of conjunctive grammars have been researched, including the expressive power of grammars over a one-letter alphabet and numerous undecidable decision problems . This work provided a basis for the study language equations of a more general form.  References   Alexander Okhotin, Conjunctive grammars.  Journal of Automata, Languages and Combinatorics , 6:4 (2001), 519-535. (pdf)  Alexander Okhotin, An overview of conjunctive grammars. In: Gheorghe Paun, Grzegorz Rozenberg, Arto Salomaa (Eds.), Current Trends in Theoretical Computer Science: The Challenge of the New Century, Vol. 2, World Scientific, 2004, 545--566. (pdf)  Artur Jeż. Conjunctive grammars can generate non-regular unary languages. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science 19(3): 597-615 (2008) Technical report version (pdf)   External links   Artur Jeż. Conjunctive grammars can generate non-regular unary languages . Slides of talk held at the International Conference on Developments in Language Theory 2007.  Alexander Okhotin's page on conjunctive grammars .  Alexander Okhotin. Nine open problems for conjunctive and Boolean grammars .   "  Category:Formal languages   