


String diagram




String diagram

In category theory, string diagrams are a way of representing 2-cells in 2-categories.
Definition
The idea is to represent structures of dimension d by structures of dimension 2-d, using the Poincaré duality. Thus,

an object is represented by a portion of plane,
a 1-cell 
 
 
 
  is represented by a vertical segment — called a string — separating the plane in two (the left part corresponding to A and the right one to B),
a 2-cell 
 
 
 
  is represented by an intersection of strings (the strings corresponding to f above the link, the strings corresponding to g below the link).

The parallel composition of 2-cells corresponds to the horizontal juxtaposition of diagrams and the sequential composition to the vertical juxtaposition of diagrams.
Example
Consider an adjunction

 
  between two categories 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is left adjoint of 
 
 
 
  and the natural transformations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are respectively the unit and the counit. The string diagrams corresponding to these natural transformations are:
The string corresponding to the identity functor is drawn as a dotted line and can be omitted. The definition of an adjunction requires the following equalities:


 
 
  The first one is depicted as 
Other diagrammatic languages
Monoidal categories can also be pictured this way1 since a strict monoidal category can be seen as a 2-category with only one object (there will therefore be only one type of plane) and Mac Lane's strictness theorem states that any monoidal category is monoidally equivalent to a strict one. The graphical language of string diagrams for monoidal categories may be extended to represent expressions in categories with other structure, such as symmetric monoidal categories, dagger categories,2 and is related to geometric presentations for braided monoidal categories3 and ribbon categories.4
External links



References
"
Category:Higher category theory Category:Monoidal categories



A. Joyal and R. Street. Geometry of Tensor Calculus I, Advances in Mathematics, 1991.
P. Selinger. A survey of graphical languages for monoidal categories. New Structures for Physics 2007.
Joyal and Street. Braided tensor categories. Advances in Mathematics, 1993.
Mei Chee Shum. Tortile tensor categories. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 1994.




