


Fundamental unit (number theory)




Fundamental unit (number theory)

In algebraic number theory, a fundamental unit is a generator (modulo the roots of unity) for the unit group of the ring of integers of a number field, when that group has rank 1 (i.e. when the unit group modulo its torsion subgroup is infinite cyclic). Dirichlet's unit theorem shows that the unit group has rank 1 exactly when the number field is a real quadratic field, a complex cubic field, or a totally imaginary quartic field. When the unit group has rank ≥ 1, a basis of it modulo its torsion is called a fundamental system of units.1 Some authors use the term fundamental unit to mean any element of a fundamental system of units, not restricting to the case of rank 1 (e.g. ).
Real quadratic fields
For the real quadratic field 
 
 
 
  (with d square-free), the fundamental unit ε is commonly normalized so that 
 
 
 
  (as a real number). Then it is uniquely characterized as the minimal unit among those that are greater than 1. If Δ denotes the discriminant of K, then the fundamental unit is


 
  where (a, b) is the smallest solution to2


 
  in positive integers. This equation is basically Pell's equation or the negative Pell equation and its solutions can be obtained similarly using the continued fraction expansion of 
 
 
 
 .
Whether or not x2 − Δy2 = −4 has a solution determines whether or not the class group of K is the same as its narrow class group, or equivalently, whether or not there is a unit of norm −1 in K. This equation is known to have a solution if, and only if, the period of the continued fraction expansion of 
 
 
 
  is odd. A simpler relation can be obtained using congruences: if Δ is divisible by a prime that is congruent to 3 modulo 4, then K does not have a unit of norm −1. However, the converse does not hold as shown by the example d = 34.3 In the early 1990s, Peter Stevenhagen proposed a probabilistic model that led him to a conjecture on how often the converse fails. Specifically, if D(X) is the number of real quadratic fields whose discriminant Δ −(X) is those who have a unit of norm −1, then4


 
  In other words, the converse fails about 42% of the time. As of March 2012, a recent result towards this conjecture was provided by Étienne Fouvry and Jürgen Klüners5 who show that the converse fails between 33% and 59% of the time.
Cubic fields
If K is a complex cubic field then it has a unique real embedding and the fundamental unit ε can be picked uniquely such that |ε| > 1 in this embedding. If the discriminant Δ of K satisfies |Δ| ≥ 33, then6


 
  For example, the fundamental unit of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  whose cube is ≈ 56.9, whereas the discriminant of this field is −108 and



Notes
References







External links



"
Category:Algebraic number theory













