


Partition regularity




Partition regularity

In combinatorics, a branch of mathematics, partition regularity is one notion of largeness for a collection of sets.
Given a set 
 
 
 
 , a collection of subsets 
 
 
 
  is called partition regular if every set A in the collection has the property that, no matter how A is partitioned into finitely many subsets, at least one of the subsets will also belong to the collection. That is, for any 
 
 
 
 , and any finite partition 
 
 
 
 , there exists an i ≤ n, such that 
 
 
 
  belongs to 
 
 
 
 . Ramsey theory is sometimes characterized as the study of which collections 
 
 
 
  are partition regular.
Examples

the collection of all infinite subsets of an infinite set X is a prototypical example. In this case partition regularity asserts that every finite partition of an infinite set has an infinite cell (i.e. the infinite pigeonhole principle.)


sets with positive upper density in 
 
 
 
 : the upper density

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is defined as 
 
 



For any ultrafilter

 
  on a set 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is partition regular. If 
 
 
 
 , then for exactly one 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .


sets of recurrence: a set R of integers is called a set of recurrence if for any measure preserving transformation 
 
 
 
  of the probability space (Ω, β, μ) and 
 
 
 
  of positive measure there is a nonzero 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
 .


Call a subset of natural numbers a.p.-rich if it contains arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions. Then the collection of a.p.-rich subsets is partition regular (Van der Waerden, 1927).


Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of all n-subsets of 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
 . For each n, 
 
 
 
  is partition regular. (Ramsey, 1930).


For each infinite cardinal 
 
 
 
 , the collection of stationary sets of 
 
 
 
  is partition regular. More is true: if 
 
 
 
  is stationary and 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 , then some 
 
 
 
  is stationary.


the collection of 
 
 
 
 -sets
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -set if 
 
 
 
  contains the set of differences 
 
 
 
 .


the set of barriers on 
 
 
 
 : call a collection 
 
 
 
  of finite subsets of 
 
 
 
  a barrier if:
 


 
  and
for all infinite 
 
 
 
 , there is some 
 
 
 
  such that the elements of X are the smallest elements of I; i.e.

 
  and 



This generalizes Ramsey's theorem, as each 
 
 
 
  is a barrier. (Nash-Williams, 1965)
 


finite products of infinite trees (Halpern–Läuchli, 1966)


piecewise syndetic sets (Brown, 1968)


Call a subset of natural numbers i.p.-rich if it contains arbitrarily large finite sets together with all their finite sums. Then the collection of i.p.-rich subsets is partition regular (Folkman–Rado–Sanders, 1968).


(m, p, c)-sets (Deuber, 1973)


IP sets (Hindman, 1974, see also Hindman, Strauss, 1998)


MTk sets for each k, i.e. k-tuples of finite sums (Milliken–Taylor, 1975)


central sets; i.e. the members of any minimal idempotent in $\beta\mathbb{N}$, the Stone–Čech compactification of the integers. (Furstenberg, 1981, see also Hindman, Strauss, 1998)

References

Vitaly Bergelson, N. Hindman Partition regular structures contained in large sets are abundant J. Comb. Theory (Series A) 93 (2001), 18–36.
T. Brown, An interesting combinatorial method in the theory of locally finite semigroups, Pacific J. Math. 36, no. 2 (1971), 285–289.
W. Deuber, Mathematische Zeitschrift 133, (1973) 109–123
N. Hindman, Finite sums from sequences within cells of a partition of N, J. Combinatorial Theory (Series A) 17 (1974) 1–11.
C.St.J.A. Nash-Williams, On well-quasi-ordering transfinite sequences, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 61 (1965), 33–39.
N. Hindman, D. Strauss, Algebra in the Stone–Čech compactification, De Gruyter, 1998
J.Sanders, A Generalization of Schur's Theorem, Doctoral Dissertation, Yale University, 1968.

"
Category:Ramsey theory Category:Set families


