   Potassium persulfate      Potassium persulfate    Not to be confused with potassium peroxymonosulfate .    Potassium persulfate is the inorganic compound with the formula K 2 S 2 O 8 . Also known as potassium peroxydisulfate or KPS, it is a white solid that is highly soluble in water. This salt is a powerful oxidant, commonly used to initiate polymerizations .  Preparation  Potassium persulfate can be prepared by electrolysis of a cold solution potassium bisulfate in sulfuric acid at a high current density. 1   2 KHSO 4 → K 2 S 2 O 8 + H 2    It can also be prepared by adding potassium bisulfate (KHSO 4 ) to a solution of the more soluble salt ammonium peroxydisulfate (NH 4 ) 2 S 2 O 8 . In principle it can be prepared by chemical oxidation of potassium sulfate using fluorine .  Uses  This salt is used to initiate polymerziation of various alkenes leading to commercially important polymers such as styrene-butadiene rubber and polytetrafluoroethylene and related materials. In solution, the dianion dissociates to give radicals: 2   [O 3 SO-OSO 3 ] 2−     ←  →     normal-→  normal-←    \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   2 [SO 4 ] −    It is used in organic chemistry as an oxidizing agent , 3 for instance in the Elbs persulfate oxidation of phenols .  As a strong bleaching agent , it is used in hair dye substances as whitening agent with hydrogen peroxide.  As a strong oxidant of environmental samples, mainly aqueous, for the determination of the total nitrogenous compounds therein. 4  It is a food additive .  Precautions  The salt is a strong oxidant and is incompatible with organic compounds.  References  "  Category:Persulfates  Category:Potassium compounds  Category:Oxidizing agents  Category:Radical initiators     F. Feher, "Potassium Peroxydisulfate" in Handbook of Preparative Inorganic Chemistry, 2nd Ed. Edited by G. Brauer, Academic Press, 1963, NY. Vol. 1. p. 392. ↩  ↩  Encyclopedia of Reagents for Organic Synthesis, vol. 1, pp 193-197(1995) ↩  Method 4500-N C. Persulfate Method for Total Nitrogen. In Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater ↩     