


Naimark's dilation theorem




Naimark's dilation theorem

In operator theory, Naimark's dilation theorem is a result that characterizes positive operator valued measures. It can be viewed as a consequence of Stinespring's dilation theorem.
Note
In the mathematical literature, one may also find other results that bear Naimark's name.
Spelling
In the physics literature, it is common to see the spelling "Neumark" instead of "Naimark." This is due to translating between the Russian alphabet spelling and the spelling in European languages (namely English and German) using the Roman alphabet.
Some preliminary notions
Let X be a compact Hausdorff space, H be a Hilbert space, and L(H) the Banach space of bounded operators on H. A mapping E from the Borel σ-algebra on X to 
 
 
 
  is called a operator-valued measure if it is weakly countably additive, that is, for any disjoint sequence of Borel sets 
 
 
 
 , we have



for all x and y. Some terminology for describing such measures are:

E is called regular if the scalar valued measure




is a regular Borel measure, meaning all compact sets have finite total variation and the measure of a set can be approximated by those of open sets.

E is called bounded if 
 
 
 
 .


E is called positive if E(B) is a positive operator for all B.


E is called ''self-adjoint '' if E(B) is self-adjoint for all B.


E is called spectral if it is self-adjoint and 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .

We will assume throughout that E is regular.
Let C(X) denote the abelian C*-algebra of continuous functions on X. If E is regular and bounded, it induces a map 
 
 
 
  in the obvious way:



The boundedness of E implies, for all h of unit norm



This shows 
 
 
 
  is a bounded operator for all f, and 
 
 
 
  itself is a bounded linear map as well.
The properties of 
 
 
 
  are directly related to those of E:

If E is positive, then 
 
 
 
 
 , viewed as a map between C*-algebras, is also positive.




 
  is a homomorphism if, by definition, for all continuous f on X and 
 
 
 
 ,




Take f and g to be indicator functions of Borel sets and we see that 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphism if and only if E is spectral.

Similarly, to say 
 
 
 
  respects the * operation means




The LHS is



and the RHS is



So, taking f a sequence of continuous functions increasing to the indicator function of B, we get 
 
 
 
 , i.e. E(B) is self adjoint.

Combining the previous two facts gives the conclusion that 
 
 
 
  is a *-homomorphism if and only if E is spectral and self adjoint. (When E is spectral and self adjoint, E is said to be a projection-valued measure or PVM.)

Naimark's theorem
The theorem reads as follows: Let E be a positive L(H)-valued measure on X. There exists a Hilbert space K, a bounded operator 
 
 
 
 , and a self-adjoint, spectral L(K)-valued measure on X, F, such that



Proof
We now sketch the proof. The argument passes E to the induced map 
 
 
 
  and uses Stinespring's dilation theorem. Since E is positive, so is 
 
 
 
  as a map between C*-algebras, as explained above. Furthermore, because the domain of 
 
 
 
 , C(X), is an abelian C*-algebra, we have that 
 
 
 
  is completely positive. By Stinespring's result, there exists a Hilbert space K, a *-homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , and operator 
 
 
 
  such that



Since π is a *-homomorphism, its corresponding operator-valued measure F is spectral and self adjoint. It is easily seen that F has the desired properties.
Finite-dimensional case
In the finite-dimensional case, there is a somewhat more explicit formulation.
Suppose now 
 
 
 
 , therefore C(X) is the finite-dimensional algebra 
 
 
 
 , and H has finite dimension m. A positive operator-valued measure E then assigns each i a positive semidefinite m × m matrix 
 
 
 
 . Naimark's theorem now states that there is a projection-valued measure on X whose restriction is E.
Of particular interest is the special case when 
 
 
 
  where I is the identity operator. (See the article on POVM for relevant applications.) In this case, the induced map 
 
 
 
  is unital. It can be assumed with no loss of generality that each 
 
 
 
  is a rank-one projection onto some 
 
 
 
 . Under such assumptions, the case 
 
 
 
  is excluded and we must have either



 
  and E is already a projection-valued measure (because 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is an orthonormal basis),


 
  and 
 
 
 
  does not consist of mutually orthogonal projections.

For the second possibility, the problem of finding a suitable projection-valued measure now becomes the following problem. By assumption, the non-square matrix


 
  is an isometry, that is 
 
 
 
 . If we can find a 
 
 
 
  matrix N where


 
  is a n × n unitary matrix, the projection-valued measure whose elements are projections onto the column vectors of U will then have the desired properties. In principle, such a N can always be found.
References

V. Paulsen, Completely Bounded Maps and Operator Algebras, Cambridge University Press, 2003.

"
Category:Operator theory Category:Measure theory Category:Theorems in functional analysis


