


Faulhaber's formula




Faulhaber's formula

In mathematics, Faulhaber's formula, named after Johann Faulhaber, expresses the sum of the p-th powers of the first n positive integers



as a (p + 1)th-degree polynomial function of n, the coefficients involving Bernoulli numbers Bj.
The formula says



Faulhaber himself did not know the formula in this form, but only computed the first seventeen polynomials; the general form was established with the discovery of the Bernoulli numbers (see History section below). The derivation of Faulhaber's formula is available in The Book of Numbers by John Horton Conway and Richard K. Guy.1
There is also a similar (but somehow simpler) expression: using the idea of telescoping and the binomial theorem, one gets Pascal's identity:2


 
 . This in particular yields the examples below, e.g., take k = 1 to get the first example.
Examples


 
  (the triangular numbers)


 
  (the square pyramidal numbers)


 
  (the squared triangular numbers)









Proof
Let


 
  denote the sum under consideration for integer 
 
 

Define the following exponential generating function with (initially) indeterminant 
 
 



 
  We find


 
 
  This is an entire function in 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  can be taken to be any complex number.
We next recall the exponential generating function for the Bernoulli polynomials




 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Bernoulli number (with the convention 
 
 
 
 ). We obtain the Faulhaber formula by expanding the generating function as follows:


 
 
  Note that 
 
 
 
  for all odd 
 
 
 
 . Hence some authors define 
 
 
 
  so that the alternating factor 
 
 
 
  is absent.
Alternate expressions
By relabelling we find the alternative expression







We may also expand 
 
 
 
  in terms of the Bernoulli polynomials to find


 
 
  which implies



Relationship to Riemann Zeta Function
Using 
 
 
 
 , one can write



If we consider the generating function 
 
 
 
  in the large 
 
 
 
  limit for 
 
 
 
 , then we find


 
  Heuristically, this suggests that


 
  This result agrees with the value of the Riemann zeta function

 
  for negative integers 
 
 
 
  on appropriately analytically continuing 
 
 
 
 .
Umbral form
In the classic umbral calculus one formally treats the indices j in a sequence Bj as if they were exponents, so that, in this case we can apply the binomial theorem and say











In the modern umbral calculus, one considers the linear functional T on the vector space of polynomials in a variable b given by



Then one can say









= T\left({(b+n)^{p+1} - b^{p+1} \over p+1}\right). 
Faulhaber polynomials
The term Faulhaber polynomials is used by some authors to refer to something other than the polynomial sequence given above. Faulhaber observed that if p is odd, then



is a polynomial function of



In particular:















More generally,



The first of these identities (i.e., the case p = 3) is known as Nicomachus's theorem.
Some authors call the polynomials in a on the right-hand sides of these identities Faulhaber polynomials. These polynomials are divisible by  because the Bernoulli number  is 0 for 
 
 
 
  odd.
Faulhaber also knew that if a sum for an odd power is given by



then the sum for the even power just below is given by



Note that the polynomial in parentheses is the derivative of the polynomial above with respect to a.
Since a = n(n + 1)/2, these formulae show that for an odd power (greater than 1), the sum is a polynomial in n having factors n2 and (n + 1)2, while for an even power the polynomial has factors n, n + ½ and n + 1.
History
Faulhaber's formula is also called Bernoulli's formula. Faulhaber did not know the properties of the coefficients discovered by Bernoulli. Rather, he knew at least the first 17 cases, as well as the existence of the Faulhaber polynomials for odd powers described above.3
A rigorous proof of these formulas and his assertion that such formulas would exist for all odd powers took until .
Notes
External links




A very rare book, but Knuth has placed a photocopy in the Stanford library, call number QA154.8 F3 1631a f MATH. ()

(winner of a 1997 Lester R. Ford Award)

"
Category:Finite differences



↩
↩
 The arxiv.org paper has a misprint in the formula for the sum of 11th powers, which was corrected in the printed version. Correct version.↩




