   High-speed craft      High-speed craft     A high-speed craft (HSC) is a high speed water vessel for civilian use, also called a fastcraft or fast ferry . The first high-speed craft were often hydrofoils or hovercraft , but in the 1990s catamaran and even monohull designs have become popular. Most high-speed craft serve as passenger ferries , but the largest catamarans and monohulls also carry cars and even buses and freight (e.g. Stena's HSS). Hulled designs are often powered by pump-jets coupled to medium speed diesel engines. Hovercraft are usually powered by gas turbines or diesel engines driving propellors and impellors.  The design and safety of high-speed craft is regulated by the High Speed Craft Codes of 1994 and 2000, adopted by the Maritime Safety Committee of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO).  In accordance with SOLAS Chapter X Reg. 1.3, High Speed Crafts are crafts capable of a maximum speed, in metres per second (m/s), equal to or exceeding:      3.7  ×   ▽  0.1667       3.7   superscript  normal-▽  0.1667     3.7\times\triangledown^{0.1667}     where   ▽   normal-▽   \triangledown   = volume of displacement in cubic metres corresponding to the design waterline, excluding craft of which the hull is supported clear above the water surface in non-displacement mode by aerodynamic forces generated by ground effect.  HSC Examples   HSC Benchijigua Express world´s largest civilian trimaran .  Fincantieri MDV1200 Super SeaCat  PacifiCat Series  Auto Express 86  Passenger-Only Fast Ferry Class ferry  Meteor (hydrofoil)  High-speed Sea Service , Finnyards HSS 1500 and Westamarin HSS 900 developed and operated by Stena Line  Hawaii Superferry  Lake Express (Lake Michigan)  Leonora Christina  HSC Silvia Ana L  Tanger Jet II  Tarifa Jet  HSV-2 Swift  HMAS Jervis Bay (AKR 45)  SSTH Ocean Arrow  Villum Clausen  HSC Jonathan Swift   See also   List of high-speed craft ferry routes  BGV   External links  (Figure)  HSC Villum Clausen - BornholmerFærgen    The Merchant Shipping (High Speed Craft) Regulations 2004   "  Category:Ferry classes     