


Tightness of measures




Tightness of measures

In mathematics, tightness is a concept in measure theory. The intuitive idea is that a given collection of measures does not "escape to infinity."
Definitions
Let (X, T) be a topological space, and let Σ be a σ-algebra on X that contains the topology T. (Thus, every open subset of X is a measurable set and Σ is at least as fine as the Borel σ-algebra on X.) Let M be a collection of (possibly signed or complex) measures defined on Σ. The collection M is called tight (or sometimes uniformly tight) if, for any ε > 0, there is a compact subset Kε of X such that, for all measures μ in M,



where 
 
 
 
  is the total variation measure of 
 
 
 
 . Very often, the measures in question are probability measures, so the last part can be written as



If a tight collection M consists of a single measure μ, then (depending upon the author) μ may either be said to be a tight measure or to be an inner regular measure.
If Y is an X-valued random variable whose probability distribution on X is a tight measure then Y is said to be a separable random variable or a Radon random variable.
Examples
Compact spaces
If X is a metrisable compact space, then every collection of (possibly complex) measures on X is tight. This is not necessarily so for non-metrisable compact spaces. If we take 
 
 
 
  with its order topology, then there exists a measure 
 
 
 
  on it that is not inner regular. Therefore the singleton 
 
 
 
  is not tight.
Polish spaces
If X is a Polish space, then every probability measure on X is tight. Furthermore, by Prokhorov's theorem, a collection of probability measures on X is tight if and only if it is precompact in the topology of weak convergence.
A collection of point masses
Consider the real line R with its usual Borel topology. Let δx denote the Dirac measure, a unit mass at the point x in R. The collection



is not tight, since the compact subsets of R are precisely the closed and bounded subsets, and any such set, since it is bounded, has δn-measure zero for large enough n. On the other hand, the collection



is tight: the compact interval [0, 1] will work as Kη for any η > 0. In general, a collection of Dirac delta measures on Rn is tight if, and only if, the collection of their supports is bounded.
A collection of Gaussian measures
Consider n-dimensional Euclidean space Rn with its usual Borel topology and σ-algebra. Consider a collection of Gaussian measures



where the measure γi has expected value (mean) μi in Rn and variance σi2 > 0. Then the collection Γ is tight if, and only if, the collections 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both bounded.
Tightness and convergence
Tightness is often a necessary criterion for proving the weak convergence of a sequence of probability measures, especially when the measure space has infinite dimension. See

Finite-dimensional distribution
Prokhorov's theorem
Tightness in classical Wiener space
Tightness in Skorokhod space

Exponential tightness
A generalization of tightness is the concept of exponential tightness, which has applications in large deviations theory. A family of probability measures (μδ)δ>0 on a Hausdorff topological space X is said to be exponentially tight if, for any η > 0, there is a compact subset Kη of X such that



References



{{ cite book

| last1 = Ledoux | first1 = Michel | last2 = Talagrand | first2 = Michel | author2-link = Michel Talagrand | title = Probability in Banach spaces | publisher = Springer-Verlag | location = Berlin | year = 1991 | pages = xii+480 | isbn = 3-540-52013-9 }}  (See chapter 2)
"
Category:Measure theory


