   Outline of epistemology      Outline of epistemology   The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to epistemology:  Epistemology or theory of knowledge – branch of philosophy concerned with the nature and scope of knowledge . 1 The term was introduced into English by the Scottish philosopher James Frederick Ferrier (1808–1864). 2 Epistemology asks the questions: "What is knowledge?", "How is knowledge acquired?", and "What do people know?"  (Figure)  According to Plato , knowledge is a subset of that which is both true and believed.   Essence of epistemology   Descriptive knowledge ("knowledge that")  Scientific method  Truth   Branches of epistemology   Alethiology – the study of the nature of truth  Formal epistemology – subdiscipline of epistemology that uses formal methods from logic , probability theory and computability theory to elucidate traditional epistemic problems.  Meta-epistemology – metaphilosophical study of the subject, matter, methods and aims of epistemology and of approaches to understanding and structuring our knowledge of knowledge itself.  Social epistemology   Epistemological theories  Justification   Theories of justification   Foundationalism – Self-evident basic beliefs justify other non-basic beliefs.  Coherentism – Beliefs are justified if they cohere with other beliefs a person holds, each belief is justified if it coheres with the overall system of beliefs.  Internalism – The believer must be able to justify a belief through internal knowledge.  Externalism – Outside sources of knowledge can be used to justify a belief.  Skepticism – A variety of viewpoints questioning the possibility of knowledge.  Minority viewpoints include:  Foundherentism – A combination of foundationalism and coherentism proposed by Susan Haack .  Infinitism – Beliefs are justified by infinite chains of reasons, as proposed by Peter D. Klein .    Common justifiers   Scientific method – body of techniques for investigating phenomena , acquiring new 3  knowledge , or correcting and integrating previous knowledge. A scientific method consists of the collection of data through observation and experimentation , and the formulation and testing of hypotheses .    scientific method , Merriam-Webster Dictionary .    Occam's Razor – the principle that "entities must not be multiplied beyond necessity" ( entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem ). The popular interpretation of this principle is that the simplest explanation is usually the correct one. However, this is often confused, as the 'simple' "is really referring to the theory with the fewest new assumptions." 4  Empiricism – theory of knowledge that asserts that knowledge arises from evidence gathered via sense experience . Empiricism emphasizes the role of experience and evidence , especially sensory perception , in the formation of ideas, over the notion of innate ideas or tradition . 5  Induction – kind of reasoning that allows for the possibility that the conclusion is false even where all of the premises are true. 6 The premises of an inductive logical argument indicate some degree of support (inductive probability) for the conclusion but do not entail it; i.e. they do not ensure its truth.  Pragmatism – philosophical movement that includes those who claim that an ideology or proposition is true if it works satisfactorily, that the meaning of a proposition is to be found in the practical consequences of accepting it, and that impractical ideas are to be rejected.  Probability theory – branch of mathematics concerned with analysis of random phenomena. 7 The central objects of probability theory are random variables , stochastic processes , and events : mathematical abstractions of non-deterministic events or measured quantities that may either be single occurrences or evolve over time in an apparently random fashion. If repeated many times the sequence of random events will exhibit certain statistical patterns, which can be studied and predicted.  Abductive Reasoning or Inference to the Best Explanation – kind of logical inference described by Charles Sanders Peirce as the process of arriving at an explanatory hypothesis. Thus, to abduce a hypothetical explanation   a   a   a   as a conclusion from a noticed curious circumstance   b   b   b   as a premiss, is to surmise that   a   a   a   may be true because then   b   b   b   would be a matter of course. 8    Alphabetical Order   Coherentism  Constructivist epistemology  Contextualism  Determinism  Empiricism  Epistemological idealism  Fallibilism  Foundationalism  Holism  Infinitism  Innatism  Internalism and externalism  Naïve realism  Naturalized epistemology  Objectivist epistemology  Phenomenalism  Positivism  Reductionism  Reliabilism  Representative realism  Rationalism  Skepticism  Theory of Forms  Transcendental idealism  Uniformitarianism   History of epistemology   Main article: History of epistemology     History of scientific method  Timeline of the history of scientific method   Epistemological concepts   A priori knowledge  Analysis  Analytic-synthetic distinction  Belief  Causality  Common sense  Criteria of truth  Descriptive knowledge  Enactivism (psychology)  Gettier problem  Justification  Knowledge  Objectivity  Perception  Induction  Other minds  Proposition  Regress argument  Simplicity  Speculative reason  Truth   Persons influential in the field of epistemology   A. J. Ayer  Alvin Goldman  Alvin Plantinga  Ayn Rand  Barry Stroud  Bertrand Russell  Catherine Elgin  David Hume  Edgar Morin  Edmund Gettier  Ernst von Glasersfeld  Fred Dretske  George Berkeley  George Edward Moore  George Pappas  Gerhard Vollmer  Giambattista Vico  Gilbert Harman  Harry Binswanger  Heinz von Foerster  Hilary Kornblith  Immanuel Kant  John Greco  Jean-Louis Le Moigne  Jean Piaget  John Locke  John Searle  Jonathan Dancy  Karla Jessen Williamson  Keith Lehrer  Laurence Bonjour  Linda Trinkaus Zagzebski  Louis Pojman  Ludwig Wittgenstein  Margaret Elizabeth Egan  Mario Bunge  Mioara Mugur-Schächter  Nassim Nicholas Taleb  Nelson Goodman  Niklas Luhmann  Norman Malcolm  P. F. Strawson  Paul Grice  Peter Strawson  Peter Unger  Phillip H. Wiebe  Plato  René Descartes  Robert Audi  Peter D. Klein  Ernest Sosa  Robert Nozick  Sherrilyn Roush  Socrates  Søren Kierkegaard  St. Thomas Aquinas  Trenton Merricks  W.V.O. Quine  Walter Terence Stace  William Alston  Xenophanes   Karl Popper  See also  References  External links   What Is Epistemology? – a brief introduction to the topic by Keith DeRose.  Certain Doubts – a group blog run by Jonathan Kvanvig, with many leading epistemologists as contributors.  The Epistemological Lifeboat by Birger Hjørland & Jeppe Nicolaisen (eds.)  The Epistemology Page by Keith DeRose.  Epistemology Papers – a collection of Michael Huemer's papers.  Epistemology Introduction, Part 1 and Part 2 by Paul Newall at the Galilean Library.  Teaching Theory of Knowledge (1986) – Marjorie Clay (ed.), an electronic publication from The Council for Philosophical Studies.  [ http://www.groovyweb.uklinux.net/?page_name=philosophy%20of%20knowledge&category; ;=philosophy Epistemology: The Philosophy of Knowledge] – an introduction at Groovyweb.  Introduction to Theory of Knowledge – from PhilosophyOnline.  The Peripatetic – A practical introduction to the theory of knowledge  Theory of Knowledge – an introduction to epistemology, exploring the various theories of knowledge, justification, and belief.  A Theory of Knowledge by Clóvis Juarez Kemmerich, on the Social Science Research Network, 2006.  An Introduction to Epistemology by Paul Newall, aimed at beginners.  David Speaks Live - A lecture on Ontological Epistemology  On a Critical Epistemology  Language Perception and Action: Philosophical Issues    Justification    Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemology, 2. What is Justification?  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Public Justification  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Internalist vs. Externalist Conceptions of Epistemic Justification  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Coherentist Theories of Epistemic Justification   "  Epistemology  Category:Epistemology     Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Volume 3, 1967, Macmillan, Inc. ↩  Encyclopaedia Britannica Online, 2007 ↩  ↩  The NESS: The Razor in the Toolbox ↩  ↩  John Vickers. The Problem of Induction . The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. ↩  Probability theory, Encyclopaedia Britannica ↩  Peirce, C. S. (1903), Harvard lectures on pragmatism, Collected Papers v. 5, paragraphs 188–189 . ↩     