


Prokhorov's theorem




Prokhorov's theorem

In measure theory Prokhorov’s theorem relates tightness of measures to relative compactness (and hence weak convergence) in the space of probability measures. It is credited to the Soviet mathematician Yuri Vasilyevich Prokhorov, who considered probability measures on complete separable metric spaces. The term "Prokhorov’s theorem" is also applied to later generalizations to either the direct or the inverse statements.
Statement of the theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  be a separable metric space. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the collection of all probability measures defined on 
 
 
 
  (with its Borel σ-algebra).
Theorem.

A collection 
 
 
 
  of probability measures is tight if and only if the closure of 
 
 
 
  is sequentially compact in the space 
 
 
 
  equipped with the topology of weak convergence.
The space 
 
 
 
  with the topology of weak convergence is metrizable.
Suppose that in addition, 
 
 
 
  is a complete metric (so that 
 
 
 
  is a Polish space). There is a complete metric 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  equivalent to the topology of weak convergence; moreover, 
 
 
 
  is tight if and only if the closure of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  is compact.

Corollaries
For Euclidean spaces we have that:

If 
 
 
 
  is a tight sequence in 
 
 
 
  (the collection of probability measures on 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space), then there exist a subsequence

 
  and a probability measure 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  converges weakly to 
 
 
 
 .


If 
 
 
 
  is a tight sequence in 
 
 
 
  such that every weakly convergent subsequence 
 
 
 
  has the same limit 
 
 
 
 , then the sequence 
 
 
 
  converges weakly to 
 
 
 
 .

Extension
Prokhorov's theorem can be extended to consider complex measures or finite signed measures.
Theorem: Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a complete separable metric space and 
 
 
 
  is a family of Borel complex measures on 
 
 
 
 .The following statements are equivalent:



 
  is sequentially compact; that is, every sequence 
 
 
 
  has a weakly convergent subsequence.


 
  is tight and uniformly bounded in total variation norm.

Comments
Since Prokhorov's theorem expresses tightness in terms of compactness, the Arzelà-Ascoli theorem is often used to substitute for compactness: in function spaces, this leads to a characterization of tightness in terms of the modulus of continuity or an appropriate analogue — see tightness in classical Wiener space and tightness in Skorokhod space.
There are several deep and non-trivial extensions to Prokhorov's theorem. However, those results do not overshadow the importance and the relevance to applications of the original result.
References








"
Category:Theorems in measure theory Category:Compactness theorems


