


Progressively measurable process




Progressively measurable process

In mathematics, progressive measurability is a property in the theory of stochastic processes. A progressively measurable process, while defined quite technically, is important because it implies the stopped process is measurable. Being progressively measurable is a strictly stronger property than the notion of being an adapted process.1 Progressively measurable processes are important in the theory of Itō integrals.
Definition
Let



 
  be a probability space;


 
  be a measurable space, the state space;


 
  be a filtration of the sigma algebra

 
 ;


 
  be a stochastic process (the index set could be 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  instead of 
 
 
 
 ).

The process 
 
 
 
  is said to be progressively measurable2 (or simply progressive) if, for every time 
 
 
 
 , the map 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -measurable. This implies that 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -adapted.3
A subset 
 
 
 
  is said to be progressively measurable if the process 
 
 
 
  is progressively measurable in the sense defined above, where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function of 
 
 
 
 . The set of all such subsets 
 
 
 
  form a sigma algebra on 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 , and a process 
 
 
 
  is progressively measurable in the sense of the previous paragraph if, and only if, it is 
 
 
 
 -measurable.
Properties

It can be shown4 that 
 
 
 
 , the space of stochastic processes 
 
 
 
  for which the Ito integral








with respect to Brownian motion

 
  is defined, is the set of equivalence classes of 
 
 
 
 -measurable processes in 
 
 
 
 .
 


Every adapted process with left- or right-continuous paths is progressively measurable. Consequently, every adapted process with càdlàg paths is progressively measurable.5
Every measurable and adapted process has a progressively measurable modification.6

References
"
Category:Stochastic processes Category:Measure theory



↩
Pascucci, Andrea (2011) PDE and Martingale Methods in Option Pricing. Berlin: Springer ↩








