


Presentation of a monoid




Presentation of a monoid

In algebra, a presentation of a monoid (or semigroup) is a description of a monoid (or semigroup) in terms of a set Σ of generators and a set of relations on the free monoid Σ∗ (or free semigroup Σ+) generated by Σ. The monoid is then presented as the quotient of the free monoid by these relations. This is an analogue of a group presentation in group theory.
As a mathematical structure, a monoid presentation is identical to a string rewriting system (also known as semi-Thue system). Every monoid may be presented by a semi-Thue system (possibly over an infinite alphabet).1
A presentation should not be confused with a representation.
Construction
The relations are given as a (finite) binary relation R on Σ∗. To form the quotient monoid, these relations are extended to monoid congruences as follows.
First, one takes the symmetric closure R ∪ R−1 of R. This is then extended to a symmetric relation E ⊂ Σ∗ × Σ∗ by defining x ~E y if and only if x = sut and y = svt for some strings u, v, s, t ∈ Σ∗ with (u,v) ∈ R ∪ R−1. Finally, one takes the reflexive and transitive closure of E, which is then a monoid congruence.
In the typical situation, the relation R is simply given as a set of equations, so that 
 
 
 
 . Thus, for example,


 
  is the equational presentation for the bicyclic monoid, and


 
  is the plactic monoid of degree 2 (it has infinite order). Elements of this plactic monoid may be written as 
 
 
 
  for integers i, j, k, as the relations show that ba commutes with both a and b.
Inverse monoids and semigroups
Presentations of inverse monoids and semigroups can be defined in a similar way using a pair


 
  where



is the free monoid with involution on 
 
 
 
 , and



is a binary relation between words. We denote by 
 
 
 
  (respectively 
 
 
 
 ) the equivalence relation (respectively, the congruence) generated by T.
We use this pair of objects to define an inverse monoid



Let 
 
 
 
  be the Wagner congruence on 
 
 
 
 , we define the inverse monoid



presented by 
 
 
 
  as



In the previous discussion, if we replace everywhere 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  we obtain a presentation (for an inverse semigroup)

 
  and an inverse semigroup 
 
 
presented by 
 
 
 
 .
A trivial but important example is the free inverse monoid (or free inverse semigroup) on 
 
 
 
 , that is usually denoted by 
 
 
 
  (respectively 
 
 
 
 ) and is defined by


 
  or



Notes
References

John M. Howie, Fundamentals of Semigroup Theory (1995), Clarendon Press, Oxford ISBN 0-19-851194-9
M. Kilp, U. Knauer, A.V. Mikhalev, Monoids, Acts and Categories with Applications to Wreath Products and Graphs, De Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics vol. 29, Walter de Gruyter, 2000, ISBN 3-11-015248-7.
Ronald V. Book and Friedrich Otto, String-rewriting Systems, Springer, 1993, ISBN 0-387-97965-4, chapter 7, "Algebraic Properties"

"
Category:Semigroup theory



Book and Otto, Theorem 7.1.7, p. 149↩




