


Kolmogorov extension theorem




Kolmogorov extension theorem

In mathematics, the Kolmogorov extension theorem (also known as Kolmogorov existence theorem or Kolmogorov consistency theorem) is a theorem that guarantees that a suitably "consistent" collection of finite-dimensional distributions will define a stochastic process. It is credited to the Soviet mathematician Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov.1
Statement of the theorem
Let 
 
 
 
  denote some interval (thought of as "time"), and let 
 
 
 
 . For each 
 
 
 
  and finite sequence of times 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be a probability measure on 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that these measures satisfy two consistency conditions:
1. for all permutations

 
  of 
 
 
 
  and measurable sets 
 
 
 
 ,



2. for all measurable sets 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 



 
  Then there exists a probability space

 
  and a stochastic process 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and measurable sets 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
  has 
 
 
 
  as its finite-dimensional distributions relative to times 
 
 
 
 .
In fact, it is always possible to take as the underlying probability space 
 
 
 
  and to take for 
 
 
 
  the canonical process 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, an alternative way of stating Kolomogorov's extension theorem is that, provided that the above consistency conditions hold, there exists a (unique) measure 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  with marginals 
 
 
 
  for any finite collection of times 
 
 
 
 . Kolmogorov's extension theorem applies when 
 
 
 
  is uncountable, but the price to pay for this level of generality is that the measure 
 
 
 
  is only defined on the product σ-algebra of 
 
 
 
 , which is not very rich.
Explanation of the conditions
The two conditions required by the theorem are trivially satisfied by any stochastic process. For example, consider a real-valued discrete-time stochastic process 
 
 
 
 . Then the probability 
 
 
 
  can be computed either as 
 
 
 
  or as 
 
 
 
 . Hence, for the finite-dimensional distributions to be consistent, it must hold that 
 
 
 
 . The first condition generalises this obvious statement to hold for any number of time points 
 
 
 
 , and any control sets 
 
 
 
 .
Continuing the example, the second condition implies that 
 
 
 
 . Also this is a trivial condition that will be satisfied by any consistent family of finite-dimensional distributions.
Implications of the theorem
Since the two conditions are trivially satisfied for any stochastic process, the power of the theorem is that no other conditions are required: For any reasonable (i.e., consistent) family of finite-dimensional distributions, there exists a stochastic process with these distributions.
The measure-theoretic approach to stochastic processes starts with a probability space and defines a stochastic process as a family of functions on this probability space. However, in many applications the starting point is really the finite-dimensional distributions of the stochastic process. The theorem says that provided the finite-dimensional distributions satisfy the obvious consistency requirements, one can always identify a probability space to match the purpose. In many situations, this means that one does not have to be explicit about what the probability space is. Many texts on stochastic processes do, indeed, assume a probability space but never state explicitly what it is.
The theorem is used in one of the standard proofs of existence of a Brownian motion, by specifying the finite dimensional distributions to be Gaussian random variables, satisfying the consistency conditions above. As in most of the definitions of Brownian motion it is required that the sample paths are continuous almost surely, one then uses kolmogorov continuity theorem to construct a continuous modification of the process constructed by Kolmogorov extension theorem.
A more general form of the theorem
The Kolmogorov extension theorem gives us conditions for a collection of measures on Euclidean spaces to be the finite-dimensional distributions of some 
 
 
 
 -valued stochastic process, but the assumption that the state space be 
 
 
 
  is unnecessary. In fact, any collection of measurable spaces together with a collection of inner regular measures defined on the finite products of these spaces would suffice, provided that these measures satisfy a certain compatibility relation. The formal statement of the general theorem is as follows.2
Let 
 
 
 
  be any set. Let 
 
 
 
  be some collection of measurable spaces, and for each 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be a Hausdorff topology on 
 
 
 
 . For each subset 
 
 
 
 , define


 
 .
For subsets 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  denote the canonical projection map 
 
 
 
 .
For each finite subset 
 
 
 
 , suppose we have a probability measure 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  which is inner regular with respect to the product topology (induced by the 
 
 
 
 ) on 
 
 
 
 . Suppose also that this collection 
 
 
 
  of measures satisfies the following compatibility relation: for finite subsets 
 
 
 
 , we have that



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the pushforward measure of 
 
 
 
  induced by the canonical projection map 
 
 
 
 .
Then there exists a unique probability measure 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for every finite subset 
 
 
 
 .
As a remark, all of the measures 
 
 
 
  are defined on the product sigma algebra on their respective spaces, which (as mentioned before) is rather coarse. The measure 
 
 
 
  may sometimes be extended appropriately to a larger sigma algebra, if there is additional structure involved.
Note that the original statement of the theorem is just a special case of this theorem with 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . The stochastic process would simply be the canonical process 
 
 
 
 , defined on 
 
 
 
  with probability measure 
 
 
 
 . The reason that the original statement of the theorem does not mention inner regularity of the measures 
 
 
 
  is that this would automatically follow, since Borel probability measures on Polish spaces are automatically Radon.
This theorem has many far-reaching consequences; for example it can be used to prove the existence of the following, among others:

Brownian motion, i.e., the Wiener process,
a Markov chain taking values in a given state space with a given transition matrix,
the random-cluster model on infinite lattices with given parameters 
 
 
 
 ,
infinite products of (inner-regular) probability spaces.

History
According to John Aldrich, the theorem was independently discovered by British mathematician Percy John Daniell in the slightly different setting of integration theory.3
References
External links
Aldrich, J. (2007) "But you have to remember P.J.Daniell of Sheffield" Electronic Journ@l for History of Probability and Statistics December 2007.
"
Category:Stochastic processes Category:Probability theorems



↩
T. Tao, An Introduction to Measure Theory, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, Vol. 126, 2011, p. 195↩
J. Aldrich, But you have to remember PJ Daniell of Sheffield, Electronic Journal for History of Probability and Statistics, Vol. 3, number 2, 2007↩




