


Equivalence of metrics




Equivalence of metrics

In the study of metric spaces in mathematics, there are various notions of two metrics on the same underlying space being "the same", or equivalent.
In the following, 
 
 
 
  will denote a non-empty set and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  will denote two metrics on 
 
 
 
 
 .
Topological equivalence
The two metrics 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are said to be topologically equivalent if they generate the same topology on 
 
 
 
 . The adjective "topological" is often dropped.1 There are multiple ways of expressing this condition:

a subset 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 
 -open if and only if it is 
 
 
 
 -open;
the open balls "nest": for any point 
 
 
 
  and any radius 
 
 
 
 , there exist radii 
 
 
 
  such that



 
  and 
 
 


the identity function

 
  is both 
 
 
 
 -continuous and 
 
 
 
 -continuous.

The following are sufficient but not necessary conditions for topological equivalence:

there exists a strictly increasing, continuous, and subadditive

 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .2
for each 
 
 
 
 , there exist positive constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that, for every point 
 
 
 
 
 ,




Strong equivalence
Two metrics 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are strongly equivalent if and only if there exist positive constants 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  such that, for every 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  In contrast to the sufficient condition for topological equivalence listed above, strong equivalence requires that there is a single set of constants that holds for every pair of points in 
 
 
 
 , rather than potentially different constants associated with each point of 
 
 
 
 .
Strong equivalence of two metrics implies topological equivalence, but not vice versa. An intuitive reason why topological equivalence does not imply strong equivalence is that bounded sets under one metric are also bounded under a strongly equivalent metric, but not necessarily under a topologically equivalent metric.
In finite dimensional spaces, all metrics induced by the p-norm, including the euclidean metric, the taxicab metric, and the Chebyshev distance, are strongly equivalent.3
Even if two metrics are strongly equivalent, not all properties of the respective metric spaces are preserved. For instance, a function from the space to itself might be a contraction mapping under one metric, but not necessarily under a strongly equivalent one.4
Properties preserved by equivalence

The continuity of a function is preserved if either the domain or range is remetrized by an equivalent metric, but uniform continuity is preserved only by strongly equivalent metrics.5
The differentiability of a function is preserved if either the domain or range is remetrized by a strongly equivalent metric.6

Notes
References





"
Category:Metric geometry



Bishop and Goldberg, p. 10.
Ok, p. 127, footnote 12.
Ok, p. 138.
Ok, p. 175.
Ok, p. 209.
Cartan, p. 27.




