


Rotation of axes




Rotation of axes

(Figure)
An xy-Cartesian coordinate system rotated through an angle 
 
 
 
  to an x'y'-Cartesian coordinate system

In mathematics, a rotation of axes in two dimensions is a mapping from an xy-Cartesian coordinate system to an x'y'-Cartesian coordinate system in which the origin is kept fixed and the x'- and y'-axes are obtained by rotating the x- and y-axes counterclockwise through an angle 
 
 
 
 . A point P has coordinates (x, y) with respect to the original system and coordinates (x', y') with respect to the new system.1 In the new coordinate system, the point P will appear to have been rotated in the opposite direction, that is, clockwise through the angle 
 
 
 
 . A rotation of axes in more than two dimensions is defined similarly.23 A rotation of axes is a linear map45 and a rigid transformation.
Motivation
When we want to study the equations of curves and when we wish to use the methods of analytic geometry, coordinate systems become essential. When we use the method of coordinate geometry we place the axes at a position "convenient" with respect to the curve under consideration. For example, when we study the equations of ellipses and hyperbolas, the foci are usually located on one of the axes and are situated symmetrically with respect to the origin. But now suppose that we have a problem in which the curve (hyperbola, parabola, ellipse, etc.) is not situated so conveniently with respect to the axes. We would then like to change the coordinate system in order to have the curve at a convenient and familiar location and orientation. The process of making this change is called a transformation of coordinates.6
The solutions to many problems can be simplified by rotating the coordinate axes to obtain new axes through the same origin.
Derivation
The equations defining the transformation in two dimensions, which rotates the xy-axes counterclockwise through an angle 
 
 
 
  into the x'y'-axes, are derived as follows.
In the xy-system, let the point P have polar coordinates

 
 . Then, in the x'y'-system, P will have polar coordinates 
 
 
 
 .
We have






and






Substituting equations () and () into equations () and (), we obtain






Equations () and () can be represented in matrix form as



which is the standard matrix equation of a rotation of axes in two dimensions.7
The inverse transformation is






or



Examples in two dimensions
Example 1
Find the coordinates of the point 
 
 
 
  after the axes have been rotated through the angle 
 
 
 
 , or 30°.
Solution:






The axes have been rotated counterclockwise through an angle of 
 
 
 
  and the new coordinates are 
 
 
 
 . Note that the point appears to have been rotated clockwise through 
 
 
 
 , that is, it now coincides with the (new) x'-axis.
Example 2
Find the coordinates of the point 
 
 
 
  after the axes have been rotated clockwise 90°, that is, through the angle 
 
 
 
 , or -90°.
Solution:



The axes have been rotated through an angle of 
 
 
 
 , which is in the clockwise direction and the new coordinates are 
 
 
 
 . Again, note that the point appears to have been rotated counterclockwise through 
 
 
 
 .
Rotation of conic sections
The most general equation of the second degree has the form




Through a change of coordinates (a rotation of axes and a translation of axes), equation () can be put into a standard form, which is usually easier to work with. It is always possible to rotate the coordinates in such a way that in the new system there is no x'y' term. Substituting equations () and () into equation (), we obtain




where




If we select 
 
 
 
  so that 
 
 
 
  we will have 
 
 
 
  and the x'y' term in equation () will vanish.8
When a problem arises with B, D and E all different from zero, we may eliminate them by performing in succession a rotation (eliminating B) and a translation (eliminating the D and E terms).9
Identifying rotated conic sections
A non-degenerate conic section given by equation () can be identified by evaluating 
 
 
 
 . The conic section is:






                       \mbox{a parabola},\ \mbox{if}\ B^2\ -\ 4AC\ =\ 0; \\
                       \mbox{a hyperbola},\ \mbox{if}\ B^2\ -\ 4AC\ >\ 0.\end{cases}10
Generalization to several dimensions
Suppose a rectangular xyz-coordinate system is rotated around its z-axis counterclockwise (looking down the positive z-axis) through an angle 
 
 
 
 , that is, the positive x-axis is rotated immediately into the positive y-axis. The z-coordinate of each point is unchanged and the x- and y-coordinates transform as above. The old coordinates (x, y, z) of a point Q are related to its new coordinates (x', y', z') by


11
Generalizing to any finite number of dimensions, a rotation matrix

 
  is an orthogonal matrix that differs from the identity matrix in at most four elements. These four elements are of the form


 
   and  
 
 

for some 
 
 
 
  and some i ≠ j.12
Examples in several dimensions
Example 3
Find the coordinates of the point 
 
 
 
  after the positive w-axis has been rotated through the angle 
 
 
 
 , or 15°, into the positive z-axis.
Solution:






See also

Rotation

Notes


References






"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Euclidean geometry Category:Linear algebra Category:Transformation (function)



















