


Hypercomplex manifold




Hypercomplex manifold

In differential geometry, a hypercomplex manifold is a manifold with the tangent bundle equipped with an action by the algebra of quaternions in such a way that the quaternions 
 
 
 
  define integrable almost complex structures.
Examples
Every hyperkähler manifold is also hypercomplex. The converse is not true. The Hopf surface


 
  (with 
 
 
 
  acting as a multiplication by a quaternion 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 ) is hypercomplex, but not Kähler, hence not hyperkähler either. To see that the Hopf surface is not Kähler, notice that it is diffeomorphic to a product 
 
 
 
  hence its odd cohomology group is odd-dimensional. By Hodge decomposition, odd cohomology of a compact Kähler manifold are always even-dimensional. In fact H. Wakakuwa proved 1 that on a compact hyperkähler manifold

 
 . M. Verbitsky has shown that any compact hypercomplex manifold admitting a Kähler structure is also hyperkähler. 2
In 1988, left-invariant hypercomplex structures on some compact Lie groups were constructed by the physicists Ph. Spindel, A. Sevrin, W. Troost, A. Van Proeyen. In 1992, D. Joyce rediscovered this construction, and gave a complete classification of left-invariant hypercomplex structures on compact Lie groups. Here is the complete list.









where 
 
 
 
  denotes an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional compact torus.
It is remarkable that any compact Lie group becomes hypercomplex after it is multiplied by a sufficiently big torus.
Basic properties
Hypercomplex manifolds as such were studied by Charles Boyer in 1988. He also proved that in real dimension 4, the only compact hypercomplex manifolds are the complex torus 
 
 
 
 , the Hopf surface and the K3 surface.
Much earlier (in 1955) M. Obata studied affine connection associated with almost hypercomplex structures (under the former terminology of Charles Ehresmann3 of almost quaternionic structures). His construction leads to what Edmond Bonan called the Obata connection45 which is torsion free, if and only if, "two" of the almost complex structures 
 
 
 
 
  are integrable and in this case the manifold is hypercomplex.
Twistor spaces
There is a 2-dimensional sphere of quaternions 
 
 
 
  satisfying 
 
 
 
 . Each of these quaternions gives a complex structure on a hypercomplex manifold M. This defines an almost complex structure on the manifold 
 
 
 
 , which is fibered over 
 
 
 
  with fibers identified with 
 
 
 
 
 . This complex structure is integrable, as follows from Obata theorem. This complex manifold is called the twistor space of 
 
 
 
 . If M is 
 
 
 
 , then its twistor space is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Quaternionic manifold

References


.

.

.
.

"
Category:Complex manifolds Category:Structures on manifolds



.

.

.




