


Impedance of free space




Impedance of free space

The impedance of free space, Z0, is a physical constant relating the magnitudes of the electric and magnetic fields of electromagnetic radiation travelling through free space. That is, Z0 = |E|/|H|, where |E| is the electric field strength and |H| magnetic field strength. It has an exact irrational value, given approximately as 376.73031... ohms.1
The impedance of free space (more correctly, the wave-impedance of a plane wave in free space) equals the product of the vacuum permeability or magnetic constant μ0 and the speed of light in vacuum c0. Since the numerical values of the magnetic constant and of the speed of light are fixed by the definitions of the ampere and the metre respectively, the exact value of the impedance of free space is likewise fixed by definition relative to the S.I. base units.
Terminology
The analogous quantity for a plane wave travelling through a dielectric medium is called the intrinsic impedance of the medium, and designated η (eta). Hence Z0 is sometimes referred to as the intrinsic impedance of free space,2 and given the symbol η0.3 It has numerous other synonyms, including:
:* wave impedance of free space,4
:* the vacuum impedance,5
:* intrinsic impedance of vacuum,6
:* characteristic impedance of vacuum,7
:* wave resistance of free space.8
Relation to other constants
From the above definition, and the plane wave solution to Maxwell's equations,


 
  where


 
  the magnetic constant


 
  the electric constant and


 
  the speed of light in free space.910
The reciprocal of 
 
 
 
  is sometimes referred to as the admittance of free space, and represented by the symbol 
 
 
 
 .
Exact value
Since 1948, the SI unit ampere has been defined by choosing the numerical value of μ0 to be exactly 4π×10−7 H/m. Similarly, since 1983 the SI metre has been defined by choosing the value of c0 to be 299 792 458 m/s. Consequently


exactly, or


 
 . This situation may change if the ampere is redefined in 2015. See New SI definitions.
120π-approximation
It is very common in textbooks and learned papers written before about 1990 to substitute the approximate value 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . This is equivalent to taking the speed of light to be 3×108 m/s. For example, Cheng 1989 states11 that the radiation resistance of a Hertzian dipole is


 
  [not exact]
This practice may be recognized from the resulting discrepancy in the units of the given formula. Consideration of the units, or more formally dimensional analysis, may be used to restore the formula to a more exact form—in this case to



See also

Electric constant
Electromagnetic wave equation
Mathematical descriptions of the electromagnetic field
Near and far field
Planck impedance
Sinusoidal plane-wave solutions of the electromagnetic wave equation
Space cloth
Vacuum
Wave impedance

References and notes

12

Further reading



"
Category:Electromagnetism Category:Physical constants











With ISO 31-5, NIST and the BIPM have adopted the notation c0 for the speed of light in free space.
"Current practice is to use c0 to denote the speed of light in vacuum according to ISO 31. In the original Recommendation of 1983, the symbol c was used for this purpose." Quote from NIST Special Publication 330, Appendix 2, p. 45






