


Arf invariant




Arf invariant

(Figure)
Arf and a formula for the Arf invariant appear on the reverse side of the 2009 Turkish 10 Lira note

In mathematics, the Arf invariant of a nonsingular quadratic form over a field of characteristic 2 was defined by Turkish mathematician  when he started the systematic study of quadratic forms over arbitrary fields of characteristic 2. The Arf invariant is the substitute, in characteristic 2, of the discriminant for quadratic forms in characteristic not 2. Arf used his invariant, among others, in his endeavor to classify quadratic forms in characteristic 2.
In the special case of the 2-element field F2 the Arf invariant can be described as the element of F2 that occurs most often among the values of the form. Two nonsingular quadratic forms over F2 are isomorphic if and only if they have the same dimension and the same Arf invariant. This fact was essentially known to , even for any finite field of characteristic 2, and it follows from Arf's results for an arbitrary perfect field. An assessment of Arf's results in the framework of the theory of quadratic forms can be found in,12
The Arf invariant is particularly applied in geometric topology, where it is primarily used to define an invariant of (4k+2)-dimensional manifolds (singly even-dimension manifolds: surfaces (2-manifolds), 6-manifolds, 10-manifolds, etc.) with certain additional structure called a framing, and thus the Arf–Kervaire invariant and the Arf invariant of a knot. The Arf invariant is analogous to the signature of a manifold, which is defined for 4k-dimensional manifolds (doubly even-dimensional); this 4-fold periodicity corresponds to the 4-fold periodicity of L-theory. The Arf invariant can also be defined more generally for certain 2k-dimensional manifolds.
Definitions
The Arf invariant belongs to a quadratic form over a field K of characteristic 2. Any binary non-singular quadratic form over K is equivalent to a form 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in K. The Arf invariant is defined to be the product 
 
 
 
 . If the form 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
 , then the products 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  differ by an element of the form 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in K. These elements form an additive subgroup U of K. Hence the coset of 
 
 
 
  modulo U is an invariant of 
 
 
 
 , which means that it is not changed when 
 
 
 
  is replaced by an equivalent form.
Every nonsingular quadratic form 
 
 
 
  over K is equivalent to a direct sum 
 
 
 
  of nonsingular binary forms. This has been shown by Arf but it had been earlier observed by Dickson in the case of finite fields of characteristic 2. The Arf invariant Arf(
 
 
 
 ) is defined to be the sum of the Arf invariants of the 
 
 
 
 . By definition, this is a coset of K modulo U. Arf 3 has shown that indeed Arf(
 
 
 
 ) does not change if 
 
 
 
  is replaced by an equivalent quadratic form, which is to say that it is an invariant of 
 
 
 
 .
The Arf invariant is additive; in other words, the Arf invariant of an orthogonal sum of two quadratic forms is the sum of their Arf invariants.
Arf's main results
If the field K is perfect then every nonsingular quadratic form over K is uniquely determined (up to equivalence) by its dimension and its Arf invariant. In particular this holds over the field F2. In this case U=0 and hence the Arf invariant is an element of the base field F2; it is either 0 or 1.
If the field is not perfect then the Clifford algebra is another important invariant of a quadratic form. For various fields Arf has shown that every quadratic form is completely characterized by its dimension, its Arf invariant and its Clifford algebra. Examples of such fields are function fields (or power series fields) of one variable over perfect base fields.
Quadratic forms over F2
Over F2 the Arf invariant is 0 if the quadratic form is equivalent to a direct sum of copies of the binary form 
 
 
 
 , and it is 1 if the form is a direct sum of 
 
 
 
  with a number of copies of 
 
 
 
 .
William Browder has called the Arf invariant the democratic invariant4 because it is the value which is assumed most often by the quadratic form.5 Another characterization: q has Arf invariant 0 if and only if the underlying 2k-dimensional vector space over the field F2 has a k-dimensional subspace on which q is identically 0 – that is, a totally isotropic subspace of half the dimension; its isotropy index is k (this is the maximum dimension of a totally isotropic subspace of a nonsingular form).
The Arf invariant in topology
Let M be a compact, connected 2k-dimensional manifold with a boundary 
 
 
 
  such that the induced morphisms in 
 
 
 
 -coefficient homology


 
 , 
 
 
 
  are both zero (e.g. if 
 
 
 
  is closed). The intersection form


 
  is non-singular. (Topologists usually write F2 as 
 
 
 
 .) A quadratic refinement for 
 
 
 
  is a function 
 
 
 
  which satisfies


 
  Let 
 
 
 
  be any 2-dimensional subspace of 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
 . Then there are two possibilities. Either all of 
 
 
 
  are 1, or else just one of them is 1, and the other two are 0. Call the first case 
 
 
 
 , and the second case 
 
 
 
 . Since every form is equivalent to a symplectic form, we can always find subspaces 
 
 
 
  with x and y being 
 
 
 
 -dual. We can therefore split 
 
 
 
  into a direct sum of subspaces isomorphic to either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, by a clever change of basis, 
 
 
 
 . We therefore define the Arf invariant


 
  = (number of copies of 
 
 
 
  in a decomposition Mod 2) 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

Let 
 
 
 
  be a compact, connected, oriented 2-dimensional manifold, i.e. a surface, of genus

 
  such that the boundary 
 
 
 
  is either empty or is connected. Embed

 
  in 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . Choose a framing of M, that is a trivialization of the normal (m-2)-plane vector bundle. (This is possible for 
 
 
 
 , so is certainly possible for 
 
 
 
 ). Choose a symplectic basis

 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Each basis element is represented by an embedded circle 
 
 
 
 . The normal (m-1)-plane vector bundle of 
 
 
 
  has two trivializations, one determined by a standard framing of a standard embedding 
 
 
 
  and one determined by the framing of M, which differ by a map 
 
 
 
  i.e. an element of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . This can also be viewed as the framed cobordism class of 
 
 
 
  with this framing in the 1-dimensional framed cobordism group 
 
 
 
 , which is generated by the circle 
 
 
 
  with the Lie group framing. The isomorphism here is via the Pontrjagin-Thom construction. Define 
 
 
 
  to be this element. The Arf invariant of the framed surface is now defined



 
  Note that 
 
 
 
 , so we had to stabilise, taking 
 
 
 
  to be at least 4, in order to get an element of 
 
 
 
 . The case 
 
 
 
  is also admissible as long as we take the residue modulo 2 of the framing.

The Arf invariant 
 
 
 
  of a framed surface detects whether there is a 3-manifold whose boundary is the given surface which extends the given framing. This is because 
 
 
 
  does not bound. 
 
 
 
  represents a torus 
 
 
 
  with a trivialisation on both generators of 
 
 
 
  which twists an odd number of times. The key fact is that up to homotopy there are two choices of trivialisation of a trivial 3-plane bundle over a circle, corresponding to the two elements of 
 
 
 
 . An odd number of twists, known as the Lie group framing, does not extend across a disc, whilst an even number of twists does. (Note that this corresponds to putting a spin structure on our surface.) Pontrjagin used the Arf invariant of framed surfaces to compute the 2-dimensional framed cobordism group 
 
 
 
 , which is generated by the torus

 
  with the Lie group framing. The isomorphism here is via the Pontrjagin-Thom construction.


Let 
 
 
 
  be a Seifert surface for a knot, 
 
 
 
 , which can be represented as a disc 
 
 
 
  with bands attached. The bands will typically be twisted and knotted. Each band corresponds to a generator 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  can be represented by a circle which traverses one of the bands. Define 
 
 
 
  to be the number of full twists in the band modulo 2. Suppose we let 
 
 
 
  bound 
 
 
 
 , and push the Seifert surface 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
 , so that its boundary still resides in 
 
 
 
 . Around any generator 
 
 
 
 , we now have a trivial normal 3-plane vector bundle. Trivialise it using the trivial framing of the normal bundle to the embedding 
 
 
 
  for 2 of the sections required. For the third, choose a section which remains normal to 
 
 
 
 , whilst always remaining tangent to 
 
 
 
 . This trivialisation again determines an element of 
 
 
 
 , which we take to be 
 
 
 
 . Note that this coincides with the previous definition of 
 
 
 
 .


The Arf invariant of a knot is defined via its Seifert surface. It is independent of the choice of Seifert surface (The basic surgery change of S-equivalence, adding/removing a tube, adds/deletes a 
 
 
 
  direct summand), and so is a knot invariant. It is additive under connected sum, and vanishes on slice knots, so is a knot concordance invariant.


The intersection form on the 2k+1-dimensional 
 
 
 
 -coefficient homology 
 
 
 
  of a framed 4k+2-dimensional manifold M has a quadratic refinement 
 
 
 
 , which depends on the framing. For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represented by an embedding

 
  the value 
 
 
 
  is 0 or 1, according as to the normal bundle of 
 
 
 
  is trivial or not. The Kervaire invariant of the framed 4k+2-dimensional manifold M is the Arf invariant of the quadratic refinement 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 . The Kervaire invariant is a homomorphism 
 
 
 
  on the 4k+2-dimensional stable homotopy group of spheres. The Kervaire invariant can also be defined for a 4k+2-dimensional manifold M which is framed except at a point.


In surgery theory, for any 
 
 
 
 -dimensional normal map 
 
 
 
  there is defined a nonsingular quadratic form 
 
 
 
  on the 
 
 
 
 -coefficient homology kernel



 
  refining the homological intersection form

 
 . The Arf invariant of this form is the Kervaire invariant of (f,b). In the special case 
 
 
 
  this is the Kervaire invariant of M. The Kervaire invariant features in the classification of exotic spheres by Kervaire and Milnor, and more generally in the classification of manifolds by surgery theory. Browder defined 
 
 
 
  using functional Steenrod squares, and Wall defined 
 
 
 
  using framed immersions. The quadratic enhancement 
 
 
 
  crucially provides more information than 
 
 
 
  : it is possible to kill x by surgery if and only if 
 
 
 
 . The corresponding Kervaire invariant detects the surgery obstruction of 
 
 
 
  in the L-group

 
 .
See also

de Rham invariant, a mod 2 invariant of (4k+1)-dimensional manifolds

Notes
References

See Lickorish (1997) for the relation between the Arf invariant and the Jones polynomial.
See Chapter 3 of Carter's book for another equivalent definition of the Arf invariant in terms of self-intersections of discs in 4-dimensional space.



Glen Bredon: Topology and Geometry, 1993, ISBN 0-387-97926-3.

J. Scott Carter: How Surfaces Intersect in Space, Series on Knots and Everything, 1993, ISBN 981-02-1050-7.



W. B. Raymond Lickorish, An Introduction to Knot Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer, 1997, ISBN 0-387-98254-X

L. Pontrjagin, Smooth manifolds and their applications in homotopy theory American Mathematical Society Translations, Ser. 2, Vol. 11, pp. 1–114 (1959)

Further reading




"
Category:Quadratic forms Category:Surgery theory





Arf (1941),
Martino and Priddy, p.61
Browder, Proposition III.1.8




