


Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy




Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy

 thumb|upright=1.5|Photoemission and metals
Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), also known as ARUPS (angle-resolved ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy), is a direct experimental technique to observe the distribution of the electrons (more precisely, the density of single-particle electronic excitations) in the reciprocal space of solids. ARPES is one of the most direct methods of studying the electronic structure of the surface of solids.
ARPES gives information on the direction, speed and scattering process of valence electrons in the sample being studied (usually a solid). This means that information can be gained on both the energy and momentum of an electron, resulting in detailed information on band dispersion and Fermi surface. This technique is a refinement of ordinary photoemission spectroscopy.
Theory
From conservation of energy, we have


 
  where E is the binding energy of the electron. Photon energy is often neglected because of its smallness compared with electron energy.
In the typical case, where the surface of the sample is smooth, translational symmetry requires that the component of electron momentum in the plane of the sample be conserved:


 
  where



 
  kinetic energy of the outgoing electron — measured.


 
  incoming photon energy — measured.


 
  electron work function (energy required to remove electron from sample to vacuum)


 
  momentum of the outgoing electron, measured by angle


 
  initial momentum of the electron

However, the normal component of electron momentum 
 
 
 
  might not be conserved. The typical way of dealing with this is to assume that the final in-crystal states are free-electron-like, in which case one has


 
  in which 
 
 
 
  denotes the band depth from vacuum, including electron work function 
 
 
 
 ; 
 
 
 
  can be determined by examining only the electrons emitted perpendicular to the surface, measuring their kinetic energy as a function of incident photon energy.
The equations for energy and momentum can be solved to determine the dispersion relation between the binding energy, 
 
 
 
 , and the wave vector, 
 
 
 
 , of the electron.
See also

Laser-based angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
Two-photon photoelectron spectroscopy

External links

Andrea Damascelli, "Probing the Electronic Structure of Complex Systems by ARPES", Physica Scripta T109, 61-74 (2004) 1
Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy of the cuprate superconductors (Review Article) (2002)
ARPES experiment in fermiology of quasi-2D metals (Review Article) (2014)

"
Category:Condensed matter physics Category:Condensed matter stubs Category:Emission spectroscopy Category:Articles containing video clips


