


Young stellar object




Young stellar object

(Figure)
Small young stellar object known as SSTC2D J033038.2+303212, located in the constellation of Perseus.1

Young stellar object (YSO) denotes a star in its early stage of evolution.
This class consists of two groups of objects: protostars and pre–main-sequence stars.
Classification by mass
Sometimes they are divided by mass – massive YSO (MYSO), intermediate mass YSO and brown dwarfs.
Classification by spectral energy distribution
YSO are usually classified using criteria based on the slope of their SED, introduced by Lada C.J. in 1987. He proposed three classes (I, II and III), based on the values of intervals of spectral index

 
 :


 
 .
Here 
 
 
 
  is wavelength, and 
 
 
 
  is flux density.
The 
 
 
 
  is calculated in the wavelength interval of 2.2–20 
 
 
 
  (near- and mid- infrared region). Later Greene et al. in 1994 added a fourth class of "flat spectrum" class sources. In 1993 Andre et al. discovered class 0—objects with strong submillimeter emission, but very faint at 
 
 
 
 .

Class 0 sources – undetectable at 
 
 

Class I sources have 
 
 

Flat spectrum sources have 
 
 

Class II sources have 
 
 

Class III sources have 
 
 


This classification schema roughly reflects evolutionary sequence. It is believed that most deeply embedded Class 0 sources evolve towards Class I stage dissipating their circumstellar envelopes. Eventually they become optically visible on the stellar birthline as pre–main sequence stars.
Characteristics
YSO are also associated with early star evolution phenomena: jets and bipolar outflows, masers, Herbig–Haro objects, protoplanetary disks (circumstellar disks or proplyds).
See also

Bok globule
Herbig–Haro object
Pre–main sequence star
Protostar

References

Lada, C. J. (1987), IAU Symposium 115: Star Forming Regions, 115, 1
Greene, Thomas P.; Wilking, Bruce A.; Andre, Philippe; Young, Erick T.; Lada, Charles J. (1994), Further mid-infrared study of the rho Ophiuchi cloud young stellar population: Luminosities and masses of pre-main-sequence stars, The Astrophysical Journal, vol. 434, pp. 614–626
Andre, Philippe; Ward-Thompson, Derek; Barsony, Mary (1993), Submillimeter continuum observations of Rho Ophiuchi A – The candidate protostar VLA 1623 and prestellar clumps, The Astrophysical Journal, vol. 406, pp. 122–141

"
Category:Star formation Category:Star types








