   Glossary of semisimple groups      Glossary of semisimple groups   This is a glossary for the terminology applied in the mathematical theories of semisimple Lie groups . It also covers terms related to their Lie algebras , their representation theory , and various geometric, algebraic and combinatorial structures that occur in connection with the development of what is a central theory of contemporary mathematics.  A   Adjoint representation   The adjoint representation of any Lie group is its action on its Lie algebra, derived from the conjugation action of the group on itself.   Affine Lie algebra   An affine Lie algebra is a particular type of Kac–Moody algebra.   Algebraic group   B   (B, N) pair  Borel subgroup  Borel-Bott-Weil theorem  Bruhat decomposition   C   Cartan decomposition  Cartan matrix  Cartan subalgebra  Cartan subgroup  Casimir invariant  Clebsch–Gordan coefficients  Compact Lie group  Complex reflection group  coroot  Coxeter group  Coxeter number  Cuspidal representation   D   Discrete series  Dominant weight   The irreducible representations of a simply-connected compact Lie group are indexed by their highest weight. These dominant weights form the lattice points in an orthant in the weight lattice of the Lie group.   Dynkin diagram   E   E6 (mathematics)  E7 (mathematics)  E7½ (Lie algebra)  E8 (mathematics)  En (Lie algebra)  Exceptional Lie algebra   F   F4 (mathematics)  Flag manifold  Fundamental representation   For the irreducible representations of a simply-connected compact Lie group there exists a set of fundamental weights , indexed by the vertices of the Dynkin diagram of G, such that dominant weights are simply non-negative integer linear combinations of the fundamental weights.  The corresponding irreducible representations are the fundamental representations of the Lie group. In particular, from the expansion of a dominant weight in terms of the fundamental weights, one can take a corresponding tensor product of the fundamental representations and extract one copy of the irreducible representation corresponding to that dominant weight.  In the case of the special unitary group  SU ( n ), the n − 1 fundamental representations are the wedge products      A  l    t  k     ℂ  n       A  l   superscript  t  k    superscript  ℂ  n     Alt^{k}\ {\mathbb{C}}^{n}     consisting of alternating tensors , for k=1,2,...,n-1.   Fundamental Weyl chamber   G   G2 (mathematics)  Generalized Cartan matrix  Generalized Kac–Moody algebra  Generalized Verma module   H   Harish-Chandra homomorphism  Highest weight  Highest weight module   I   Iwasawa decomposition   J  K   Kac–Moody algebra  Killing form  Kirillov character formula   L   Langlands decomposition  Langlands dual  Levi decomposition  Lie algebra  Lowest weight   M   Maximal compact subgroup  Maximal torus   N   Nilpotent cone   Elements in a semisimple Lie algebra that are represented in every linear representation by a nilpotent endomorphism.  O  P   Parabolic subgroup  Peter–Weyl theorem  Positive root   Q  R   Real form  Reductive group  Reflection group  Root datum  Root system   S   Schur polynomial   A Schur polynomial is a symmetric function , of a type occurring in the Weyl character formula applied to unitary groups.   Semisimple Lie algebra  Semisimple Lie group  Simple Lie algebra  Simple Lie group  Simple root  Simply laced group   A simple Lie group is simply laced when its Dynkin diagram is without multiple edges   Steinberg representation   T  U   Unitarian trick   V   Verma module   W   Weight (representation theory)  Weight module  Weight space  Weyl chamber   A Weyl chamber is one of the connected components of the complement in V , a real vector space on which a root system is defined, when the hyperplanes orthogonal to the root vectors are removed.   Weyl character formula   The Weyl character formula gives in closed form the characters of the irreducible complex representations of the simple Lie groups.   Weyl group   "  Semisimple groups     