


Runge–Kutta method (SDE)




Runge–Kutta method (SDE)

In mathematics of stochastic systems, the Runge–Kutta method is a technique for the approximate numerical solution of a stochastic differential equation. It is a generalization of the Runge–Kutta method for ordinary differential equations to stochastic differential equations (SDEs). Importantly, the method does not involve knowing derivatives the coefficient functions in the SDEs.
Most basic scheme
Consider the Itō diffusion

 
  satisfying the following Itō stochastic differential equation



with initial condition

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  stands for the Wiener process, and suppose that we wish to solve this SDE on some interval of time 
 
 
 
 . Then the basic Runge–Kutta approximation to the true solution 
 
 
 
  is the Markov chain

 
  defined as follows:1

partition the interval 
 
 
 
  into 
 
 
 
  subintervals of width 
 
 
 
 :





set 
 
 
 
 ;


recursively compute 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  by




where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  The random variables

 
  are independent and identically distributed normal random variables with expected value zero and variance

 
 .
This scheme has strong order 1, meaning that the approximation error of the actual solution at a fixed time scales with the time step 
 
 
 
 . It has also weak order 1, meaning that the error on the statistics of the solution scales with the time step 
 
 
 
 . See the references for complete and exact statements.
The functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be time-varying without any complication. The method can be generalized to the case of several coupled equations; the principle is the same but the equations become longer.
Variation of the Improved Euler is flexible
A newer Runge—Kutta scheme also of strong order 1 straightforwardly reduces to the Improved Euler scheme for deterministic ODEs. 2 Consider the vector stochastic process 
 
 
 
  that satisfies the general Ito SDE


 
  where drift 
 
 
 
  and volatility 
 
 
 
  are sufficiently smooth functions of their arguments. Given time step 
 
 
 
 , and given the value 
 
 
 
 , estimate 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  for time 
 
 
 
  via




where 
 
 
 
  for normal random 
 
 
 
 ;
and where 
 
 
 
 , each alternative chosen with probability 
 
 
 
 .

The above describes only one time step. Repeat this time step 
 
 
 
  times in order to integrate the SDE from time 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
The scheme integrates Stratonovich SDEs to 
 
 
 
  provided one sets 
 
 
 
  throughout (instead of choosing 
 
 
 
 ).
Higher order Runge-Kutta schemes
Higher-order schemes also exist, but become increasingly complex. Rossler developed many schemes for Ito SDEs. 3 4 Whereas Komori developed schemes for Stratonovich SDEs. 5 6 7
References
"
Category:Numerical differential equations Category:Stochastic differential equations



P. E. Kloeden and E. Platen. Numerical solution of stochastic differential equations, volume 23 of Applications of Mathematics. Springer--Verlag, 1992.↩
A. J. Roberts. Modify the improved Euler scheme to integrate stochastic differential equations. 1, Oct 2012.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




