


Random dynamical system




Random dynamical system

In the mathematical field of dynamical systems, a random dynamical system is a dynamical system in which the equations of motion have an element of randomness to them. Random dynamical systems are characterized by a state space S, a set of maps T from S into itself that can be thought of as the set of all possible equations of motion, and a probability distribution Q on the set T that represents the random choice of map. Motion in a random dynamical system can be informally thought of as a state 
 
 
 
  evolving according to a succession of maps randomly chosen according to the distribution Q.1
An example of a random dynamical system is a stochastic differential equation; in this case the distribution Q is typically determined by noise terms. It consists of a base flow, the "noise", and a cocycle dynamical system on the "physical" phase space.
Motivation: solutions to a stochastic differential equation
Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional vector field, and let 
 
 
 
 . Suppose that the solution 
 
 
 
  to the stochastic differential equation



exists for all positive time and some (small) interval of negative time dependent upon 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes a 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Wiener process (Brownian motion). Implicitly, this statement uses the classical Wiener probability space



In this context, the Wiener process is the coordinate process.
Now define a flow map or (solution operator) 
 
 
 
  by



(whenever the right hand side is well-defined). Then 
 
 
 
  (or, more precisely, the pair 
 
 
 
 ) is a (local, left-sided) random dynamical system. The process of generating a "flow" from the solution to a stochastic differential equation leads us to study suitably defined "flows" on their own. These "flows" are random dynamical systems.
Formal definition
Formally, a random dynamical system consists of a base flow, the "noise", and a cocycle dynamical system on the "physical" phase space. In detail.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a probability space, the noise space. Define the base flow

 
  as follows: for each "time" 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be a measure-preserving measurable function:


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ;
Suppose also that



 
 , the identity function on 
 
 
 
 ;
for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .

That is, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , forms a group of measure-preserving transformation of the noise 
 
 
 
 . For one-sided random dynamical systems, one would consider only positive indices 
 
 
 
 ; for discrete-time random dynamical systems, one would consider only integer-valued 
 
 
 
 ; in these cases, the maps 
 
 
 
  would only form a commutative monoid instead of a group.
While true in most applications, it is not usually part of the formal definition of a random dynamical system to require that the measure-preserving dynamical system

 
  is ergodic.
Now let 
 
 
 
  be a complete separable metric space, the phase space. Let 
 
 
 
  be a 
 
 
 
 -measurable function such that

for all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , the identity function on 
 
 
 
 ;
for (almost) all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is continuous in both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  satisfies the (crude) cocycle property: for almost all

 
 ,









In the case of random dynamical systems driven by a Wiener process 
 
 
 
 , the base flow 
 
 
 
  would be given by


 
 .
This can be read as saying that 
 
 
 
  "starts the noise at time 
 
 
 
  instead of time 0". Thus, the cocycle property can be read as saying that evolving the initial condition 
 
 
 
  with some noise 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  seconds and then through 
 
 
 
  seconds with the same noise (as started from the 
 
 
 
  seconds mark) gives the same result as evolving 
 
 
 
  through 
 
 
 
  seconds with that same noise.
Attractors for random dynamical systems
The notion of an attractor for a random dynamical system is not as straightforward to define as in the deterministic case. For technical reasons, it is necessary to "rewind time", as in the definition of a pullback attractor. Moreover, the attractor is dependent upon the realisation 
 
 
 
  of the noise.
See also

Stochastic control

References

Crauel, H., Debussche, A., & Flandoli, F. (1997) Random attractors. Journal of Dynamics and Differential Equations. 9(2) 307—341.

"
* Category:Stochastic differential equations Category:Stochastic processes



↩




