


Dagger category




Dagger category

In mathematics, a dagger category (also called involutive category or category with involution 12) is a category equipped with a certain structure called dagger or involution. The name dagger category was coined by Selinger.3
Formal definition
A dagger category is a category

 
  equipped with an involutive functor

 
  that is the identity on objects, where 
 
 
 
  is the opposite category.
In detail, this means that it associates to every morphism

 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  its adjoint

 
  such that for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,











Note that in the previous definition, the term "adjoint" is used in a way analogous to (and inspired by) the linear-algebraic sense, not in the category-theoretic sense.
Some sources 4 define a category with involution to be a dagger category with the additional property that its set of morphisms is partially ordered and that the order of morphisms is compatible with the composition of morphisms, that is aa\circ ca, b, c whenever their sources and targets are compatible.
 Examples

The category Rel of sets and relations possesses a dagger structure i.e. for a given relation

 
  in Rel, the relation 
 
 
 
  is the relational converse of 
 
 
 
 
 . In this example, a self-adjoint morphism is a symmetric relation.


The category Cob of cobordisms is a dagger compact category, in particular it possesses a dagger structure.


The category FdHilb of finite dimensional Hilbert spaces also possesses a dagger structure: Given a linear map

 
 , the map 
 
 
 
  is just its adjoint in the usual sense.


Any monoid with involution is a dagger category with only one object. In fact, every endomorphism hom-set in a dagger category is not simply a monoid, but a monoid with involution, because of the dagger.


A discrete category is trivially a dagger category.


A groupoid (and as trivial corollary a group) also has a dagger structure with the adjoint of a morphism being its inverse. In this case, all morphisms are unitary.

Remarkable morphisms
In a dagger category 
 
 
 
 , a morphism

 
  is called

unitary if 
 
 
 
 
 ;
self-adjoint if 
 
 
 
  (this is only possible for an endomorphism

 
 ).

The terms unitary and self-adjoint in the previous definition are taken from the category of Hilbert spaces where the morphisms satisfying those properties are then unitary and self-adjoint in the usual sense.
See also

*-algebra
Dagger symmetric monoidal category
Dagger compact category

References

5 6 7 8




"
 







P. Selinger, Dagger compact closed categories and completely positive maps, Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Quantum Programming Languages, Chicago, June 30–July 1, 2005.
M. Burgin, Categories with involution and correspondences in γ-categories, IX All-Union Algebraic Colloquium, Gomel (1968), pp.34–35; M. Burgin, Categories with involution and relations in γ-categories, Transactions of the Moscow Mathematical Society, 1970, v. 22, pp. 161–228
J. Lambek, Diagram chasing in ordered categories with involution, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 143 (1999), No.1–3, 293–307



