


Absolute presentation of a group




Absolute presentation of a group

In mathematics, one method of defining a group is by an absolute presentation.1
Recall that to define a group 
 
 
 
  by means of a presentation, one specifies a set 
 
 
 
  of generators so that every element of the group can be written as a product of some of these generators, and a set 
 
 
 
  of relations among those generators. In symbols:



Informally 
 
 
 
  is the group generated by the set 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . But here there is a tacit assumption that 
 
 
 
 
  is the "freest" such group as clearly the relations are satisfied in any homomorphic image of 
 
 
 
 . One way of being able to eliminate this tacit assumption is by specifying that certain words in 
 
 
 
  should not be equal to 
 
 
 
  That is we specify a set 
 
 
 
 , called the set of irrelations, such that 
 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
Formal Definition
To define an absolute presentation of a group 
 
 
 
  one specifies a set 
 
 
 
  of generators, a set 
 
 
 
  of relations among those generators and a set 
 
 
 
 
  of irrelations among those generators. We then say 
 
 
 
  has absolute presentation



provided that:



 
  has presentation


Given any homomorphism

 
 
  such that the irrelations 
 
 
 
  are satisfied in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 .

A more algebraic, but equivalent, way of stating condition 2 is:

2a. if 
 
 
 
 
  is a non-trivial normal subgroup of 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 


Remark: The concept of an absolute presentation has been fruitful in fields such as algebraically closed groups and the Grigorchuk topology. In the literature, in a context where absolute presentations are being discussed, a presentation (in the usual sense of the word) is sometimes referred to as a relative presentation. The term seems rather strange as one may well ask "relative to what?" and the only justification seems to be that relative is habitually used as an antonym to ''absolute.
Example
The cyclic group of order 8 has the presentation



But, up to isomorphism there are three more groups that "satisfy" the relation 
 
 
 
  namely:





 
  and



However none of these satisfy the irrelation 
 
 
 
 . So an absolute presentation for the cyclic group of order 8 is:



It is part of the definition of an absolute presentation that the irrelations are not satisfied in any proper homomorphic image of the group. Therefore:



Is not an absolute presentation for the cyclic group of order 8 because the irrelation 
 
 
 
  is satisfied in the cyclic group of order 4.
Background
The notion of an absolute presentation arises from Bernhard Neumann's study of the isomorphism problem for algebraically closed groups.2
A common strategy for considering whether two groups 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are isomorphic is to consider whether a presentation for one might be transformed into a presentation for the other. However algebraically closed groups are neither finitely generated nor recursively presented and so it is impossible to compare their presentations. Neumann considered the following alternative strategy:
Suppose we know that a group 
 
 
 
  with finite presentation 
 
 
 
 
  can be embedded in the algebraically closed group 
 
 
 
  then given another algebraically closed group 
 
 
 
 , we can ask "Can 
 
 
 
  be embedded in 
 
 
 
 ?"
It soon becomes apparent that a presentation for a group does not contain enough information to make this decision for while there may be a homomorphism 
 
 
 
 
 , this homomorphism need not be an embedding. What is needed is a specification for 
 
 
 
  that "forces" any homomorphism preserving that specification to be an embedding. An absolute presentation does precisely this.
References


"
Category:Combinatorial group theory



B. Neumann, The isomorphism problem for algebraically closed groups, in: Word Problems, Decision Problems, and the Burnside Problem in Group Theory, Amsterdam-London (1973), pp. 553–562.↩





