


Truncated distribution




Truncated distribution

In statistics, a truncated distribution is a conditional distribution that results from restricting the domain of some other probability distribution. Truncated distributions arise in practical statistics in cases where the ability to record, or even to know about, occurrences is limited to values which lie above or below a given threshold or within a specified range. For example, if the dates of birth of children in a school are examined, these would typically be subject to truncation relative to those of all children in the area given that the school accepts only children in a given age range on a specific date. There would be no information about how many children in the locality had dates of birth before or after the school's cutoff dates if only a direct approach to the school were used to obtain information.
Where sampling is such as to retain knowledge of items that fall outside the required range, without recording the actual values, this is known as censoring, as opposed to the truncation here.1
Definition
The following discussion is in terms of a random variable having a continuous distribution although the same ideas apply to discrete distributions. Similarly, the discussion assumes that truncation is to a semi-open interval y ∈ (a,b] but other possibilities can be handled straightforwardly.
Suppose we have a random variable, 
 
 
 
  that is distributed according to some probability density function, 
 
 
 
 , with cumulative distribution function 
 
 
 
  both of which have infinite support. Suppose we wish to know the probability density of the random variable after restricting the support to be between two constants so that the support, 
 
 
 
 . That is to say, suppose we wish to know how 
 
 
 
  is distributed given 
 
 
 
 .



where 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  everywhere else. Notice that 
 
 
 
  has the same support as 
 
 
 
 .
There is, unfortunately, an ambiguity about the term Truncated Distribution. When one refers to a truncated distribution one could be referring to 
 
 
 
  where one has removed the parts from the distribution 
 
 
 
  but not scaled up the distribution, or one could be referring to the 
 
 
 
 . In general, 
 
 
 
  is not a probability density function since it does not integrate to one, whereas 
 
 
 
  is a probability density function. In this article, a truncated distribution refers to 
 
 

Notice that in fact 
 
 
 
  is a distribution:


 
 .
Truncated distributions need not have parts removed from the top and bottom. A truncated distribution where just the bottom of the distribution has been removed is as follows:



where 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  everywhere else, and 
 
 
 
  is the cumulative distribution function.
A truncated distribution where the top of the distribution has been removed is as follows:



where 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  everywhere else, and 
 
 
 
  is the cumulative distribution function.
Expectation of truncated random variable
Suppose we wish to find the expected value of a random variable distributed according to the density 
 
 
 
  and a cumulative distribution of 
 
 
 
  given that the random variable, 
 
 
 
 , is greater than some known value 
 
 
 
 . The expectation of a truncated random variable is thus:



where again 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  everywhere else.
Letting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the lower and upper limits respectively of support for 
 
 
 
  (i.e. the original density) properties of 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is some continuous function of 
 
 
 
  with a continuous derivative and where 
 
 
 
  is assumed continuous include:
(i) 
 
 

(ii) 
 
 

(iii) 
 
 

(iv) 
 
 

(v) 
 
 

Provided that the limits exist, that is
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  represents either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
The truncated normal distribution is an important example.2
The Tobit model employs truncated distributions.
Random truncation
Suppose we have the following set up: a truncation value, 
 
 
 
 , is selected at random from a density, 
 
 
 
 , but this value is not observed. Then a value, 
 
 
 
 , is selected at random from the truncated distribution, 
 
 
 
 . Suppose we observe 
 
 
 
  and wish to update our belief about the density of 
 
 
 
  given the observation.
First, by definition:


 
 , and



Notice that 
 
 
 
  must be greater than 
 
 
 
 , hence when we integrate over 
 
 
 
 , we set a lower bound of 
 
 
 
 . The functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the unconditional density and unconditional cumulative distribution function, respectively.
By Bayes' rule,



which expands to



Two uniform distributions (example)
Suppose we know that t is uniformly distributed from [0,T] and x|t is distributed uniformly on [0,t]. Let g(t) and f(x|t) be the densities that describe t and x respectively. Suppose we observe a value of x and wish to know the distribution of t given that value of x.



See also

Truncated mean

References


"
Category:Theory of probability distributions Category:Types of probability distributions



Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms. OUP. ISBN 0-19-920613-9
Johnson, N.L., Kotz, S., Balakrishnan, N. (1994) Continuous Univariate Distributions, Volume 1, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-58495-9 (Section 10.1)




