


Pullback attractor




Pullback attractor

In mathematics, the attractor of a random dynamical system may be loosely thought of as a set to which the system evolves after a long enough time. The basic idea is the same as for a deterministic dynamical system, but requires careful treatment because random dynamical systems are necessarily non-autonomous. This requires one to consider the notion of a pullback attractor or attractor in the pullback sense.
Set-up and motivation
Consider a random dynamical system 
 
 
 
  on a complete separable metric space

 
 , where the noise is chosen from a probability space

 
  with  base flow

 
 .
A naïve definition of an attractor 
 
 
 
  for this random dynamical system would be to require that for any initial condition 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . This definition is far too limited, especially in dimensions higher than one. A more plausible definition, modelled on the idea of an omega-limit set, would be to say that a point 
 
 
 
  lies in the attractor 
 
 
if and only if there exists an initial condition 
 
 
 
 , there is a sequence of times 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  as 
 
 
 
 .
This is not too far from a working definition. However, we have not yet considered the effect of the noise 
 
 
 
 , which makes the system non-autonomous (i.e. it depends explicitly on time). For technical reasons, it becomes necessary to do the following: instead of looking 
 
 
 
  seconds into the "future", and considering the limit as 
 
 
 
 , one "rewinds" the noise 
 
 
 
  seconds into the "past", and evolves the system through 
 
 
 
  seconds using the same initial condition. That is, one is interested in the pullback limit


 
 .
So, for example, in the pullback sense, the omega-limit set for a (possibly random) set 
 
 
 
  is the random set



Equivalently, this may be written as



Importantly, in the case of a deterministic dynamical system (one without noise), the pullback limit coincides with the deterministic forward limit, so it is meaningful to compare deterministic and random omega-limit sets, attractors, and so forth.
Definition
The pullback attractor (or random global attractor) 
 
 
 
  for a random dynamical system is a 
 
 
 
 -almost surely unique random set such that



 
  is a random compact set

 
  is almost surely compact and 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -measurable function for every 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  is invariant: for all 
 
 
 
  almost surely;


 
  is attractive: for any deterministic bounded set

 
 ,





 
  almost surely.
 



There is a slight abuse of notation in the above: the first use of "dist" refers to the Hausdorff semi-distance from a point to a set,



whereas the second use of "dist" refers to the Hausdorff semi-distance between two sets,



As noted in the previous section, in the absence of noise, this definition of attractor coincides with the deterministic definition of the attractor as the minimal compact invariant set that attracts all bounded deterministic sets.
Theorems relating omega-limit sets to attractors
The attractor as a union of omega-limit sets
If a random dynamical system has a compact random absorbing set

 
 , then the random global attractor is given by



where the union is taken over all bounded sets 
 
 
 
 .
Bounding the attractor within a deterministic set
Crauel (1999) proved that if the base flow 
 
 
 
  is ergodic and 
 
 
 
  is a deterministic compact set with



then 
 
 

 
 -almost surely.
References

Crauel, H., Debussche, A., & Flandoli, F. (1997) Random attractors. Journal of Dynamics and Differential Equations. 9(2) 307–341.
Crauel, H. (1999) Global random attractors are uniquely determined by attracting deterministic compact sets. Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. 4 176 57–72
Chekroun, M. D., E. Simonnet, and M. Ghil, (2011). Stochastic climate dynamics: Random attractors and time-dependent invariant measures. Physica D. 240 (21), 1685–1700.

"
Category:Random dynamical systems


