


Kelvin's circulation theorem




Kelvin's circulation theorem

In fluid mechanics, Kelvin's circulation theorem (named after William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin who published it in 18691) states In a barotropic ideal fluid with conservative body forces, the circulation around a closed curve (which encloses the same fluid elements) moving with the fluid remains constant with time.2 Stated mathematically:



where 
 
 
 
  is the circulation around a material contour 
 
 
 
 . Stated more simply this theorem says that if one observes a closed contour at one instant, and follows the contour over time (by following the motion of all of its fluid elements), the circulation over the two locations of this contour are equal.
This theorem does not hold in cases with viscous stresses, nonconservative body forces (for example a coriolis force) or non-barotropic pressure-density relations.
Mathematical proof
The circulation 
 
 
 
 
  around a closed material contour 
 
 
 
  is defined by:


 
  where u is the velocity vector, and ds is an element along the closed contour.
The governing equation for an inviscid fluid with a conservative body force is


 
  where D/Dt is the convective derivative, ρ is the fluid density, p is the pressure and Φ is the potential for the body force. These are the Euler equations with a body force.
The condition of barotropicity implies that the density is a function only of the pressure, i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
Taking the convective derivative of circulation gives



For the first term, we substitute from the governing equation, and then apply Stokes' theorem, thus:


 
  The final equality arises since 
 
 
 
  owing to barotropicity.
For the second term, we note that evolution of the material line element is given by


 
  Hence


 
  The last equality is obtained by applying Stokes theorem.
Since both terms are zero, we obtain the result



The theorem also applies to a rotating frame, with a rotation vector 
 
 
 
 , if the circulation is modified thus:



Here 
 
 
 
  is the position of the area of fluid. From Stoke's theorem, this is:



See also

Euler equations (fluid dynamics)
Helmholtz's theorems
Bernoulli's principle

Notes


"
Category:Equations of fluid dynamics Category:Fluid dynamics Category:Equations Category:William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin



Katz, Plotkin: Low-Speed Aerodynamics
Kundu, P and Cohen, I: Fluid Mechanics, page 130. Academic Press 2002




