


Optimal stopping




Optimal stopping

In mathematics, the theory of optimal stopping is concerned with the problem of choosing a time to take a particular action, in order to maximise an expected reward or minimise an expected cost. Optimal stopping problems can be found in areas of statistics, economics, and mathematical finance (related to the pricing of American options). A key example of an optimal stopping problem is the secretary problem. Optimal stopping problems can often be written in the form of a Bellman equation, and are therefore often solved using dynamic programming.
Definition
Discrete time case
Stopping rule problems are associated with two objects:

A sequence of random variables 
 
 
 
 , whose joint distribution is something assumed to be known
A sequence of 'reward' functions 
 
 
 
  which depend on the observed values of the random variables in 1.:
 
 



Given those objects, the problem is as follows:

You are observing the sequence of random variables, and at each step 
 
 
 
 , you can choose to either stop observing or continue
If you stop observing at step 
 
 
 
 , you will receive reward 
 
 

You want to choose a stopping rule to maximise your expected reward (or equivalently, minimise your expected loss)

Continuous time case
Consider a gain processes 
 
 
 
  defined on a filtered probability space

 
  and assume that 
 
 
 
  is adapted to the filtration. The optimal stopping problem is to find the stopping time

 
  which maximizes the expected gain


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is called the value function. Here 
 
 
 
  can take value 
 
 
 
 .
A more specific formulation is as follows. We consider an adapted strong Markov process

 
  defined on a filtered probability space 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the probability measure where the stochastic process starts at 
 
 
 
 . Given continuous functions 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , the optimal stopping problem is


 
  This is sometimes called the MLS (which stand for Mayer, Lagrange, and supremum, respectively) formulation.1
Solution methods
There are generally two approaches of solving optimal stopping problems.2 When the underlying process (or the gain process) is described by its unconditional finite-dimensional distributions, the appropriate solution technique is the martingale approach, so called because it uses martingale theory, the most important concept being the Snell envelope. In the discrete time case, if the planning horizon 
 
 
 
  is finite, the problem can also be easily solved by dynamic programming.
When the underlying process is determined by a family of (conditional) transition functions leading to a Markovian family of transition probabilities, very powerful analytical tools provided by the theory of Markov processes can often be utilized and this approach is referred to as the Markovian method. The solution is usually obtained by solving the associated free-boundary problems (Stefan problems).
A jump diffusion result
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Lévy diffusion in 
 
 
 
  given by the SDE


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Brownian motion, 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -dimensional compensated Poisson random measure, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are given functions such that a unique solution 
 
 
 
  exists. Let 
 
 
 
  be an open set (the solvency region) and


 
  be the bankruptcy time. The optimal stopping problem is:


 
  It turns out that under some regularity conditions,3 the following verification theorem holds:
If a function 
 
 
 
  satisfies



 
  where the continuation region is 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  on 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  on 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the infinitesimal generator of 
 
 


then 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, if



 
  on 
 
 


Then 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is an optimal stopping time.
These conditions can also be written is a more compact form (the integro-variational inequality):



 
  on 
 
 


Examples
Coin tossing
(Example where 
 
 
 
  converges)
You have a fair coin and are repeatedly tossing it. Each time, before it is tossed, you can choose to stop tossing it and get paid (in dollars, say) the average number of heads observed.
You wish to maximise the amount you get paid by choosing a stopping rule. If Xi (for i ≥ 1) forms a sequence of independent, identically distributed random variables with Bernoulli distribution


 
  and if


 
  then the sequences 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are the objects associated with this problem.
House selling
(Example where 
 
 
 
  does not necessarily converge)
You have a house and wish to sell it. Each day you are offered 
 
 
 
  for your house, and pay 
 
 
 
  to continue advertising it. If you sell your house on day 
 
 
 
 , you will earn 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 .
You wish to maximise the amount you earn by choosing a stopping rule.
In this example, the sequence (
 
 
 
 ) is the sequence of offers for your house, and the sequence of reward functions is how much you will earn.
Secretary problem
(Example where 
 
 
 
  is a finite sequence)
You are observing a sequence of objects which can be ranked from best to worst. You wish to choose a stopping rule which maximises your chance of picking the best object.
Here, if 
 
 
 
  (n is some large number, perhaps) are the ranks of the objects, and 
 
 
 
  is the chance you pick the best object if you stop intentionally rejecting objects at step i, then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the sequences associated with this problem. This problem was solved in the early 1960s by several people. An elegant solution to the secretary problem and several modifications of this problem is provided by the more recent odds algorithm of optimal stopping (Bruss algorithm).
Search theory
Economists have studied a number of optimal stopping problems similar to the 'secretary problem', and typically call this type of analysis 'search theory'. Search theory has especially focused on a worker's search for a high-wage job, or a consumer's search for a low-priced good.
Option trading
In the trading of options on financial markets, the holder of an American option is allowed to exercise the right to buy (or sell) the underlying asset at a predetermined price at any time before or at the expiry date. Therefore the valuation of American options is essentially an optimal stopping problem. Consider a classical Black-Scholes set-up and let 
 
 
 
  be the risk-free interest rate and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the dividend rate and volatility of the stock. The stock price 
 
 
 
  follows geometric Brownian motion


 
  under the risk-neutral measure. When the option is perpetual, the optimal stopping problem is


 
  where the payoff function is 
 
 
 
  for a call option and 
 
 
 
  for a put option. The variational inequality is


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the exercise boundary. The solution is known to be4

(Perpetual call) 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

(Perpetual put) 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 


If the expiry date is finite, the problem is associated with a 2-dimensional free-boundary problem with no known closed-form solution. Various numerical methods can be used.
See also

Stochastic control
Markov decision process

References

Chow, Y.S., Robbins, H. and Siegmund, D. (1971) Great Expectations: The Theory of Optimal Stopping. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
T. P. Hill. "Knowing When to Stop". American Scientist, Vol. 97, 126-133 (2009). (For French translation, see cover story in the July issue of Pour la Science (2009))
Optimal Stopping and Applications, retrieved on 21 June 2007
Thomas S. Ferguson. "Who solved the secretary problem?" Statistical Science, Vol. 4.,282-296, (1989)
F. Thomas Bruss. "Sum the odds to one and stop." Annals of Probability, Vol. 28, 1384–1391,(2000)
F. Thomas Bruss. "The art of a right decision: Why decision makers want to know the odds-algorithm." Newsletter of the European Mathematical Society, Issue 62, 14-20, (2006)
R. Rogerson, R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2005), 'Search-theoretic models of the labor market: a survey'. Journal of Economic Literature 43, pp. 959–88.

External links

Neil Bearden's Optimal Search Page

"
Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Mathematical finance Category:Decision theory Category:Sequential methods Category:Dynamic programming











