


Cap product




Cap product

In algebraic topology the cap product is a method of adjoining a chain of degree p with a cochain of degree q, such that q ≤ p, to form a composite chain of degree p − q. It was introduced by Eduard Čech in 1936, and independently by Hassler Whitney in 1938.
Definition
Let X be a topological space and R a coefficient ring. The cap product is a bilinear map on singular homology and cohomology



defined by contracting a singular chain

 
  with a singular cochain

 
  by the formula :



Here, the notation 
 
 
 
  indicates the restriction of the simplicial map 
 
 
 
  to its face spanned by the vectors of the base, see Simplex.
Interpretation
In analogy with the interpretation of the cup product in terms of the Künneth formula, we can explain the existence of the cap product by considering the composition



in terms of the chain and cochain complexes of 
 
 
 
 , where we are taking tensor products of chain complexes, 
 
 
 
  is the diagonal map which induces the map 
 
 
 
  on the chain complex, and 
 
 
 
  is the evaluation map (always 0 except for 
 
 
 
 ).
This composition then passes to the quotient to define the cap product 
 
 
 
 , and looking carefully at the above composition shows that it indeed takes the form of maps 
 
 
 
 , which is always zero for 
 
 
 
 .
The slant product
The above discussion indicates that the same operation can be defined on cartesian products

 
  yielding a product



In case X = Y, the two products are related by the diagonal map.
Equations
The boundary of a cap product is given by :



Given a map f the induced maps satisfy :



The cap and cup product are related by :



where


 
  , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

An interesting consequence of the last equation is that it makes 
 
 
 
  into a right 
 
 
module.
See also

cup product
Poincaré duality
singular homology
homology theory

References

Hatcher, A., Algebraic Topology, Cambridge University Press (2002) ISBN 0-521-79540-0. Detailed discussion of homology theories for simplicial complexes and manifolds, singular homology, etc.


"
Category:Homology theory Category:Algebraic topology Category:Binary operations


