


Random energy model




Random energy model

In statistical physics of disordered systems, the random energy model is a toy model of a system with quenched disorder. It concerns the statistics of a system of 
 
 
 
  particles, such that the number of possible states for the systems grow as 
 
 
 
 , while the energy of such states is a Gaussian stochastic variable. The model has an exact solution. Its simplicity makes this model suitable for pedagogical introduction of concepts like quenched disorder and replica symmetry.
Comparison with other disordered systems
The 
 
 
 
 -spin Infinite Range Model, in which all 
 
 
 
 -spin sets interact with a random, independent, identically distributed interaction constant, becomes the Random-Energy Model in a suitably defined 
 
 
 
  limit.1
More precisely, if the Hamiltonian of the model is defined by



where the sum runs over all 
 
 
 
  distinct sets of 
 
 
 
  indices, and, for each such set, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is an independent Gaussian variable of mean 0 and variance 
 
 
 
 , the Random-Energy model is recovered in the 
 
 
 
  limit.
Derivation of thermodynamical quantities
As its name suggests, in the REM each microscopic state has an independent distribution of energy. For a particular realization of the disorder, 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  refers to the individual spin configurations described by the state and 
 
 
 
  is the energy associated with it. The final extensive variables like the free energy need to be averaged over all realizations of the disorder, just as in the case of the Edwards Anderson model. Averaging 
 
 
 
  over all possible realizations, we find that the probability that a given configuration of the disordered system has an energy equal to 
 
 
 
  is given by



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the average over all realizations of the disorder. Moreover, the joint probability distribution of the energy values of two different microscopic configurations of the spins, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  factorizes:



It can be seen that the probability of a given spin configuration only depends on the energy of that state and not on the individual spin configuration.2
The entropy of the REM is given by3

 
  for 
 
 
 
 . However this expression only holds if the entropy per spin, 
 
 
 
  is finite, i.e., when 
 
 
 
  Since 
 
 
 
 , this corresponds to 
 
 
 
 . For $T, the system remains "frozen" in a small number of configurations of energy  and the entropy per spin vanishes in the thermodynamic limit.
References
"
Category:Statistical mechanics










