


Kendall rank correlation coefficient




Kendall rank correlation coefficient

In statistics, the Kendall rank correlation coefficient, commonly referred to as Kendall's tau coefficient (after the Greek letter τ), is a statistic used to measure the association between two measured quantities. A tau test is a non-parametric hypothesis test for statistical dependence based on the tau coefficient.
It is a measure of rank correlation: the similarity of the orderings of the data when ranked by each of the quantities. It is named after Maurice Kendall, who developed it in 1938,1 though Gustav Fechner had proposed a similar measure in the context of time series in 1897.2
Definition
Let (x1, y1), (x2, y2), …, (xn, yn) be a set of observations of the joint random variables X and Y respectively, such that all the values of (xi) and (yi) are unique. Any pair of observations (xi, yi) and (xj, yj) are said to be concordant if the ranks for both elements agree: that is, if both xi > xj and yi > yj or if both xi j and yi j. They are said to be discordant, if xi > xj and yi j or if xi j and yi > yj. If xi = xj or yi = yj, the pair is neither concordant nor discordant.
The Kendall τ coefficient is defined as:


3
Properties
The denominator is the total number of pair combinations, so the coefficient must be in the range −1 ≤ τ ≤ 1.

If the agreement between the two rankings is perfect (i.e., the two rankings are the same) the coefficient has value 1.
If the disagreement between the two rankings is perfect (i.e., one ranking is the reverse of the other) the coefficient has value −1.
If X and Y are independent, then we would expect the coefficient to be approximately zero.

Hypothesis test
The Kendall rank coefficient is often used as a test statistic in a statistical hypothesis test to establish whether two variables may be regarded as statistically dependent. This test is non-parametric, as it does not rely on any assumptions on the distributions of X or Y or the distribution of (X,Y).
Under the null hypothesis of independence of X and Y, the sampling distribution of τ has an expected value of zero. The precise distribution cannot be characterized in terms of common distributions, but may be calculated exactly for small samples; for larger samples, it is common to use an approximation to the normal distribution, with mean zero and variance


 
 .4
Accounting for ties
A pair {(xi, yi), (xj, yj)} is said to be tied if xi = xj or yi = yj; a tied pair is neither concordant nor discordant. When tied pairs arise in the data, the coefficient may be modified in a number of ways to keep it in the range [−1, 1]:
Tau-a
The Tau-a statistic tests the strength of association of the cross tabulations. Both variables have to be ordinal. Tau-a will not make any adjustment for ties. It is defined as:



where nc, nd and n0 are defined as in the next section.
Tau-b
The Tau-b statistic, unlike Tau-a, makes adjustments for ties.5 Values of Tau-b range from −1 (100% negative association, or perfect inversion) to +1 (100% positive association, or perfect agreement). A value of zero indicates the absence of association.
The Kendall Tau-b coefficient is defined as:



where



Tau-c
Tau-c differs from Tau-b as in being more suitable for rectangular tables than for square tables.
Significance tests
When two quantities are statistically independent, the distribution of 
 
 
 
  is not easily characterizable in terms of known distributions. However, for 
 
 
 
  the following statistic, 
 
 
 
 , is approximately distributed as a standard normal when the variables are statistically independent:



Thus, to test whether two variables are statistically dependent, one computes 
 
 
 
 , and finds the cumulative probability for a standard normal distribution at 
 
 
 
 . For a 2-tailed test, multiply that number by two to obtain the p-value. If the p-value is below a given significance level, one rejects the null hypothesis (at that significance level) that the quantities are statistically independent.
Numerous adjustments should be added to 
 
 
 
  when accounting for ties. The following statistic, 
 
 
 
 , has the same distribution as the 
 
 
 
  distribution, and is again approximately equal to a standard normal distribution when the quantities are statistically independent:



where



pvrank6 is a very recent R package that computes rank correlations and their p-values with various options for tied ranks. It is possible to compute exact Kendall coefficient test p-values for n ≤ 60.
Algorithms
The direct computation of the numerator 
 
 
 
 , involves two nested iterations, as characterized by the following pseudo-code:
numer := 0
for i:=2..N do
    for j:=1..(i-1) do
        numer := numer + sign(x[i] - x[j]) * sign(y[i] - y[j])
return numer
Although quick to implement, this algorithm is 
 
 
 
  in complexity and becomes very slow on large samples. A more sophisticated algorithm7 built upon the Merge Sort algorithm can be used to compute the numerator in 
 
 
 
  time.
Begin by ordering your data points sorting by the first quantity, 
 
 
 
 , and secondarily (among ties in 
 
 
 
 ) by the second quantity, 
 
 
 
 . With this initial ordering, 
 
 
 
  is not sorted, and the core of the algorithm consists of computing how many steps a Bubble Sort would take to sort this initial 
 
 
 
 . An enhanced Merge Sort algorithm, with 
 
 
 
  complexity, can be applied to compute the number of swaps, 
 
 
 
 , that would be required by a Bubble Sort to sort 
 
 
 
 . Then the numerator for 
 
 
 
  is computed as:



where 
 
 
 
  is computed like 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , but with respect to the joint ties in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
A Merge Sort partitions the data to be sorted, 
 
 
 
  into two roughly equal halves, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then sorts each half recursive, and then merges the two sorted halves into a fully sorted vector. The number of Bubble Sort swaps is equal to:



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the sorted versions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  characterizes the Bubble Sort swap-equivalent for a merge operation. 
 
 
 
  is computed as depicted in the following pseudo-code:
function M(L[1..n], R[1..m])
    i := 1
    j := 1
    nSwaps := 0
    while i x and a sorted version of 

. With these, the factors 

 and 

 used to compute 

 are easily obtained in a single linear-time pass through the sorted arrays.
A second algorithm with 
 
 
 
  time complexity, based on AVL trees, was devised by David Christensen.8 Yet another algorithm for 
 
 
 
  time complexity was proposed more recently.9
See also

Correlation
Kendall tau distance
Kendall's W
Spearman's rank correlation coefficient
Goodman and Kruskal's gamma
Theil–Sen estimator

References


Kendall, M. (1948) Rank Correlation Methods, Charles Griffin & Company Limited
Bonett, DG & Wright, TA (2000) Sample size requirements for Pearson, Kendall, and Spearman correlations, Psychometrika, 65, 23–28.

External links

Tied rank calculation
Software for computing Kendall's tau on very large datasets
Online software: computes Kendall's tau rank correlation
The CORR Procedure: Statistical Computations – McDonough School of Business

de:Rangkorrelationskoeffizient#Kendalls Tau"
Category:Covariance and correlation Category:Non-parametric statistics Category:Statistical tests Category:Statistical dependence
















