


Uniqueness theorem for Poisson's equation




Uniqueness theorem for Poisson's equation

The uniqueness theorem for Poisson's equation states that the equation has a unique gradient of the solution for a large class of boundary conditions. In the case of electrostatics, this means that if an electric field satisfying the boundary conditions is found, then it is the complete electric field. __TOC__
Proof
In Gaussian units, the general expression for Poisson's equation in electrostatics is



Here 
 
 
 
  is the electric potential and 
 
 
 
  is the electric field.
The uniqueness of the gradient of the solution (the uniqueness of the electric field) can be proven for a large class of boundary conditions in the following way.
Suppose that there are two solutions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . One can then define 
 
 
 
  which is the difference of the two solutions. Given that both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfy Poisson's Equation, 
 
 
 
  must satisfy



Using the identity



And noticing that the second term is zero one can rewrite this as



Taking the volume integral over all space specified by the boundary conditions gives



Applying the divergence theorem, the expression can be rewritten as



Where 
 
 
 
  are boundary surfaces specified by boundary conditions.
Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  must be zero everywhere (and so 
 
 
 
 ) when the surface integral vanishes.
This means that the gradient of the solution is unique when



The boundary conditions for which the above is true are:

Dirichlet boundary condition

 
  is well defined at all of the boundary surfaces. As such 
 
 
 
  so at the boundary 
 
 
 
  and correspondingly the surface integral vanishes.
Neumann boundary condition

 
  is well defined at all of the boundary surfaces. As such 
 
 
 
  so at the boundary 
 
 
 
  and correspondingly the surface integral vanishes.
Modified Neumann boundary condition (also called Robin boundary condition - conditions where boundaries are specified as conductors with known charges)
 
 
 
  is also well defined by applying locally Gauss's Law. As such, the surface integral also vanishes.
Mixed boundary conditions (a combination of Dirichlet, Neumann, and modified Neumann boundary conditions): the uniqueness theorem will still hold.

The boundary surfaces may also include boundaries at infinity (describing unbounded domains) - for these as well the uniqueness theorem holds if the surface integral vanishes, which is the case (for example) when at large distances the integrand decays faster than the surface area grows.
See also

Poisson's equation
Gauss's law
Coulomb's law
Method of images
Green's function
Uniqueness theorem
Spherical harmonics

References




"
Category:Electrostatics Category:Vector calculus


