


Cash accumulation equation




Cash accumulation equation

The cash accumulation equation is an equation which calculates how much money will be in a bank account, at any point in time. The account pays interest, and is being fed a steady trickle of money.
Compound interest
We will approach the development of this equation by first considering the simpler case, that of just placing a lump sum in an account and then making no additions to the sum. With the usual notation, namely








= the current sum (dollars)







= principal (dollars)







= force of interest (per year)







= time (years)



the equation is  and so the sum of money grows exponentially. Differentiating this we derive  and applying the definition of 
 
 
 
  from eqn (1) to eqn (2), yields  Note that eqn. (1) is a particular solution to the ordinary differential equation in eqn. (3), with 
 
 
 
  equal to 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
 .
Cash infeed
Having achieved this we are ready to start feeding money into the account, at a rate of 
 
 
 
 
  dollars/year. This is effected by making a small change to eqn (3) as follows



and accordingly we need to solve the equation



From a table of integrals, the solution is



where 
 
 
 
  is the constant of integration. The initial sum deposited was 
 
 
 
 
  so we know one point on the curve :



and making this substitution we find that



Using this expression for 
 
 
 
 , and recalling that



gives us the solution :



This is the neatest form of the cash accumulation equation, as we are calling it, but it not the most useful form. Using the exponential instead of the logarithmic function, the equation can be written out like this : 
First special case
From this new perspective, eqn (1) is just a special case of eqn (4) - namely with 
 
 
 
 .
Second special case
For completeness we will consider the case 
 
 
 
 , and specifically the expression


 
  One way of evaluating this is to write out the Maclaurin expansion


 
  At a glance we can subtract 
 
 
 
 
  from this series and divide by 
 
 
 
 , to find out that


 
  With this result the cash accumulation equation now reads


 
  Thus the cash sum just increases linearly, as expected, if no interest is being paid.
Third special case
The only other special case to mention is 
 
 
 
 . Upon making this substitution, eqn (4) becomes simply


 
  Evidently 
 
 
 
  is negative, and money is being withdrawn rather than deposited. Specifically, the interest is being withdrawn as fast as it is being earned.
An alternative interpretation of this special case is that 
 
 
 
  is negative - the account is overdrawn - and money is being fed in at a rate which just meets the interest charges. A force of interest value is always positive.
External links

an extended version of this article
try out the equation with you own values

"
Interest rates Category:Basic financial concepts Category:Mathematical finance Category:Factor income distribution


