


Local martingale




Local martingale

In mathematics, a local martingale is a type of stochastic process, satisfying the localized version of the martingale property. Every martingale is a local martingale; every bounded local martingale is a martingale; in particular, every local martingale that is bounded from below is a supermartingale, and every local martingale that is bounded from above is a submartingale; however, in general a local martingale is not a martingale, because its expectation can be distorted by large values of small probability. In particular, a driftless diffusion process is a local martingale, but not necessarily a martingale.
Local martingales are essential in stochastic analysis, see Itō calculus, semimartingale, Girsanov theorem.
Definition
Let (Ω, F, P) be a probability space; let F∗ = { Ft | t ≥ 0 } be a filtration of F; let X : [0, +∞) × Ω → S be an F∗-adapted stochastic process on set S. Then X is called an F∗-local martingale if there exists a sequence of F∗-stopping times τk : Ω → [0, +∞) such that

the τk are almost surely increasing: P[τk k+1] = 1;
the τk diverge almost surely: P[τk → +∞ as k → +∞] = 1;
the stopped process










is an F∗-martingale for every k.
 

Examples
Example 1
Let Wt be the Wiener process and T = min{ t : Wt = −1 } the time of first hit of −1. The stopped process Wmin{ t, T } is a martingale; its expectation is 0 at all times, nevertheless its limit (as t → ∞) is equal to −1 almost surely (a kind of gambler's ruin). A time change leads to a process



The process 
 
 
 
  is continuous almost surely; nevertheless, its expectation is discontinuous,



This process is not a martingale. However, it is a local martingale. A localizing sequence may be chosen as 
 
 
 
  if there is such t, otherwise τk = k. This sequence diverges almost surely, since τk = k for all k large enough (namely, for all k that exceed the maximal value of the process X). The process stopped at τk is a martingale.1
Example 2
Let Wt be the Wiener process and ƒ a measurable function such that 
 
 
 
 
  Then the following process is a martingale:


 
  here


 
  The Dirac delta function

 
  (strictly speaking, not a function), being used in place of 
 
 
 
  leads to a process defined informally as 
 
 
 
  and formally as


 
  where


 
  The process 
 
 
 
  is continuous almost surely (since 
 
 
 
  almost surely), nevertheless, its expectation is discontinuous,


 
  This process is not a martingale. However, it is a local martingale. A localizing sequence may be chosen as 
 
 

Example 3
Let 
 
 
 
  be the complex-valued Wiener process, and


 
  The process 
 
 
 
  is continuous almost surely (since 
 
 
 
  does not hit 1, almost surely), and is a local martingale, since the function 
 
 
 
  is harmonic (on the complex plane without the point 1). A localizing sequence may be chosen as 
 
 
 
  Nevertheless, the expectation of this process is non-constant; moreover,


 
    as 
 
 
 
  which can be deduced from the fact that the mean value of 
 
 
 
  over the circle 
 
 
 
  tends to infinity as 
 
 
 
 . (In fact, it is equal to 
 
 
 
  for r ≥ 1 but to 0 for r ≤ 1).
Martingales via local martingales
Let 
 
 
 
  be a local martingale. In order to prove that it is a martingale it is sufficient to prove that 
 
 
in L1 (as 
 
 
 
 ) for every t, that is, 
 
 
 
  here 
 
 
 
  is the stopped process. The given relation 
 
 
 
  implies that 
 
 
 
  almost surely. The dominated convergence theorem ensures the convergence in L1 provided that


 
     for every t. Thus, Condition (*) is sufficient for a local martingale 
 
 
 
  being a martingale. A stronger condition


 
     for every t is also sufficient.
Caution. The weaker condition


 
     for every t is not sufficient. Moreover, the condition


 
  is still not sufficient; for a counterexample see Example 3 above.
A special case:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Wiener process, and 
 
 
 
  is twice continuously differentiable. The process 
 
 
 
  is a local martingale if and only if f satisfies the PDE


 
  However, this PDE itself does not ensure that 
 
 
 
  is a martingale. In order to apply (**) the following condition on f is sufficient: for every 
 
 
 
  and t there exists 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Technical details


References



"
Category:Martingale theory Category:Stochastic processes



For the times before 1 it is a martingale since a stopped Brownian motion is. After the instant 1 it is constant. It remains to check it at the instant 1. By the bounded convergence theorem the expectation at 1 is the limit of the expectation at (n-1)/n (as n tends to infinity), and the latter does not depend on n. The same argument applies to the conditional expectation.↩




