   K-vertex-connected graph      K-vertex-connected graph   In graph theory , a connected graph  G is said to be k -vertex-connected (or k -connected ) if it has more than k  vertices and remains connected whenever fewer than k vertices are removed.  The vertex-connectivity , or just connectivity , of a graph is the largest k for which the graph is k -vertex-connected.  Definitions  A graph (other than a complete graph ) has connectivity k if k is the size of the smallest subset of vertices such that the graph becomes disconnected if you delete them. 1 Complete graphs are not included in this version of the definition since they cannot be disconnected by deleting vertices. The complete graph with n vertices has connectivity n − 1, as implied by the first definition.  An equivalent definition is that a graph with at least two vertices is k -connected if, for every pair of its vertices, it is possible to find k vertex-independent paths connecting these vertices; see Menger's theorem . This definition produces the same answer, n − 1, for the connectivity of the complete graph K n . 2  A 1-connected graph is called connected ; a 2-connected graph is called biconnected . A 3-connected graph is called triconnected.  Applications  Polyhedral Combinatorics  The 1- skeleton of any k -dimensional convex polytope forms a k -vertex-connected graph ( Balinski's theorem , ). As a partial converse, Steinitz's theorem states that any 3-vertex-connected planar graph forms the skeleton of a convex polyhedron .  Computational complexity  The vertex-connectivity of an input graph G can be computed in polynomial time in the following way 3 consider all possible pairs    (  s  ,  t  )     s  t    (s,t)   of nonadjacent nodes to disconnect, using Menger's theorem to justify that the minimal-size separator for    (  s  ,  t  )     s  t    (s,t)   is the number of pairwise vertex-independent paths between them, encode the input by doubling each vertex as an edge to reduce to a computation of the number of pairwise edge-independent paths, and compute the maximum number of such paths by computing the maximum flow in the graph between   s   s   s   and   t   t   t   with capacity 1 to each edge, noting that a flow of   k   k   k   in this graph corresponds, by the integral flow theorem , to   k   k   k   pairwise edge-independent paths from   s   s   s   to   t   t   t   .  See also   k -edge-connected graph  Connectivity (graph theory)  Menger's theorem  Structural cohesion  Tutte embedding  Vertex separator   Notes  References    .   .   "  Category:Graph connectivity  Category:Graph families     ↩   The algorithm design manual , p 506, and Computational discrete mathematics: combinatorics and graph theory with Mathematica , p. 290-291 ↩     