


Classical modular curve




Classical modular curve

In number theory, the classical modular curve is an irreducible plane algebraic curve given by an equation

 0}},
 

such that 
 
 
 
  is a point on the curve. Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the 

 
 -invariant.
The curve is sometimes called , though often that is used for the abstract algebraic curve for which there exist various models. A related object is the classical modular polynomial, a polynomial in one variable defined as .
It is important to note that the classical modular curves are part of the larger theory of modular curves. In particular it has another expression as a compactified quotient of the complex upper half-plane

 
 .
Geometry of the modular curve
 The classical modular curve, which we will call , is of degree greater than or equal to 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 , with equality if and only if 
 
 
 
  is a prime. The polynomial  has integer coefficients, and hence is defined over every field. However, the coefficients are sufficiently large that computational work with the curve can be difficult. As a polynomial in 
 
 
 
  with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 , it has degree 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Dedekind psi function. Since  Φn(y, x)}},  is symmetrical around the line 
 
 
 
 , and has singular points at the repeated roots of the classical modular polynomial, where it crosses itself in the complex plane. These are not the only singularities, and in particular when 
 
 
 
 , there are two singularites at infinity, where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , which have only one branch and hence have a knot invariant which is a true knot, and not just a link.
Parametrization of the modular curve
For 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 ,  has genus zero, and hence can be parametrized 1 by rational functions. The simplest nontrivial example is , where:



is (up to the constant term) the McKay–Thompson series for the class 2B of the Monster, and 
 
 
 
  is the Dedekind eta function, then






parametrizes  in terms of rational functions of . It is not necessary to actually compute  to use this parametrization; it can be taken as an arbitrary parameter.
Mappings
A curve 
 
 
 
 , over 
 
 
 
  is called a modular curve if for some 
 
 
 
  there exists a surjective morphism , given by a rational map with integer coefficients. The famous modularity theorem tells us that all elliptic curves over 
 
 
 
  are modular.
Mappings also arise in connection with  since points on it correspond to 
 
 
 
 -isogenous pairs of elliptic curves. Two elliptic curves are isogenous if there is a morphism of varieties (defined by a rational map) between the curves which is also a group homomorphism, respecting the group law on the elliptic curves, and hence which sends the point at infinity (serving as the identity of the group law) to the point at infinity. The isogenies with cyclic kernel of degree 
 
 
 
 , the cyclic isogenies, correspond to points on .
When  has genus one, it will itself be isomorphic to an elliptic curve, which will have the same 

 
 -invariant.
For instance,  has 
 
 
 
 -invariant , and is isomorphic to the curve  x3 − x2 − 10x − 20}}. If we substitute this value of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  in , we obtain two rational roots and a factor of degree four. The two rational roots correspond to isomorphism classes of curves with rational coefficients which are 5-isogenous to the above curve, but not isomorphic, having a different function field. Specifically, we have the six rational points: x=-122023936/161051, y=-4096/11, x=-122023936/161051, y=-52893159101157376/11, and x=-4096/11, y=-52893159101157376/11, plus the three points exchanging 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , all on , corresponding to the six isogenies between these three curves.
If in the curve  x3 − x2 − 10x − 20}}, isomorphic to  we substitute






and factor, we get an extraneous factor of a rational function of 
 
 
 
 , and the curve  x3 − x2}}, with 
 
 
 
 -invariant . Hence both curves are modular of level 
 
 
 
 , having mappings from .
By a theorem of Henri Carayol, if an elliptic curve 
 
 
 
  is modular then its conductor, an isogeny invariant described originally in terms of cohomology, is the smallest integer 
 
 
 
  such that there exists a rational mapping . Since we now know all elliptic curves over 
 
 
 
  are modular, we also know that the conductor is simply the level 
 
 
 
  of its minimal modular parametrization.
Galois theory of the modular curve
The Galois theory of the modular curve was investigated by Erich Hecke. Considered as a polynomial in x with coefficients in 
 
 
 
 , the modular equation  is a polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , whose roots generate a Galois extension of 
 
 
 
 . In the case of  with 
 
 
 
  prime, where the characteristic of the field is not 
 
 
 
 , the Galois group of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , the projective general linear group of linear fractional transformations of the projective line of the field of 
 
 
 
  elements, which has 
 
 
 
  points, the degree of .
This extension contains an algebraic extension 
 
 
 
  where if 
 
 
 
  in the notation of Gauss then:



If we extend the field of constants to be 
 
 
 
 , we now have an extension with Galois group 
 
 
 
 , the projective special linear group of the field with 
 
 
 
  elements, which is a finite simple group. By specializing 
 
 
 
  to a specific field element, we can, outside of a thin set, obtain an infinity of examples of fields with Galois group 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 .
When 
 
 
 
  is not a prime, the Galois groups can be analyzed in terms of the factors of 
 
 
 
  as a wreath product.
See also

Algebraic curves
J-invariant
Modular curve
Modular function

References

Erich Hecke, Die eindeutige Bestimmung der Modulfunktionen q-ter Stufe durch algebraische Eigenschaften, Math. Ann. 111 (1935), 293-301, reprinted in Mathematische Werke, third edition, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen, 1983, 568-576 [http://dz-srv1.sub.uni-goettingen.de/sub/digbib/pdftermsconditions?did=D37958&p;;=297]
Anthony Knapp, Elliptic Curves, Princeton, 1992
Serge Lang, Elliptic Functions, Addison-Wesley, 1973
Goro Shimura, Introduction to the Arithmetic Theory of Automorphic Functions, Princeton, 1972

External links

Sequence  in the OEIS: Genus of 
2 Coefficients of 

"
Category:Algebraic curves * Category:Analytic number theory


