


Okamoto–Uchiyama cryptosystem




Okamoto–Uchiyama cryptosystem

The Okamoto–Uchiyama cryptosystem was discovered in 1998 by Tatsuaki Okamoto and Shigenori Uchiyama. The system works in the multiplicative group of integers modulo n, 
 
 
 
 , where n is of the form p2q and p and q are large primes.
Scheme definition
Like many public key cryptosystems, this scheme works in the group 
 
 
 
 . A fundamental difference of this cryptosystem is that here n is a of the form p2q, where p and q are large primes. This scheme is homomorphic and hence malleable.
Key generation
A public/private key pair is generated as follows:

Generate large primes p and q and set 
 
 
 
 .
Choose 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
Let h = gn mod n.

The public key is then (n, g, h) and the private key is the factors (p, q).
Message encryption
To encrypt a message m, where m is taken to be an element in 
 
 


Select 
 
 
 
  at random. Set









Message decryption
If we define 
 
 
 
 , then decryption becomes



How the system works
The group


 
 .
The group 
 
 
 
  has a unique subgroup of order p, call it H. By the uniqueness of H, we must have


 
 .
For any element x in 
 
 
 
 , we have xp−1 mod p2 is in H, since p divides xp−1 − 1.
The map L should be thought of as a logarithm from the cyclic group H to the additive group 
 
 
 
 , and it is easy to check that L(ab) = L(a) + L(b), and that the L is an isomorphism between these two groups. As is the case with the usual logarithm, L(x)/L(g) is, in a sense, the logarithm of x with base g.
We have



So to recover m we just need to take the logarithm with base gp−1, which is accomplished by



Security
The security of the entire message can be shown to be equivalent to factoring n. The semantic security rests on the p-subgroup assumption, which assumes that it is difficult to determine whether an element x in 
 
 
 
  is in the subgroup of order p. This is very similar to the quadratic residuosity problem and the higher residuosity problem.
References



"
Category:Public-key encryption schemes


