


Proofs of trigonometric identities




Proofs of trigonometric identities

Proofs of trigonometric identities are used to show relations between trigonometric functions. This article will list trigonometric identities and prove them.
Elementary trigonometric identities
Definitions
(Figure)
Trigonometric functions specify the relationships between side lengths and interior angles of a right triangle. For example, the sine of angle θ is defined as being the length of the opposite side divided by the length of the hypotenuse.|396x396px

Referring to the diagram at the right, the six trigonometric functions of θ are:


















Ratio identities
The following identities are trivial algebraic consequences of these definitions and the division identity.
 They rely on multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator of fractions by a variable. Ie,

















 
  Or






Complementary angle identities
Two angles whose sum is π/2 radians (90 degrees) are complementary. In the diagram, the angles at vertices A and B are complementary, so we can exchange a and b, and change θ to π/2 − θ, obtaining:


















Pythagorean identities
Identity 1:



The following two results follow from this and the ratio identities. To obtain the first, divide both sides of 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
 ; for the second, divide by 
 
 
 
 .






Similarly






Identity 2:
The following accounts for all three reciprocal functions.



Proof 2:
Refer to the triangle diagram above. Note that 
 
 
 
  by Pythagorean theorem.



Substituting with appropriate functions -



Rearranging gives:



Angle sum identities
Sine
(Figure)
Illustration of the sum formula.

Draw a horizontal line (the x-axis); mark an origin O. Draw a line from O at an angle 
 
 
 
  above the horizontal line and a second line at an angle 
 
 
 
  above that; the angle between the second line and the x-axis is 
 
 
 
 
 .
Place P on the line defined by 
 
 
 
  at a unit distance from the origin.
Let PQ be a line perpendicular to line defined by angle 
 
 
 
 , drawn from point Q on this line to point P. 
 
 
 
  OQP is a right angle.
Let QA be a perpendicular from point A on the x-axis to Q and PB be a perpendicular from point B on the x-axis to P. 
 
 
 
  OAQ and OBP are right angles.
Draw R on PB so that QR is parallel to the x-axis.
Now angle 
 
 
 
 
  (because 
 
 
 
 , making 
 
 
 
 , and finally 
 
 
 
 )














 
 , so 
 
 



 
 , so 
 
 




By substituting 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and using Symmetry, we also get:






Another simple "proof" can be given using Euler's formula known from complex analysis: Euler's formula is:



Although it is more precise to say that Euler's formula entails the trigonometric identities, it follows that for angles 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have:



Also using the following properties of exponential functions:



Evaluating the product:



Equating real and imaginary parts:






Cosine
Using the figure above,











 
 , so 
 
 



 
 , so 
 
 




By substituting 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and using Symmetry, we also get:






Also, using the complementary angle formulae,



Tangent and cotangent
From the sine and cosine formulae, we get



Dividing both numerator and denominator by 
 
 
 
 , we get



Subtracting 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 , using 
 
 
 
 ,



Similarly from the sine and cosine formulae, we get



Then by dividing both numerator and denominator by 
 
 
 
 , we get



Or, using 
 
 
 
 ,



Using 
 
 
 
 ,



Double-angle identities
From the angle sum identities, we get



and



The Pythagorean identities give the two alternative forms for the latter of these:






The angle sum identities also give






It can also be proved using Euler's formula



Squaring both sides yields



But replacing the angle with its doubled version, which achieves the same result in the left side of the equation, yields



It follows that


 
 .
Expanding the square and simplifying on the left hand side of the equation gives


 
 .
Because the imaginary and real parts have to be the same, we are left with the original identities


 
 ,
and also


 
 .
Half-angle identities
The two identities giving the alternative forms for cos 2θ lead to the following equations:






The sign of the square root needs to be chosen properly—note that if π is added to θ, the quantities inside the square roots are unchanged, but the left-hand-sides of the equations change sign. Therefore the correct sign to use depends on the value of θ.
For the tan function, the equation is:



Then multiplying the numerator and denominator inside the square root by (1 + cos θ) and using Pythagorean identities leads to:



Also, if the numerator and denominator are both multiplied by (1 - cos θ), the result is:



This also gives:



Similar manipulations for the cot function give:



Miscellaneous -- the triple tangent identity
If 
 
 
 
  half circle (for example, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the angles of a triangle),



Proof:1



Miscellaneous -- the triple cotangent identity
If 
 
 
 
  quarter circle,


 
 .
Proof:
Replace each of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  with their complementary angles, so cotangents turn into tangents and vice versa.
Given






so the result follows from the triple tangent identity.
Prosthaphaeresis identities











Proof of sine identities
First, start with the sum-angle identities:






By adding these together,



Similarly, by subtracting the two sum-angle identities,



Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  and 
 
 

Substitute 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 







Therefore,



Proof of cosine identities
Similarly for cosine, start with the sum-angle identities:






Again, by adding and subtracting






Substitute 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  as before,






Inequalities
(Figure)
Illustration of the sine and tangent inequalities.

The figure at the right shows a sector of a circle with radius 1. The sector is θ/(2π) of the whole circle, so its area is θ/2.









The area of triangle OAD is AB/2, or sinθ/2. The area of triangle OCD is CD/2, or tanθ/2.
Since triangle OAD lies completely inside the sector, which in turn lies completely inside triangle OCD, we have



This geometric argument applies if 0<θ<π/2. It relies on definitions of arc length and area, which act as assumptions, so it is rather a condition imposed in construction of trigonometric functions than a provable property.2 For the sine function, we can handle other values. If θ>π/2, then θ>1. But sinθ≤1 (because of the Pythagorean identity), so sinθ<θ. So we have



For negative values of θ we have, by symmetry of the sine function



Hence






Identities involving calculus
Preliminaries






Sine and angle ratio identity



Proof: From the previous inequalities, we have, for small angles


 
 , Therefore,


 
 , Consider the right-hand inequality. Since





 
  Multply through by 
 
 



 
  Combining with the left-hand inequality:


 
  Taking 
 
 
 
  to the limit as 
 
 



 
  Therefore,



Cosine and angle ratio identity



Proof:



The limits of those three quantities are 1, 0, and 1/2, so the resultant limit is zero.
Cosine and square of angle ratio identity



Proof:
As in the preceding proof,



The limits of those three quantities are 1, 1, and 1/2, so the resultant limit is 1/2.
Proof of Compositions of trig and inverse trig functions
All these functions follow from the Pythagorean trigonometric identity. We can prove for instance the function



Proof:
We start from


 
  Then we divide this equation by 
 
 




Then use the substitution 
 
 
 
 , also use the Pythagorean trigonometric identity:



Then we use the identity 
 
 




See also

List of trigonometric identities
Bhaskara I's sine approximation formula
Generating trigonometric tables
Aryabhata's sine table
Madhava's sine table
Table of Newtonian series
Madhava series
Unit vector (explains direction cosines)
Euler's formula

Notes
References

E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson. A course of modern analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1952

"
Category:Trigonometry Category:Article proofs



http://mathlaoshi.com/tags/tangent-identity/ dead link





