


Coherent risk measure




Coherent risk measure

In the field of financial economics there are a number of ways that risk can be defined; to clarify the concept theoreticians have described a number of properties that a risk measure might or might not have. A coherent risk measure is a function 
 
 
 
  that satisfies properties of monotonicity, sub-additivity, homogeneity, and translational invariance.
Properties
Consider a random outcome 
 
 
 
  viewed as an element of a linear space 
 
 
 
  of measurable functions, defined on an appropriate probability space. A functional

 
  → 
 
 
 
  is said to be coherent risk measure for 
 
 
 
  if it satisfies the following properties:1

Normalized




That is, the risk of holding no assets is zero.

Monotonicity




That is, if portfolio 
 
 
 
  always has better values than portfolio 
 
 
 
  under almost all scenarios then the risk of 
 
 
 
  should be less than the risk of 
 
 
 
 .2 E.g. If 
 
 
 
  is an in the money call option (or otherwise) on a stock, and 
 
 
 
  is also an in the money call option with a lower strike price.

Sub-additivity




Indeed, the risk of two portfolios together cannot get any worse than adding the two risks separately: this is the diversification principle.

Positive homogeneity




Loosely speaking, if you double your portfolio then you double your risk.

Translation invariance

If 
 
 
 
  is a deterministic portfolio with guaranteed return 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then


 
  The portofolio 
 
 
 
  is just adding cash 
 
 
 
  to your portfolio 
 
 
 
 . In particular, if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 .
Convex risk measures
The notion of coherence has been subsequently relaxed. Indeed, the notions of Sub-additivity and Positive Homogeneity can be replaced by the notion of convexity:3

Convexity




General framework of Wang transform

Wang transform of the decumulative distribution function

A Wang transform of the decumulative distribution function is an increasing function 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . 4 This function is called distortion function or Wang transform function.
The dual distortion function is 
 
 
 
 .56 Given a probability space

 
 , then for any random variable

 
  and any distortion function 
 
 
 
  we can define a new probability measure

 
  such that for any 
 
 
 
  it follows that 
 
 
7

Actuarial premium principle

For any increasing concave Wang transform function, we could define a corresponding premium principle :8



Coherent risk measure

A coherent risk measure could be defined by a Wang transform of the decumulative distribution function 
 
 
 
  if on only if 
 
 
 
  is concave.9
Examples of risk measure
Value at risk
It is well known that value at risk is not, in general, a coherent risk measure as it does not respect the sub-additivity property. An immediate consequence is that value at risk might discourage diversification.10 Value at risk is, however, coherent, under the assumption of elliptically distributed losses (e.g. normally distributed) when the portfolio value is a linear function of the asset prices. However, in this case the value at risk becomes equivalent to a mean-variance approach where the risk of a portfolio is measured by the variance of the portfolio's return.
The Wang transform function (distortion function) for the Value at Risk is 
 
 
 
 . The non-concavity of 
 
 
 
  proves the non coherence of this risk measure.

Illustration

As a simple example to demonstrate the non-coherence of value-at-risk consider looking at the VaR of a portfolio at 95% confidence over the next year of two default-able zero coupon bonds that mature in 1 years time denominated in our numeraire currency.
Assume the following:

The current yield on the two bonds is 0%
The two bonds are from different issuers
Each bonds has a 4% probability of defaulting over the next year
The event of default in either bond is independent of the other
Upon default the bonds have a recovery rate of 30%

Under these conditions the 95% VaR for holding either of the bonds is 0 since the probability of default is less than 5%. However if we held a portfolio that consisted of 50% of each bond by value then the 95% VaR is 35% since the probability of at least one of the bonds defaulting is 7.84% which exceeds 5%. This violates the sub-additivity property showing that VaR is not a coherent risk measure.
Average value at risk
The average value at risk (sometimes called expected shortfall or conditional value-at-risk) is a coherent risk measure, even though it is derived from Value at Risk which is not.
Entropic value at risk
The entropic value at risk is a coherent risk measure.11
Tail value at risk
The tail value at risk (or tail conditional expectation) is a coherent risk measure only when the underlying distribution is continuous.
The Wang transform function (distortion function) for the tail value at risk is 
 
 
 
 . The concavity of 
 
 
 
  proves the coherence of this risk measure in the case of continuous distribution.
Proportional Hazard (PH) risk measure
The PH risk measure (or Proportional Hazard Risk measure) transforms the hasard rates 
 
 
 
  using a coefficient 
 
 
 
 .
The Wang transform function (distortion function) for the PH risk measure is 
 
 
 
 . The concavity of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  proves the coherence of this risk measure. 
g-Entropic risk measures
g-entropic risk measures are a class of information-theoretic coherent risk measures that involve some important cases such as CVaR and EVaR.12
The Wang risk measure
The Wang risk measure is define by the following Wang transform function (distortion function) 
 
 
 
 . The coherence of this risk measure is a consequence of the concavity of 
 
 
 
 .
Entropic risk measure
The entropic risk measure is a convex risk measure which is not coherent. It is related to the exponential utility.
Superhedging price
The superhedging price is a coherent risk measure.
Set-valued
In a situation with 
 
 
 
 -valued portfolios such that risk can be measured in 
 
 
 
  of the assets, then a set of portfolios is the proper way to depict risk. Set-valued risk measures are useful for markets with transaction costs.13
Properties
A set-valued coherent risk measure is a function 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a constant solvency cone and 
 
 
 
  is the set of portfolios of the 
 
 
 
  reference assets. 
 
 
 
  must have the following properties:14

Normalized





Translative in M





Monotone





Sublinear

Set-valued convex risk measure
If instead of the sublinear property,R is convex, then R is a set-valued convex risk measure.
Dual representation
A lower semi-continuous convex risk measure 
 
 
 
  can be represented as


 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a penalty function and 
 
 
 
  is the set of probability measures absolutely continuous with respect to P (the "real world" probability measure), i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
A lower semi-continuous risk measure is coherent if and only if it can be represented as


 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .15
See also

Risk metric - the abstract concept that a risk measure quantifies
RiskMetrics - a model for risk management
Spectral risk measure - a subset of coherent risk measures
Distortion risk measure
Conditional value-at-risk
Entropic value at risk
Financial risk

References
External links

A list of important papers on coherent and convex risk measures

"
Category:Actuarial science Category:Mathematical finance Category:Financial risk



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩




↩

↩
↩
↩




