


Composition of relations




Composition of relations

In mathematics, the composition of binary relations is a concept of forming a new relation  from two given relations R and S, having as its most well-known special case the composition of functions.
Definition
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are two binary relations, then their composition 
 
 
 
  is the relation



In other words, 
 
 
 
  is defined by the rule that says 
 
 
 
  if and only if there is an element 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  (i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ).
In particular fields, authors might denote by  what is defined here to be . The convention chosen here is such that function composition (with the usual notation) is obtained as a special case, when R and S are functional relations. Some authors1 prefer to write 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  explicitly when necessary, depending whether the left or the right relation is the first one applied.
A further variation encountered in computer science is the Z notation

 
  is used to denote the traditional (right) composition, but ⨾ ; (a fat open semicolon with Unicode code point U+2A3E) denotes left composition.23 This use of semicolon coincides with the notation for function composition used (mostly by computer scientists) in Category theory,4 as well as the notation for dynamic conjunction within linguistic dynamic semantics.5 The semicolon notation (with this semantic) was introduced by Ernst Schröder in 1895.6
The binary relations 
 
 
 
  are sometimes regarded as the morphisms 
 
 
 
  in a category Rel which has the sets as objects. In Rel, composition of morphisms is exactly composition of relations as defined above. The category Set of sets is a subcategory of Rel that has the same objects but fewer morphisms. A generalization of this is found in the theory of allegories.
Properties
Composition of relations is associative.
The inverse relation of  is . This property makes the set of all binary relations on a set a semigroup with involution.
The compose of (partial) functions (i.e. functional relations) is again a (partial) function.
If R and S are injective, then  is injective, which conversely implies only the injectivity of R.
If R and S are surjective, then  is surjective, which conversely implies only the surjectivity of S.
The set of binary relations on a set X (i.e. relations from X to X) together with (left or right) relation composition forms a monoid with zero, where the identity map on X is the neutral element, and the empty set is the zero element.
Join: another form of composition
Other forms of composition of relations, which apply to general n-place relations instead of binary relations, are found in the join operation of relational algebra. The usual composition of two binary relations as defined here can be obtained by taking their join, leading to a ternary relation, followed by a projection that removes the middle component.
See also

Binary relation
Relation algebra
Demonic composition
Function composition
Join (SQL)
Logical matrix

Notes
References

M. Kilp, U. Knauer, A.V. Mikhalev, Monoids, Acts and Categories with Applications to Wreath Products and Graphs, De Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics vol. 29, Walter de Gruyter, 2000, ISBN 3-11-015248-7.

"
Category:Mathematical relations



Kilp, Knauer & Mikhalev, p. 7↩
ISO/IEC 13568:2002(E), p. 23↩
http://www.fileformat.info/info/unicode/char/2a3e/index.htm↩
http://www.math.mcgill.ca/triples/Barr-Wells-ctcs.pdf, p. 6↩
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dynamic-semantics/#EncDynTypLog↩
 A free HTML version of the book is available at http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/~pt/Practical_Foundations/↩




