


Krylov–Bogolyubov theorem




Krylov–Bogolyubov theorem

In mathematics, the Krylov–Bogolyubov theorem (also known as the existence of invariant measures theorem) may refer to either of the two related fundamental theorems within the theory of dynamical systems. The theorems guarantee the existence of invariant measures for certain "nice" maps defined on "nice" spaces and were named after Russian-Ukrainian mathematicians and theoretical physicists Nikolay Krylov and Nikolay Bogolyubov who proved the theorems.1
Formulation of the theorems
Invariant measures for a single map
Theorem (Krylov–Bogolyubov). Let (X, T) be a compact, metrizable topological space and F : X → X a continuous map. Then F admits an invariant Borel probability measure.
That is, if Borel(X) denotes the Borel σ-algebra generated by the collection T of open subsets of X, then there exists a probability measure μ : Borel(X) → [0, 1] such that for any subset A ∈ Borel(X),



In terms of the push forward, this states that



Invariant measures for a Markov process
Let X be a Polish space and let 
 
 
 
  be the transition probabilities for a time-homogeneous Markov semigroup on X, i.e.



Theorem (Krylov–Bogolyubov). If there exists a point 
 
 
 
  for which the family of probability measures { Pt(x, ·) | t > 0 } is uniformly tight and the semigroup (Pt) satisfies the Feller property, then there exists at least one invariant measure for (Pt), i.e. a probability measure μ on X such that



See also

For the 1st theorem: Ya. G. Sinai (Ed.) (1997): Dynamical Systems II. Ergodic Theory with Applications to Dynamical Systems and Statistical Mechanics. Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-17001-4. (Section 1).
For the 2nd theorem: G. Da Prato and J. Zabczyk (1996): Ergodicity for Infinite Dimensional Systems. Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 0-521-57900-7. (Section 3).

Notes
"
Category:Ergodic theory Category:Theorems in dynamical systems Category:Probability theorems Category:Stochastic processes Category:Measure theory



 Zbl. 16.86.↩




