


Novikov ring




Novikov ring


For a concept in quantum cohomology, see the linked article.


In mathematics, given an additive subgroup 
 
 
 
 , the Novikov ring

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is the subring of 
 
 
1 consisting of formal sums

 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The notion was introduced by S. P. Novikov in the papers that initiated the generalization of Morse theory using a closed one-form instead of a function.
The Novikov ring 
 
 
 
  is a principal ideal domain. Let S be the subset of 
 
 
 
 
  consisting of those with leading term 1. Since the elements of S are unit elements of 
 
 
 
 , the localization 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  with respect to S is a subring of 
 
 
 
  called the "rational part" of 
 
 
 
 
 ; it is also a principal ideal domain.
Novikov numbers
Given a smooth function f on a smooth manifold M with nondegenerate critical points, the usual Morse theory constructs a free chain complex 
 
 
 
  such that the (integral) rank of 
 
 
 
  is the number of critical points of f of index p (called the Morse number). It computes the homology of M

 
  (cf. Morse homology.)
In an analogy with this, one can define "Novikov numbers". Let X be a connected polyhedron with a base point. Each cohomology class 
 
 
 
  may be viewed as a linear functional on the first homology group 
 
 
 
 
  and, composed with the Hurewicz homomorphism, it can be viewed as a group homomorphism 
 
 
 
 . By the universal property, this map in turns gives a ring homomorphism 
 
 
 
 , making 
 
 
 
  a module over 
 
 
 
 . Since X is a connected polyhedron, a local coefficient system over it corresponds one-to-one to a 
 
 
 
 
 -module. Let 
 
 
 
  be a local coefficient system corresponding to 
 
 
 
  with module structure given by 
 
 
 
 . The homology group 
 
 
 
  is a finitely genereated module over 
 
 
 
 
 , which is, by the structure theorem, is a direct sum of the free part and the torsion part. The rank of the free part is called the Novikov Betti number and is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . The number of cyclic modules in the torsion part is denoted by 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is trivial and 
 
 
 
 
  is the usual Betti number of X.
The analog of Morse inequalities holds for Novikov numbers as well (cf. the reference for now.)
Notes
References


S. P. Novikov, Multi-valued functions and functionals: An analogue of Morse theory. Soviet Math. Doklady 24 (1981), 222–226.
S. P. Novikov: The Hamiltonian formalism and a multi-valued analogue of Morse theory. Russian Mathematical Surveys 35:5 (1982), 1–56.

External links

http://mathoverflow.net/questions/13203/different-definitions-of-novikov-ring

"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Ring theory Category:Morse theory



Here, 
 
 
 
  is the ring consisting of the formal sums 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  integers and t a formal variable, such that the multiplication is an extension of a multiplication in the integral group ring

 
 .




