


Cheeger constant (graph theory)




Cheeger constant (graph theory)

In mathematics, the Cheeger constant (also Cheeger number or isoperimetric number) of a graph is a numerical measure of whether or not a graph has a "bottleneck". The Cheeger constant as a measure of "bottleneckedness" is of great interest in many areas: for example, constructing well-connected networks of computers, card shuffling. The graph theoretical notion originated after the Cheeger isoperimetric constant of a compact Riemannian manifold.
The Cheeger constant is named after the mathematician Jeff Cheeger.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be an undirected finite graph with vertex set 
 
 
 
  and edge set 
 
 
 
 . For a collection of vertices 
 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  denote the collection of all edges going from a vertex in 
 
 
 
  to a vertex outside of 
 
 
 
 :



(Remember that edges are unordered, so the edge 
 
 
 
 
  is the same as the edge 
 
 
 
 .) Then the Cheeger constant of 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 , is defined by



The Cheeger constant is strictly positive if and only if

 
 
  is a connected graph. Intuitively, if the Cheeger constant is small but positive, then there exists a "bottleneck", in the sense that there are two "large" sets of vertices with "few" links (edges) between them. The Cheeger constant is "large" if any possible division of the vertex set into two subsets has "many" links between those two subsets.
Example: computer networking
(Figure)
Ring network layout

In applications to theoretical computer science, one wishes to devise network configurations for which the Cheeger constant is high (at least, bounded away from zero) even when 
 
 
 
  (the number of computers in the network) is large.
For example, consider a ring network of 
 
 
 
  computers, thought of as a graph . Number the computers 
 
 
 
  clockwise around the ring. Mathematically, the vertex set and the edge set are given by:



Take 
 
 
 
  to be a collection of 
 
 
 
  of these computers in a connected chain:



Clearly,



so



This example provides an upper bound for the Cheeger constant , which also tends to zero as 
 
 
 
 . Consequently, we would regard a ring network as highly "bottlenecked" for large 
 
 
 
 , and this is highly undesirable in practical terms. We would only need one of the computers on the ring to fail, and network performance would be greatly reduced. If two non-adjacent computers were to fail, the network would split into two disconnected components.
Cheeger Inequalities
The Cheeger constant is especially important in the context of expander graphs as it is a way to measure the edge expansion of a graph. The so-called Cheeger inequalities relate the Eigenvalue gap of a graph with its Cheeger constant.
See also

Algebraic connectivity
Cheeger bound
Conductance (graph)
Connectivity (graph theory)
Expander graph

References




"
Category:Computer network analysis Category:Graph theory Category:Graph invariants


