


Subnormal operator




Subnormal operator

In mathematics, especially operator theory, subnormal operators are bounded operators on a Hilbert space defined by weakening the requirements for normal operators. Some examples of subnormal operators are isometries and Toeplitz operators with analytic symbols.
Definition
Let H be a Hilbert space. A bounded operator A on H is said to be subnormal if A has a normal extension. In other words, A is subnormal if there exists a Hilbert space K such that H can be embedded in K and there exists a normal operator N of the form



for some bounded operators



Normality, quasinormality, and subnormality
Normal operators
Every normal operator is subnormal by definition, but the converse is not true in general. A simple class of examples can be obtained by weakening the properties of unitary operators. A unitary operator is an isometry with dense range. Consider now an isometry A whose range is not necessarily dense. A concrete example of such is the unilateral shift, which is not normal. But A is subnormal and this can be shown explicitly. Define an operator U on



by



Direct calculation shows that U is unitary, therefore a normal extension of A. The operator U is called the unitary dilation of the isometry A.
Quasinormal operators
An operator A is said to be quasinormal if A commutes with A*A. A normal operator is thus quasinormal; the converse is not true. A counter example is given, as above, by the unilateral shift. Therefore the family of normal operators is a proper subset of both quasinormal and subnormal operators. A natural question is how are the quasinormal and subnormal operators related.
We will show that a quasinormal operator is necessarily subnormal but not vice versa. Thus the normal operators is a proper subfamily of quasinormal operators, which in turn are contained by the subnormal operators. To argue the claim that a quasinormal operator is subnormal, recall the following property of quasinormal operators:
Fact: A bounded operator A is quasinormal if and only if in its polar decomposition A = UP, the partial isometry U and positive operator P commute.
Given a quasinormal A, the idea is to construct dilations for U and P in a sufficiently nice way so everything commutes. Suppose for the moment that U is an isometry. Let V be the unitary dilation of U,



Define



The operator N = VQ is clearly an extension of A. We show it is a normal extension via direct calculation. Unitarity of V means



On the other hand,



Because UP = PU and P is self adjoint, we have U*P = PU* and DU*P = DU*P. Comparing entries then shows N is normal. This proves quasinormality implies subnormality.
For a counter example that shows the converse is not true, consider again the unilateral shift A. The operator B = A + s for some scalar s remains subnormal. But if B is quasinormal, a straightforward calculation shows that A*A = AA*, which is a contradiction.
Minimal normal extension
Non-uniqueness of normal extensions
Given a subnormal operator A, its normal extension B is not unique. For example, let A be the unilateral shift, on l2(N). One normal extension is the bilateral shift B on l2(Z) defined by



where ˆ denotes the zero-th position. B can be expressed in terms of the operator matrix



Another normal extension is given by the unitary dilation ''B' '' of A defined above:



whose action is described by



Minimality
Thus one is interested in the normal extension that is, in some sense, smallest. More precisely, a normal operator B acting on a Hilbert space K is said to be a minimal extension of a subnormal A if '' K' '' ⊂ K is a reducing subspace of B and H ⊂ '' K' '', then ''K' '' = K. (A subspace is a reducing subspace of B if it is invariant under both B and B*.)
One can show that if two operators B1 and B2 are minimal extensions on K1 and K2, respectively, then there exists a unitary operator



Also, the following interwining relationship holds:



This can be shown constructively. Consider the set S consisting of vectors of the following form:



Let ''K' '' ⊂ K1 be the subspace that is the closure of the linear span of S. By definition, ''K' '' is invariant under B1* and contains H. The normality of B1 and the assumption that H is invariant under B1 imply ''K' '' is invariant under B1. Therefore ''K' '' = K1. The Hilbert space K2 can be identified in exactly the same way. Now we define the operator U as follows:



Because



, the operator U is unitary. Direct computation also shows (the assumption that both B1 and B2 are extensions of A are needed here)






When B1 and B2 are not assumed to be minimal, the same calculation shows that above claim holds verbatim with U being a partial isometry.
"
Category:Operator theory


