


Cauchy matrix




Cauchy matrix

In mathematics, a Cauchy matrix, named after Augustin Louis Cauchy, is an m×n matrix with elements aij in the form



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are elements of a field

 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are injective sequences (they do not contain repeated elements; elements are distinct).
The Hilbert matrix is a special case of the Cauchy matrix, where


 
  Every submatrix of a Cauchy matrix is itself a Cauchy matrix.
Cauchy determinants
The determinant of a Cauchy matrix is clearly a rational fraction in the parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . If the sequences were not injective, the determinant would vanish, and tends to infinity if some 
 
 
 
  tends to 
 
 
 
 . A subset of its zeros and poles are thus known. The fact is that there are no more zeros and poles:
The determinant of a square Cauchy matrix A is known as a Cauchy determinant and can be given explicitly as


 
      (Schechter 1959, eqn 4). It is always nonzero, and thus all square Cauchy matrices are invertible. The inverse A−1 = B = [bij] is given by


 
      (Schechter 1959, Theorem 1) where Ai(x) and Bi(x) are the Lagrange polynomials for 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. That is,


 
  with



Generalization
A matrix C is called Cauchy-like if it is of the form



Defining X=diag(xi), Y=diag(yi), one sees that both Cauchy and Cauchy-like matrices satisfy the displacement equation



(with 
 
 
 
  for the Cauchy one). Hence Cauchy-like matrices have a common displacement structure, which can be exploited while working with the matrix. For example, there are known algorithms in literature for

approximate Cauchy matrix-vector multiplication with 
 
 
 ops (e.g. the fast multipole method),
(pivoted) LU factorization with 
 
 
 
  ops (GKO algorithm), and thus linear system solving,
approximated or unstable algorithms for linear system solving in 
 
 
 
 .

Here 
 
 
 
 
  denotes the size of the matrix (one usually deals with square matrices, though all algorithms can be easily generalized to rectangular matrices).
See also

Toeplitz matrix

References






"
Category:Matrices Category:Determinants


