


Bonferroni correction




Bonferroni correction

In statistics, the Bonferroni correction is a method used to counteract the problem of multiple comparisons. It is named after Italian mathematician Carlo Emilio Bonferroni for the use of Bonferroni inequalities,1 but modern usage is credited to Olive Jean Dunn, who first used it in a pair of articles written in 1959 and 1961.23
Informal introduction
Statistical inference logic is based on rejecting the null hypotheses if the likelihood of the observed data under the null hypotheses is low. The problem of multiplicity arises from the fact that as we increase the number of hypotheses being tested, we also increase the likelihood of a rare event, and therefore, the likelihood of incorrectly rejecting a null hypothesis (i.e., make a Type I error).
The Bonferroni correction is based on the idea that if an experimenter is testing 
 
 
hypotheses, then one way of maintaining the familywise error rate (FWER) is to test each individual hypothesis at a statistical significance level of 
 
 
 
  times what it would be if only one hypothesis were tested.
So, if the desired significance level for the whole family of tests should be (at most) 
 
 
 
 , then the Bonferroni correction would test each individual hypothesis at a significance level of 
 
 
 
 . For example, if a trial is testing eight hypotheses with a desired 
 
 
 
 , then the Bonferroni correction would test each individual hypothesis at 
 
 
 
 .
Statistically significant simply means that a given result is unlikely to have occurred by chance assuming the null hypothesis is actually correct (i.e., no difference among groups, no effect of treatment, no relation among variables).
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a family of hypotheses and 
 
 
 
  the corresponding p-values. Let 
 
 
 
  be the (unknown) subset of the true null hypotheses, having 
 
 
 
  members.
The familywise error rate is the probability of rejecting at least one of the members in 
 
 
 
 ; that is, to make one or more type I error. The Bonferroni Correction states that choosing all 
 
 
 
  will control the 
 
 
 
 . The proof follows from Boole's inequality: 
 
 

This result does not require that the tests be independent.
Modifications
Generalization
We have used the fact that 
 
 
 
 , but the correction can be generalized and applied to any 
 
 
 
 , as long as the weights are defined prior to the test.
Confidence intervals
Bonferroni correction can be used to adjust confidence intervals. If we are forming 
 
 
 
  confidence intervals, and wish to have overall confidence level of 
 
 
 
 , then adjusting each individual confidence interval to the level of 
 
 
 
  will be the analog confidence interval correction.
Alternatives
There are other alternatives to control the familywise error rate. Both the Holm–Bonferroni method and the Šidák correction are said to be uniformly more powerful test procedures than the Bonferroni correction.
Criticisms
The Bonferroni correction can be somewhat conservative if there are a large number of tests and/or the test statistics are positively correlated. The correction also comes at the cost of increasing the probability of producing false negatives, and consequently reducing statistical power.
Another criticism concerns the concept of a family of hypotheses. The statistical community has not reached a consensus on how to define such a family. As there is no standard definition, test results may change dramatically, only by modifying the way we consider the hypotheses families.
All of these criticisms, however, apply to adjustments for multiple comparisons in general, and are not specific to the Bonferroni correction.
See also

Bonferroni inequalities
Familywise error rate
Holm–Bonferroni method
Multiple testing

References
Further reading







See also the Rapid Response to this suggesting much of it is mistaken.





External links

School of Psychology, University of New England, New South Wales, Australia, 2000, http://www.une.edu.au/WebStat/unit_materials/c5_inferential_statistics/bonferroni.html

Bonferroni, Sidak online calculator
Explanation of p-value correction methods under the context of differential gene expression analysis

"
Category:Multiple comparisons Category:Hypothesis testing



Bonferroni, C. E., Teoria statistica delle classi e calcolo delle probabilità, Pubblicazioni del R Istituto Superiore di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali di Firenze 1936






