


Welch's t test




Welch's t test

In statistics, Welch's t-test (or unequal variances t-test) is a two-sample location test, and is used to test the hypothesis that two populations have equal means. Welch's t-test is an adaptation of Student's t-test,1 and is more reliable when the two samples have unequal variances and unequal sample sizes.2 These tests are often referred to as "unpaired" or "independent samples" t-tests, as they are typically applied when the statistical units underlying the two samples being compared are non-overlapping. Given that Welch's t-test has been less popular than Student's t-test3 and may be less familiar to readers, a more informative name is "Welch's unequal variances t-test" or "unequal variances t-test" for brevity.
Assumptions
Student's t-test assumes that the two populations have normal distributions and with equal variances. Welch's t-test is designed for unequal variances, but the assumption of normality is maintained.4 Welch's t-test is an approximate solution to the Behrens-Fisher problem.
Calculations
Welch's t-test defines the statistic t by the following formula:



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the 
 
 
st sample mean, sample variance and sample size, respectively. Unlike in Student's t-test, the denominator is not based on a pooled variance estimate.
The degrees of freedom

 
   associated with this variance estimate is approximated using the Welch–Satterthwaite equation:



Here 
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
 , the degrees of freedom associated with the 
 
 
st variance estimate. 
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
 , the degrees of freedom associated with the 
 
 
nd variance estimate.
Welch's t-test can also be calculated for ranked data and might then be named Welch's U-test.5
Statistical test
Once t and 

 have been computed, these statistics can be used with the t-distribution to test the null hypothesis that the two population means are equal (using a two-tailed test), or the alternative hypothesis that one of the population means is greater than or equal to the other (using a one-tailed test). The approximate degrees of freedom is rounded down to the nearest integer.
Advantages and limitations
Welch's t-test is more robust than Student's t-test and maintains type I error rates close to nominal for unequal variances and for unequal sample sizes. Furthermore, the power of Welch's t-test comes close to that of Student’s t-test, even when the population variances are equal and sample sizes are balanced.6
It is not recommended to pre-test for equal variances and then choose between Student's t-test or Welch's t-test.7 Rather, Welch's t-test can be applied directly and without any substantial disadvantages to Student's t-test as noted above. Welch's t-test remains robust for skewed distributions and large sample sizes.8 Reliability decreases for skewed distributions and smaller samples, where one could possibly perform Welch’s t-test on ranked data.9
Examples
The following three examples compare Welch's t-test and Student's t-test. Samples are from random normal distributions using the R programming language.
For all three examples, the population means were 
 
 
 
  = 20 and 
 
 
 
  = 22.
The first example is for equal variances (
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
  = 4) and equal sample sizes (
 
 
 
  = 
 
 
 
  = 15). Let A1 and A2 denote two random samples:




The second example is for unequal variances (
 
 
 
  = 16, 
 
 
 
  = 1) and unequal sample sizes (
 
 
 
  = 10, 
 
 
 
  = 20). The smaller sample has the larger variance:




The third example is for unequal variances (
 
 
 
  = 1, 
 
 
 
  = 16) and unequal sample sizes (
 
 
 
  = 10, 
 
 
 
  = 20). The larger sample has the larger variance:




Reference P-values were obtained by simulating the distributions of the t statistics for the null hypothesis of equal population means (
 
 
 
  = 0). Results are summarised in the table below, with two-tailed P-values:





Sample A1

Sample A2

Student's t-test

Welch's t-test



Example



















1

15

20.8

7.9

15



2

10

20.6

9.0

20



3

10

19.4

1.4

20





Welch's t-test and Student's t-test gave practically identical results for the two samples with equal variances and equal sample sizes (Example 1). For unequal variances, Student's t-test gave a low P-value when the smaller sample had a larger variance (Example 2) and a high P-value when the larger sample had a larger variance (Example 3). For unequal variances, Welch's t-test gave P-values close to simulated P-values.
Software implementations




Language/Program

Function

Notes





LibreOffice

TTEST(''Data1; Data2; Mode; Type'')

See 1



MATLAB

ttest2(data1, data2, 'Vartype', 'unequal')

See 2



Microsoft Excel pre 2010

TTEST(''array1'', ''array2'', ''tails'', ''type'')

See 3



Microsoft Excel 2010 and later

T.TEST(''array1'', ''array2'', ''tails'', ''type'')

See 4



Python

scipy.stats.ttest_ind(''a'', ''b'', ''axis=0'', ''equal_var=False'')

See 5



R

t.test(data1, data2, alternative="two.sided", var.equal=FALSE)

See 6



See also

Student's t-test
Z-test

References
"
Category:Statistical approximations Category:Statistical tests



↩
↩


↩

↩
↩





