


Magnetic dipole–dipole interaction




Magnetic dipole–dipole interaction

Magnetic dipole–dipole interaction, also called dipolar coupling, refers to the direct interaction between two magnetic dipoles.
Suppose  and  are two magnetic moments in space. The potential energy

 
  of the interaction is then given by:








where  is the magnetic constant, 
 
 
 
  is a unit vector parallel to the line joining the centers of the two dipoles, and |
 
 
 
 
 | is the distance between the centers of  and . Alternatively, suppose  and  are gyromagnetic ratios of two spins. Then:








where 
 
 
 
  is a unit vector in the direction of the line joining the two spins, and |
 
 
 
 | is the distance between them.
The force 
 
 
 
  arising from the interaction between  and  is given by:



Dipolar coupling and NMR spectroscopy
The direct dipole-dipole coupling is very useful for molecular structural studies, since it depends only on known physical constants and the inverse cube of internuclear distance. Estimation of this coupling provides a direct spectroscopic route to the distance between nuclei and hence the geometrical form of the molecule, or additionally also on intermolecular distances in the solid state leading to NMR crystallography notably in amorphous materials. Although internuclear magnetic dipole couplings contain a great deal of structural information, in isotropic solution, they average to zero as a result of rotational diffusion. However, their effect on nuclear spin relaxation results in measurable nuclear Overhauser effects (NOEs).
The residual dipolar coupling (RDC) occur if the molecules in solution exhibit a partial alignment leading to an incomplete averaging of spatially anisotropic magnetic interactions i.e. dipolar couplings. RDC measurement provides information on the global folding of the protein-long distance structural information. It also provides information about "slow" dynamics in molecules
Relevance to Current Research
While the theory of magnetic dipole-dipole interactions has deep roots, it is not a dead subject by any means. For instance, the dipole-dipole interaction is critical to the understanding of magnetic dipoles in optical lattices.1
See also

J-coupling
Magic angle
Residual dipolar coupling
Nuclear Overhauser effect
Magnetic moment

References

Malcolm H. Levitt, Spin Dynamics: Basics of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. ISBN 0-471-48922-0.

"
Category:Electromagnetism Category:Nuclear magnetic resonance



↩




