


Green's function (many-body theory)




Green's function (many-body theory)

In many-body theory, the term Green's function (or Green function) is sometimes used interchangeably with correlation function, but refers specifically to correlators of field operators or creation and annihilation operators.
The name comes from the Green's functions used to solve inhomogeneous differential equations, to which they are loosely related. (Specifically, only two-point 'Green's functions' in the case of a non-interacting system are Green's functions in the mathematical sense; the linear operator that they invert is the Hamiltonian operator, which in the non-interacting case is quadratic in the fields.)
Spatially uniform case
Basic definitions
We consider a many-body theory with field operator (annihilation operator written in the position basis) 
 
 
 
 .
The Heisenberg operators can be written in terms of Schrödinger operators as


 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the grand-canonical Hamiltonian.
Similarly, for the imaginary-time operators,





 
  [Note that the imaginary-time creation operator 
 
 
 
  is not the Hermitian conjugate of the annihilation operator 
 
 
 
 .]
In real time, the 
 
 
 
 -point Green function is defined by


 
  where we have used a condensed notation in which 
 
 
 
  signifies 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  signifies 
 
 
 
 . The operator 
 
 
 
  denotes time ordering, and indicates that the field operators that follow it are to be ordered so that their time arguments increase from right to left.
In imaginary time, the corresponding definition is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  signifies 
 
 
 
 . (The imaginary-time variables 
 
 
 
  are restricted to the range from 
 
 
 
  to the inverse temperature 
 
 
 
 .)
Note regarding signs and normalization used in these definitions: The signs of the Green functions have been chosen so that Fourier transform of the two-point (
 
 
 
 ) thermal Green function for a free particle is


 
  and the retarded Green function is


 
  where


 
  is the Matsubara frequency.
Throughout, 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  for bosons and 
 
 
 
  for fermions and 
 
 
 
  denotes either a commutator or anticommutator as appropriate.
(See below for details.)
Two-point functions
The Green function with a single pair of arguments (
 
 
 
 ) is referred to as the two-point function, or propagator. In the presence of both spatial and temporal translational symmetry, it depends only on the difference of its arguments. Taking the Fourier transform with respect to both space and time gives


 
  where the sum is over the appropriate Matsubara frequencies (and the integral involves an implicit factor of 
 
 
 
 , as usual).
In real time, we will explicitly indicate the time-ordered function with a superscript T:



The real-time two-point Green function can be written in terms of 'retarded' and 'advanced' Green functions, which will turn out to have simpler analyticity properties. The retarded and advanced Green functions are defined by


 
  and


 
  respectively.
They are related to the time-ordered Green function by


 
  where


 
  is the Bose–Einstein or Fermi–Dirac distribution function.
Imaginary-time ordering and 
 
 
 
 -periodicity
The thermal Green functions are defined only when both imaginary-time arguments are within the range 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The two-point Green function has the following properties. (The position or momentum arguments are suppressed in this section.)
Firstly, it depends only on the difference of the imaginary times:


 
  The argument 
 
 
 
  is allowed to run from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Secondly, 
 
 
 
  is (anti)periodic under shifts of 
 
 
 
 . Because of the small domain within which the function is defined, this means just


 
  for 
 
 
 
 . Time ordering is crucial for this property, which can be proved straightforwardly, using the cyclicity of the trace operation.
These two properties allow for the Fourier transform representation and its inverse,



Finally, note that 
 
 
 
  has a discontinuity at 
 
 
 
 ; this is consistent with a long-distance behaviour of 
 
 
 
 .
Spectral representation
The propagators in real and imaginary time can both be related to the spectral density (or spectral weight), given by


 
  where 
 
 
 
  refers to a (many-body) eigenstate of the grand-canonical Hamiltonian 
 
 
 
 , with eigenvalue 
 
 
 
 .
The imaginary-time propagator is then given by


 
  and the retarded propagator by


 
  where the limit as 
 
 
 
  is implied.
The advanced propagator is given by the same expression, but with 
 
 
 
  in the denominator. The time-ordered function can be found in terms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . As claimed above, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have simple analyticity properties: the former (latter) has all its poles and discontinuities in the lower (upper) half-plane. The thermal propagator 
 
 
 
  has all its poles and discontinuities on the imaginary 
 
 
 
  axis.
The spectral density can be found very straightforwardly from 
 
 
 
 , using the Sokhatsky–Weierstrass theorem


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Cauchy principal part. This gives



This furthermore implies that 
 
 
 
  obeys the following relationship between its real and imaginary parts:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes the principal value of the integral.
The spectral density obeys a sum rule:


 
  which gives


 
  as 
 
 
 
 
 .
Hilbert transform
The similarity of the spectral representations of the imaginary- and real-time Green functions allows us to define the function


 
  which is related to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  by


 
  and


 
  A similar expression obviously holds for 
 
 
 
 .
The relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is referred to as a Hilbert transform.
Proof of spectral representation
We demonstrate the proof of the spectral representation of the propagator in the case of the thermal Green function, defined as



Due to translational symmetry, it is only necessary to consider 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , given by


 
  Inserting a complete set of eigenstates gives



Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are eigenstates of 
 
 
 
 , the Heisenberg operators can be rewritten in terms of Schrödinger operators, giving


 
  Performing the Fourier transform then gives



Momentum conservation allows the final term to be written as (up to possible factors of the volume)


 
  which confirms the expressions for the Green functions in the spectral representation.
The sum rule can be proved by considering the expectation value of the commutator,


 
  and then inserting a complete set of eigenstates into both terms of the commutator:



Swapping the labels in the first term then gives


 
  which is exactly the result of the integration of 
 
 
 
 .
Non-interacting case
In the non-interacting case, 
 
 
 
  is an eigenstate with (grand-canonical) energy 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the single-particle dispersion relation measured with respect to the chemical potential. The spectral density therefore becomes



From the commutation relations,


 
  with possible factors of the volume again. The sum, which involves the thermal average of the number operator, then gives simply 
 
 
 
 , leaving



The imaginary-time propagator is thus


 
  and the retarded propagator is



Zero-temperature limit
As 
 
 
 
 
 , the spectral density becomes


 
  where 
 
 
 
  corresponds to the ground state. Note that only the first (second) term contributes when 
 
 
 
  is positive (negative).
General case
Basic definitions
We can use `field operators' as above, or creation and annihilation operators associated with other single-particle states, perhaps eigenstates of the (noninteracting) kinetic energy. We then use


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the annihilation operator for the single-particle state 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is that state's wavefunction in the position basis. This gives


 
  with a similar expression for 
 
 
 
 .
Two-point functions
These depend only on the difference of their time arguments, so that


 
  and



We can again define retarded and advanced functions in the obvious way; these are related to the time-ordered function in the same way as above.
The same periodicity properties as described in above apply to 
 
 
 
 . Specifically,


 
  and


 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
Spectral representation
In this case,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are many-body states.
The expressions for the Green functions are modified in the obvious ways:


 
  and



Their analyticity properties are identical. The proof follows exactly the same steps, except that the two matrix elements are no longer complex conjugates.
Noninteracting case
If the particular single-particle states that are chosen are `single-particle energy eigenstates', i.e.


 
  then for 
 
 
 
  an eigenstate:


 
  so is 
 
 
 
 :


 
  and so is 
 
 
 
 :



We therefore have



We then rewrite


 
  therefore


 
  use


 
  and the fact that the thermal average of the number operator gives the Bose–Einstein or Fermi–Dirac distribution function.
Finally, the spectral density simplifies to give


 
  so that the thermal Green function is


 
  and the retarded Green function is


 
  Note that the noninteracting Green function is diagonal, but this will not be true in the interacting case.
See also

Fluctuation theorem
Green-Kubo relations
Linear response function
Lindblad equation
Kadanoff-Baym equation

References
Books

Bonch-Bruevich V. L., Tyablikov S. V. (1962): The Green Function Method in Statistical Mechanics. North Holland Publishing Co.
Abrikosov, A. A., Gorkov, L. P. and Dzyaloshinski, I. E. (1963): Methods of Quantum Field Theory in Statistical Physics Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Negele, J. W. and Orland, H. (1988): Quantum Many-Particle Systems AddisonWesley.
Zubarev D. N., Morozov V., Ropke G. (1996): Statistical Mechanics of Nonequilibrium Processes: Basic Concepts, Kinetic Theory (Vol. 1). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 3-05-501708-0.
Mattuck Richard D. (1992), A Guide to Feynman Diagrams in the Many-Body Problem, Dover Publications, ISBN 0-486-67047-3.

Papers

Bogolyubov N. N., Tyablikov S. V. Retarded and advanced Green functions in statistical physics, Soviet Physics Doklady, Vol. 4, p. 589 (1959).
Zubarev D. N., Double-time Green functions in statistical physics, Soviet Physics Uspekhi 3(3), 320—345 (1960).

External Links

Linear Response Functions in Eva Pavarini, Erik Koch, Dieter Vollhardt, and Alexander Lichtenstein (eds.): DMFT at 25: Infinite Dimensions, Verlag des Forschungszentrum Jülich, 2014 ISBN 978-3-89336-953-9

"
Category:Quantum field theory Category:Statistical mechanics


