


Hamiltonian matrix




Hamiltonian matrix

In mathematics, a Hamiltonian matrix is a 
 
 
 
 -by-
 
 
matrix

 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is symmetric, where 
 
 
 
  is the skew-symmetric matrix



and  is the 
 
 
 
 -by-
 
 
identity matrix. In other words, 
 
 
 
  is Hamiltonian if and only if  where  denotes the transpose.1
Properties
Suppose that the 
 
 
 
 -by-
 
 
 
  matrix 
 
 
 
  is written as the block matrix


 
  where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
 
 -by-
 
 
 
  matrices. Then the condition that 
 
 
 
  be Hamiltonian is equivalent to requiring that the matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are symmetric, and that .23 Another equivalent condition is that 
 
 
 
 
  is of the form 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  symmetric.4
It follows easily from the definition that the transpose of a Hamiltonian matrix is Hamiltonian. Furthermore, the sum (and any linear combination) of two Hamiltonian matrices is again Hamiltonian, as is their commutator. It follows that the space of all Hamiltonian matrices is a Lie algebra, denoted 
 
 
 
 . The dimension of 
 
 
 
  is . The corresponding Lie group is the symplectic group

 
 
 . This group consists of the symplectic matrices, those matrices 
 
 
 
  which satisfy . Thus, the matrix exponential of a Hamiltonian matrix is symplectic. However the logarithm of a symplectic matrix is not necessarily Hamiltonian because the exponential map from the Lie algebra to the group is not surjective.56
The characteristic polynomial of a real Hamiltonian matrix is even. Thus, if a Hamiltonian matrix has 
 
 
 
  as an eigenvalue, then 
 
 
 
 ,  and  are also eigenvalues.7 It follows that the trace of a Hamiltonian matrix is zero.
The square of a Hamiltonian matrix is skew-Hamiltonian (a matrix 
 
 
 
  is skew-Hamiltonian if ). Conversely, every skew-Hamiltonian matrix arises as the square of a Hamiltonian matrix.8
Extension to complex matrices
The definition for Hamiltonian matrices can be extended to complex matrices in two ways. One possibility is to say that a matrix 
 
 
 
 
  is Hamiltonian if , as above.910 Another possibility is to use the condition  where  denotes the conjugate transpose.11
Hamiltonian operators
Let 
 
 
 
  be a vector space, equipped with a symplectic form 
 
 
 
 . A linear map 
 
 
 
  is called a Hamiltonian operator with respect to 
 
 
 
  if the form 
 
 
 
 
  is symmetric. Equivalently, it should satisfy



Choose a basis  in 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  is written as 
 
 
 
 . A linear operator is Hamiltonian with respect to 
 
 
 
 
  if and only if its matrix in this basis is Hamiltonian.12
References


"
Category:Matrices



.↩

.↩


.↩

.↩


.↩





