


Weyl's lemma (Laplace equation)




Weyl's lemma (Laplace equation)

In mathematics, Weyl's lemma, named after Hermann Weyl, states that every weak solution of Laplace's equation is a smooth solution. This contrasts with the wave equation, for example, which has weak solutions that are not smooth solutions. Weyl's lemma is a special case of elliptic or  hypoelliptic regularity.
Statement of the lemma
Let 
 
 
 
  be an open subset of 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Euclidean space 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
 
  denote the usual Laplace operator. Weyl's lemma1 states that if a locally integrable function 
 
 
 
  is a weak solution of Laplace's equation, in the sense that



for every  smooth test function 
 
 
 
  with compact support, then (up to redefinition on a set of measure zero) 
 
 
 
  is smooth and satisfies 
 
 
 
 
  pointwise in 
 
 
 
 .
This result implies the interior regularity of harmonic functions in 
 
 
 
 , but it does not say anything about their regularity on the boundary 
 
 
 
 .
Idea of the proof
To prove Weyl's lemma, one convolves the function 
 
 
 
  with an appropriate mollifier

 
 
  and shows that the mollification 
 
 
 
  satisfies Laplace's equation, which implies that 
 
 
 
  has the mean value property. Taking the limit as 
 
 
 
  and using the properties of mollifiers, one finds that 
 
 
 
  also has the mean value property, which implies that it is a smooth solution of Laplace's equation.2 Alternative proofs use the smoothness of the fundamental solution of the Laplacian or suitable a priori elliptic estimates.
Generalization to distributions
More generally, the same result holds for every  distributional solution of Laplace's equation: If 
 
 
 
 
  satisfies 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a regular distribution associated with a smooth solution 
 
 
 
  of Laplace's equation.3
Connection with hypoellipticity
Weyl's lemma follows from more general results concerning the regularity properties of elliptic or hypoelliptic operators.4 A linear partial differential operator 
 
 
 
 
  with smooth coefficients is hypoelliptic if the  singular support of 
 
 
 
  is equal to the singular support of 
 
 
 
  for every distribution 
 
 
 
 . The Laplace operator is hypoelliptic, so if 
 
 
 
 , then the singular support of 
 
 
 
 
  is empty since the singular support of 
 
 
 
  is empty, meaning that 
 
 
 
 . In fact, since the Laplacian is elliptic, a stronger result is true, and solutions of 
 
 
 
  are  real-analytic.
Notes
References




"
Category:Lemmas Category:Partial differential equations Category:Harmonic functions



Hermann Weyl, The method of orthogonal projections in potential theory, Duke Math. J., 7, 411-444 (1940). See Lemma 2, p. 415↩
Bernard Dacorogna, Introduction to the Calculus of Variations, 2nd ed., Imperial College Press (2009), p. 148.↩
Lars Gårding, Some Points of Analysis and their History, AMS (1997), p. 66.↩
Lars Hörmander, The Analysis of Linear Partial Differential Operators I, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag (1990), p.110↩




