


Hitchin functional




Hitchin functional

The Hitchin functional is a mathematical concept with applications in string theory that was introduced by the British mathematician Nigel Hitchin.  and  are the original articles of the Hitchin functional.
As with Hitchin's introduction of generalized complex manifolds, this is an example of a mathematical tool found useful in mathematical physics.
Formal definition
This is the definition for 6-manifolds. The definition in Hitchin's article is more general, but more abstract.1
Let 
 
 
 
  be a compact, oriented 6-manifold with trivial canonical bundle. Then the Hitchin functional is a functional on 3-forms defined by the formula:



where 
 
 
 
  is a 3-form and * denotes the Hodge star operator.
Properties

The Hitchin functional is analogous for six-manifold to the Yang-Mills functional for the four-manifolds.


The Hitchin functional is manifestly invariant under the action of the group of orientation-preserving diffeomorphisms.


Theorem. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a three-dimensional complex manifold and 
 
 
 
  is the real part of a non-vanishing holomorphic 3-form, then 
 
 
 
  is a critical point of the functional 
 
 
 
  restricted to the cohomology class

 
 . Conversely, if 
 
 
 
  is a critical point of the functional 
 
 
 
  in a given comohology class and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
defines the structure of a complex manifold, such that 
 
 
 
  is the real part of a non-vanishing holomorphic 3-form on 
 
 
 
 .


The proof of the theorem in Hitchin's articles  and  is relatively straightforward. The power of this concept is in the converse statement: if the exact form 
 
 
 
  is known, we only have to look at its critical points to find the possible complex structures.
 

Stable forms
Action functionals often determine geometric structure2 on 
 
 
 
  and geometric structure are often characterized by the existence of particular differential forms on 
 
 
 
  that obey some integrable conditions.
If an m-form 
 
 
 
  can be written with local coordinates


 
  and


 
 , then 
 
 
 
  defines symplectic structure.
A p-form 
 
 
 
  is stable if it lies in an open orbit of the local 
 
 
 
  action where n=dim(M), namely if any small perturbation 
 
 
 
  can be undone by a local 
 
 
 
  action. So any 1-form that don't vanish everywhere is stable; 2-form (or p-form when p is even) stability is equivalent to nondegeneratacy.
What about p=3? For large n 3-form is difficult because the dimension of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , grows more firstly than the dimension of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 . But there are some very lucky exceptional case, namely, 
 
 
 
 , when dim 
 
 
 
 , dim 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a stable real 3-form in dimension 6. Then the stabilizer of 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
  has real dimension 36-20=16, in fact either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .
Focus on the case of 
 
 
 
  and if 
 
 
 
  has a stabilizer in 
 
 
 
  then it can be written with local coordinates as follows:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are bases of 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  determines an almost complex structure on 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, if there exist local coordinate 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  then it determines fortunately an complex structure on 
 
 
 
 .
Given the stable 
 
 
 
 :


 
 . We can define another real 3-from


 
 .
And then 
 
 
 
  is a holomorphic 3-form in the almost complex structure determined by 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, it becomes to be the complex structure just if 
 
 
 
  i.e. 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This 
 
 
 
  is just the 3-form 
 
 
 
  in formal definition of Hitchin functional. These idea induces the generalized complex structure.
Use in string theory
Hitchin functionals arise in many areas of string theory. An example is the compactifications of the 10-dimensional string with a subsequent orientifold projection 
 
 
 
  using an involution

 
 . In this case, 
 
 
 
  is the internal 6 (real) dimensional Calabi-Yau space. The couplings to the complexified Kähler coordinates

 
  is given by



The potential function is the functional 
 
 
 
 , where J is the almost complex structure. Both are Hitchin functionals.
As application to string theory, the famous OSV conjecture  used Hitchin functional in order to relate topological string to 4-dimensional black hole entropy. Using similar technique in the 
 
 
 
  holonomy  argued about topological M-theory and in the 
 
 
 
  holonomy topological F-theory might be argued.
More recently, E. Witten claimed the mysterious superconformal field theory in six dimensions, called 6D (2,0) superconformal field theory . Hitchin functional gives one of the bases of it.
Notes


References








"
Category:Complex manifolds Category:String theory



For explicitness, the definition of Hitchin functional is written before some explanations.↩
For example, complex structure, symplectic structure, 
 
 
 
  holonomy and 
 
 
 
  holonomy etc.↩




