


Smooth morphism




Smooth morphism

In algebraic geometry, a morphism 
 
 
 
  between schemes is said to be smooth if

(i) it is locally of finite presentation
(ii) it is flat, and
(iii) for every geometric point

 
  the fiber 
 
 
 
  is regular.

(iii) means that for any 
 
 
 
  the fiber 
 
 
 
  is a nonsingular variety. Thus, intuitively speaking, a smooth morphism gives a flat family of nonsingular varieties.
If S is the spectrum of a field and f is of finite type, then one recovers the definition of a nonsingular variety.
There are many equivalent definitions of a smooth morphism. Let 
 
 
 
  be locally of finite presentation. Then the following are equivalent.

f is smooth.
f is formally smooth (see below).
f is flat and the relative differential

 
  is locally free of rank equal to the relative dimension of 
 
 
 
 .
For any 
 
 
 
 , there exists a neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of s and a neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and the ideal generated by the m-by-m minors of 
 
 
 
  is B.
Locally, f factors into 
 
 
 
  where g is étale.
Locally, f factors into 
 
 
 
  where g is étale.

A morphism of finite type is étale if and only if it is smooth and quasi-finite.
A smooth morphism is stable under base change and composition. A smooth morphism is locally of finite presentation.
A smooth morphism is universally locally acyclic.
Formally smooth morphism
One can define smoothness without reference to geometry. We say that a S-scheme X is formally smooth if for any affine S-scheme T and a subscheme 
 
 
 
  of T given by a nilpotent ideal, 
 
 
 
  is surjective where we wrote 
 
 
 
 . Then a morphism locally of finite type is smooth if and only if it is formally smooth.
In the definition of "formally smooth", if we replace surjective by "bijective" (resp. "injective"), then we get the definition of formally étale (resp. formally unramified).
Smooth base change
Let S be a scheme and 
 
 
 
  denote the image of the structure map 
 
 
 
 . The smooth base change theorem states the following: let 
 
 
 
  be a quasi-compact morphism, 
 
 
 
  a smooth morphism and 
 
 
 
  a torsion sheaf on 
 
 
 
 . If for every 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is injective, then the base change morphism

 
  is an isomorphism.
See also

smooth algebra
regular embedding

References

J. S. Milne (2012). "Lectures on Étale Cohomology"
J. S. Milne. Étale cohomology, volume 33 of Princeton Mathematical Series . Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1980.

"
Category:Morphisms of schemes


