


Domain coloring




Domain coloring

(Figure)
Domain coloring plot of the function
 ƒ(x) =(x2 − 1)(x − 2 − i)2/(x2 + 2 + 2i). The hue represents the function argument, while the saturation and value represent the multiply-wrapped magnitude.

Domain coloring is a technique for visualizing functions of a complex variable. The term "domain coloring" was coined by Frank Farris, possibly around 1998.12 There were many earlier uses of color to visualize complex functions, typically mapping argument (phase) to hue.3 The technique of using continuous color to map points from domain to codomain or image plane was used in 1999 by George Abdo and Paul Godfrey4 and colored grids were used in graphics by Doug Arnold that he dates to 1997.5
Motivation
Insufficient dimensions
A real function

 
  (for example 
 
 
 
 ) can be graphed using two Cartesian coordinates on a plane.
A graph of a complex function

 
  of one complex variable lives in a space with two complex dimensions. Since the complex plane itself is two-dimensional, a graph of a complex function is an object in four real dimensions. That makes complex functions difficult to visualize in a three-dimensional space. One way of depicting holomorphic functions is with a Riemann surface.
Visual encoding of complex numbers
Given a complex number 
 
 
 
 , the phase (also known as argument) 
 
 
 
  can be represented by a hue, and the modulus 
 
 
 
  is represented by either intensity or variations in intensity. The arrangement of hues is arbitrary, but often it follows the color wheel. Sometimes the phase is represented by a specific gradient rather than hue.
(Figure)
Unit circle domain coloring.png

Example
The following image depicts the sine function 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  on the real axis and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  on the imaginary axis.
(Figure)
Sine.png

See also

Color wheel graphs of complex functions
Conformal pictures, where the domain is colored with a picture and not with a fixed color wheel

References


External links

Color Graphs of Complex Functions
Visualizing complex-valued functions in the plane.
Gallery of Complex Functions
Complex Mapper by Alessandro Rosa
John Davis software - S-Lang script for Domain Coloring
[http://devrand.org/show_item.html?item=72&page;;=Project Open source C and Python domain coloring software]
Enhanced 3D Domain coloring
Domain Coloring Method on GPU
Java domain coloring software (In development)
MATLAB routines 1
Python script for GIMP by Michael J. Gruber
Matplotlib and MayaVi implementation of domain coloring by E. Petrisor 2

"
Category:Complex analysis



Frank A. Farris, Visualizing complex-valued functions in the plane↩
 Ludmark refers to Farris' coining the term "domain coloring" in this 2004 article.↩
↩
↩
↩




