


Josephson energy




Josephson energy

In superconductivity, the Josephson energy is the potential energy accumulated in the Josephson junction when a supercurrent flows through it. One can think of a Josephson junction as a non-linear inductance which accumulates (magnetic field) energy when a current passes through it. In contrast to real inductance, no magnetic field is created by a supercurrent in Josephson junction—the accumulated energy is a Josephson energy.
Derivation
For the simplest case the current-phase relation (CPR) is given by (aka the first Josephson relation):


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the supercurrent flowing through the junction, 
 
 
 
  is the critical current, and 
 
 
 
  is the Josephson phase, see Josephson junction for details.
Imagine that initially at time 
 
 
 
  the junction was in the ground state 
 
 
 
  and finally at time 
 
 
 
  the junction has the phase 
 
 
 
 . The work done on the junction (so the junction energy is increased by)



Here 
 
 
 
  sets the characteristic scale of the Josephson energy, and 
 
 
 
  sets its dependence on the phase 
 
 
 
 . The energy 
 
 
 
  accumulated inside the junction depends only on the current state of the junction, but not on history or velocities, i.e. it is a potential energy. Note, that 
 
 
 
  has a minimum equal to zero for the ground state 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is any integer.
Josephson inductance
Imagine that the Josephson phase across the junction is 
 
 
 
  and the supercurrent flowing through the junction is


 
  (This is the same equation as above, except now we will look at small variations in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  around the values 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .)
Imagine that we add little extra current (dc or ac) 
 
 
 
  through JJ, and want to see how the junction reacts. The phase across the junction changes to become 
 
 
 
 . One can write:


 
  Assuming that 
 
 
 
  is small, we make a Taylor expansion in the right hand side to arrive at


 
  The voltage across the junction (we use the 2nd Josephson relation) is


 
  If we compare this expression with the expression for voltage across the conventional inductance


 
 ,
we can define the so-called Josephson inductance


 
  One can see that this inductance is not constant, but depends on the phase 
 
 
 
  across the junction. The typical value is given by 
 
 
 
  and is determined only by the critical current 
 
 
 
 . Note that, according to definition, the Josephson inductance can even become infinite or negative (if 
 
 
 
 ).
One can also calculate the change in Josephson energy


 
  Making Taylor expansion for small 
 
 
 
 , we get


 
  If we now compare this with the expression for increase of the inductance energy 
 
 
 
 , we again get the same expression for 
 
 
 
 .
Note, that although Josephson junction behaves like an inductance, there is no associated magnetic field. The corresponding energy is hidden inside the junction. The Josephson Inductance is also known as a Kinetic Inductance - the behaviour is derived from the kinetic energy of the charge carriers, not energy in a magnetic field.
"
Category:Superconductivity Category:Energy (physics) Category:Josephson effect


