


Nested sampling algorithm




Nested sampling algorithm

The nested sampling algorithm is a computational approach to the problem of comparing models in Bayesian statistics, developed in 2004 by physicist John Skilling.1
Background
Bayes' theorem can be applied to a pair of competing models 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for data 
 
 
 
 , one of which may be true (though which one is not known) but which both cannot simultaneously be true. The posterior probability for 
 
 
 
  may be calculated as follows:



Given no a priori information in favor of 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , it is reasonable to assign prior probabilities 
 
 
 
 , so that 
 
 
 
 . The remaining Bayes factor

 
  is not so easy to evaluate since in general it requires marginalization of nuisance parameters. Generally, 
 
 
 
  has a collection of parameters that can be lumped together and called 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  has its own vector of parameters that may be of different dimensionality but is still referred to as 
 
 
 
 . The marginalization for 
 
 
 
  is



and likewise for 
 
 
 
 . This integral is often analytically intractable, and in these cases it is necessary to employ a numerical algorithm to find an approximation. The nested sampling algorithm was developed by John Skilling specifically to approximate these marginalization integrals, and it has the added benefit of generating samples from the posterior distribution 
 
 
 
 .2 It is an alternative to methods from the Bayesian literature3 such as bridge sampling and defensive importance sampling.
Here is a simple version of the nested sampling algorithm, followed by a description of how it computes the marginal probability density 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 :
  Start with 

 points 

 sampled from prior.
  for 

 to 

 do        % The number of iterations j is chosen by guesswork.
      

current likelihood values of the points

;
      






      Save the point with least likelihood as a sample point with weight 

.
      Update the point with least likelihood with some Markov Chain
      Monte Carlo steps according to the prior, accepting only steps that
      keep the likelihood above 

.
  end
  return 

;
At each iteration, 
 
 
 
  is an estimate of the amount of prior mass covered by the hypervolume in parameter space of all points with likelihood greater than 
 
 
 
 . The weight factor 
 
 
 
  is an estimate of the amount of prior mass that lies between two nested hypersurfaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The update step 
 
 
 
  computes the sum over 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  to numerically approximate the integral



The idea is to chop up the range of 
 
 
 
  and estimate, for each interval 
 
 
 
 , how likely it is a priori that a randomly chosen 
 
 
 
  would map to this interval. This can be thought of as a Bayesian's way to numerically implement Lebesgue integration.
Implementations

Simple example code written in C, R, or Python demonstrating this algorithm can be downloaded from John Skilling's website
There is also a Haskell port of the above simple codes on Hackage
An implementation in R originally designed for fitting of spectra is described at 1 and can be obtained on GitHub at 2
A highly modular Python parallel implementation of Nested Sampling for statistical physics and condensed matter physics applications is publicly available from GitHub 3.

Applications
Since nested sampling was proposed in 2004, it has been used in multiple settings within the field of astronomy. One paper suggested using nested sampling for cosmological model selection and object detection, as it "uniquely combines accuracy, general applicability and computational feasibility."4 A refinement of the nested sampling algorithm to handle multimodal posteriors has also been suggested as a means of detecting astronomical objects in existing datasets.5 Other applications of nested sampling is in the field of finite element updating where nested sampling is used to choose an optimal finite element model and this was applied to structural dynamics. 6
See also

Bayesian model comparison

References
"
Category:Bayesian statistics Category:Model selection Category:Statistical algorithms








Mthembu, L., Marwala, T., Friswell, M.I. and Adhikari, S. 2011. Model selection in finite element model updating using the Bayesian evidence statistic.Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 25(7), 2399– 2412.




