


Q-Vandermonde identity




Q-Vandermonde identity

In mathematics, in the field of combinatorics, the q-Vandermonde identity is a q-analogue of the Chu–Vandermonde identity. Using standard notation for q-binomial coefficients, the identity states that



The nonzero contributions to this sum come from values of j such that the q-binomial coefficients on the right side are nonzero, that is, 
 
 

Other conventions
As is typical for q-analogues, the q-Vandermonde identity can be rewritten in a number of ways. In the conventions common in applications to quantum groups, a different q-binomial coefficient is used. This q-binomial coefficient, which we denote here by 
 
 
 
 , is defined by



In particular, it is the unique shift of the "usual" q-binomial coefficient by a power of q such that the result is symmetric in q and 
 
 
 
 . Using this q-binomial coefficient, the q-Vandermonde identity can be written in the form



Proof
As with the (non-q) Chu–Vandermonde identity, there are several possible proofs of the q-Vandermonde identity. The following proof uses the q-binomial theorem.
One standard proof of the Chu–Vandermonde identity is to expand the product 
 
 
 
  in two different ways. Following Stanley,1 we can tweak this proof to prove the q-Vandermonde identity, as well. First, observe that the product


 
  can be expanded by the q-binomial theorem as


 
  Less obviously, we can write


 
  and we may expand both subproducts separately using the q-binomial theorem. This yields


 
  Multiplying this latter product out and combining like terms gives


 
  Finally, equating powers of 
 
 
 
  between the two expressions yields the desired result.
This argument may also be phrased in terms of expanding the product 
 
 
 
  in two different ways, where A and B are operators (for example, a pair of matrices) that "q-commute," that is, that satisfy BA = qAB.
Notes
References




Exton, H. (1983), q-Hypergeometric Functions and Applications, New York: Halstead Press, Chichester: Ellis Horwood, 1983, ISBN 0853124914, ISBN 0470274530, ISBN 978-0470274538










"
Category:Combinatorics Category:Q-analogs Category:Mathematical identities



Stanley (2011), Solution to exercise 1.100, p. 188.↩




