


Divided power structure




Divided power structure

In mathematics, specifically commutative algebra, a divided power structure is a way of making expressions of the form 
 
 
 
  meaningful even when it is not possible to actually divide by 
 
 
 
 .
Definition
Let A be a commutative ring with an ideal I. A divided power structure (or PD-structure, after the French puissances divisées) on I is a collection of maps 
 
 
 
  for n=0, 1, 2, ... such that:



 
  and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , while 
 
 
 
  for n > 0.


 
  for 
 
 
 
 .


 
  for 
 
 
 
 .


 
  for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an integer.


 
  for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an integer.

For convenience of notation, 
 
 
 
  is often written as 
 
 
 
  when it is clear what divided power structure is meant.
The term divided power ideal refers to an ideal with a given divided power structure, and divided power ring refers to a ring with a given ideal with divided power structure.
Homomorphisms of divided power algebras are ring homomorphisms that respects the divided power structure on its source and target.
Examples



 
  is a divided power algebra, it is the free divided power algebra over 
 
 
 
  on one generator.


If A is an algebra over the rational numbers Q, then every ideal I has a unique divided power structure where 
 
 
 
 . (The uniqueness follows from the easily verified fact that in general, 
 
 
 
 .) Indeed, this is the example which motivates the definition in the first place.


If A is a ring of characteristic

 
 , where p is prime, and I is an ideal such that 
 
 
 
 , then we can define a divided power structure on I where 
 
 
 
  if n \gamma_n(x) = 0 if 
 
 
 
 . (Note the distinction between 
 
 
 
  and the ideal generated by 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 ; the latter is always zero if a divided power structure exists, while the former is not necessarily zero.)


If M is an A-module, let 
 
 
 
  denote the symmetric algebra of M over A. Then its dual 
 
 
 
  has a canonical structure of divided power ring. In fact, it is canonically isomorphic to a natural completion of 
 
 
 
  (see below) if M has finite rank.

Constructions
If A is any ring, there exists a divided power ring



consisting of divided power polynomials in the variables



that is sums of divided power monomials of the form



with 
 
 
 
 . Here the divided power ideal is the set of divided power polynomials with constant coefficient 0.
More generally, if M is an A-module, there is a universal A-algebra, called



with PD ideal



and an A-linear map



(The case of divided power polynomials is the special case in which M is a free module over A of finite rank.)
If I is any ideal of a ring A, there is a universal construction which extends A with divided powers of elements of I to get a divided power envelope of I in A.
Applications
The divided power envelope is a fundamental tool in the theory of PD differential operators and crystalline cohomology, where it is used to overcome technical difficulties which arise in positive characteristic.
The divided power functor is used in the construction of co-Schur functors.
References




"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Polynomials


