


Cotlar–Stein lemma




Cotlar–Stein lemma

In mathematics, in the field of functional analysis, the Cotlar–Stein almost orthogonality lemma is named after mathematicians Mischa Cotlar and Elias Stein. It may be used to obtain information on the operator norm on an operator, acting from one Hilbert space into another when the operator can be decomposed into almost orthogonal pieces. The original version of this lemma (for self-adjoint and mutually commuting operators) was proved by Mischa Cotlar in 19551 and allowed him to conclude that the Hilbert transform is a continuous linear operator in 
 
 
 
  without using the Fourier transform. A more general version was proved by Elias Stein.2
Cotlar–Stein almost orthogonality lemma
Let 
 
 
 
  be two Hilbert spaces. Consider a family of operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , with each 
 
 
 
  a bounded linear operator from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
Denote



The family of operators 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is almost orthogonal if



The Cotlar–Stein lemma states that if 
 
 
 
  are almost orthogonal, then the series 
 
 
 
  converges in the strong operator topology, and that



Proof
If R1, ..., Rn is a finite collection of bounded operators, then3



So under the hypotheses of the lemma,



It follows that



and that



Hence the partial sums



form a Cauchy sequence.
The sum is therefore absolutely convergent with limit satisfying the stated inequality.
To prove the inequality above set



with |aij| ≤ 1 chosen so that



Then



Hence



Taking 2mth roots and letting m tend to ∞,



which immediately implies the inequality.
Generalization
There is a generalization of the Cotlar–Stein lemma with sums replaced by integrals.4 Let X be a locally compact space and μ a Borel measure on X. Let T(x) be a map from X into bounded operators from E to F which is uniformly bounded and continuous in the strong operator topology. If



are finite, then the function T(x)v is integrable for each v in E with



The result can be proved by replacing sums by integrals in the previous proof or by using Riemann sums to approximate the integrals.
Example
Here is an example of an orthogonal family of operators. Consider the inifite-dimensional matrices



and also



Then 
 
 
 
 
  for each 
 
 
 
 , hence the series 
 
 
 
  does not converge in the uniform operator topology.
Yet, since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
 , the Cotlar–Stein almost orthogonality lemma tells us that



converges in the strong operator topology and is bounded by 1.
Notes
References






"
Category:Hilbert space Category:Harmonic analysis Category:Operator theory Category:Inequalities Category:Theorems in functional analysis Category:Lemmas











