


Crosswordese




Crosswordese

Crosswordese is the group of words frequently found in crossword puzzles but seldom found in everyday conversation. The words are usually short, three to five letters, with letter combinations which crossword constructors find useful in the creation of crossword puzzles, such as words that start and/or end with vowels, abbreviations consisting entirely of consonants, unusual combinations of letters, and words consisting almost entirely of frequently used letters. Such words are needed in almost every puzzle to some extent. Too much crosswordese in a crossword puzzle is frowned upon by cruciverbalists and crossword enthusiasts.
Knowing the language of ‘crosswordese’ is helpful to constructors and solvers alike. According to Marc Romano,1 “to do well solving crosswords, you absolutely need to keep a running mental list of “crosswordese,” the set of recurring words that constructors reach for whenever they are heading for trouble in a particular section of the grid.”
Frequently used crosswordese

Portions of phrases are occasionally used as fill in the blank clues. For instance, "Et tu, Brute?" might appear in a puzzle's clue sheet as "_____, Brute?"

Architecture

Apse – a semicircular church recess
Ell – a type of extension to a building; a measure for cloth
Classical orders – referring to ancient architecture most readily identifiable by the style of support columns
 
Doric order (Greek)
Ionic order (Greek or Roman)
Also Corinthian order (Greek), Tuscan order and composite order (both Roman)
Nonce orders – referring to Greek-style columns used in modern buildings.

Nave – the middle section of a church

Biblical references

Enos - first-born son of Seth
Esau - older twin son of Isaac

Brand and trade names

Afta and Atra - Gillette brand aftershave and safety razor, respectively
STP - a brand of motor oil additives; slogan "The Racer's Edge"

Computers and the Internet

SCSI - pronounced "scuzzy", a set of standards to physically connect computers and peripherals for the purpose of transferring data.
LAN - local area network, a network of computers in a limited area.

Directions between cities
 Many puzzles ask for the direction from one city to another. These directions always fall between the standard octaval compass points—i.e., North (N - 0° or 360°), Northeast (NE - 45°), East (E - 90°), etc.
The directions asked for on clue sheets are usually approximations. Starting at north and going clockwise, the directions are:

NNE = North-northeast (22.5°)
ENE = East-northeast (67.5°)
ESE = East-southeast (112.5°)
SSE = South-southeast (157.5°)
SSW = South-southwest (202.5°)
WSW = West-southwest (247.5°)
WNW = West-northwest (292.5°)
NNW = North-northwest (337.5°)

Directions on the mariner's compass (divided into 32 directions) may also be encountered, although generally clued more explicitly:

NBE = North by east (11.25°)
NEBN = Northeast by north (33.75°)
NEBE = Northeast by east (56.25°)
EBN = East by north (78.75°)
EBS = East by south (101.25°)
SEBE = Southeast by east (123.75°)
SEBS = Southeast by south (146.25°)
SBE = South by east (168.75°)
SBW = South by west (191.25°)
SWBS = Southwest by south (213.75°)
SWBW = Southwest by west (236.25°)
WBS = West by south (258.75°)
WBN = West by north (281.25°)
NWBW = Northwest by west (303.75°)
NWBN = Northwest by north (326.25°)
NBW = North by west (348.75°)

Fictional characters

Asta - film dog of the 1930s
Esmé - title character of the short story "For Esmé—with Love and Squalor" by J. D. Salinger and included in the collection of his story titled Nine Stories.
Ilsa - as in Ilsa Lund, the character played by Ingrid Bergman in Casablanca
Smee - Captain Hook's chief assistant in Peter Pan. Smee may also be referred to as the assistant to the Black Stache, Captain Hook's sobriquet in the prequel novel Peter and the Starcatchers or the play Peter and the Starcatcher.
Odie - dog in the comic strip Garfield
Tin - As in Rin Tin Tin, the canine silent-film star, or the European comic The Adventures of Tintin

Food and drink

Aioli - A condiment similar to mayonnaise, usually with garlic.
Grog - an alcoholic beverage made of heated low-alcohol beer, rum and a variety of flavorings such as lemon or lime juice, cinnamon and sugar.
Mahi - Persian (borrowed into Hindi–Urdu) for fish. "Mahi" may refer to mahi-mahi.
Mead - honey wine
Nehi - a line of fruit-flavored soft drinks from the Royal Crown Company. Grape Nehi was the favorite drink of Radar O'Reilly on the TV series M*A*S*H
MSG - monosodium glutamate, a flavor enhancer that may cause asthmatic reactions in some people.
Oleo - Used as a synonym for *margarine.
Phở - a Vietnamese soup made with beef and rice noodles, usually served with basil, lime, bean sprouts and peppers.

Foreign words

Erse - Scottish Gaelic
Été - summer in French
Frau - German for "woman", "wife" or "Mrs."
Herr - German for "Mister (Mr.)"
Mme - abbreviation of the French honorific "Madame"
Mann - German for "man" or "husband"
Sra. - abbreviation for señora (Spanish)
Tío and Tía - Spanish for "uncle" and "aunt", respectively

General adjectives and adverbs

Eoan - an adjective meaning "of the dawn"

Geography

Agra - an ancient city in India best known as the location of the Taj Mahal.
Asti - a city of Italy known for its sparkling wines
Mesa - a Spanish word commonly used in English—especially in the American Southwest—to designate a plateau that sits higher in elevation than its immediate surroundings.
Ouse - river in Yorkshire
Tor - a rock outcrop formed by weathering

Jargon and slang

Alee - in seaman's language, toward the side opposite the wind

Latin words and phrases

Ad hoc - pertaining to a specific problem
Dies Irae - Day of Wrath - a medieval hymn used in the Roman Catholic Requiem Mass
Et tu, Brute? - alleged last words spoken by Julius Caesar after being stabbed by his friend Brutus
Veni, vidi, vici - a phrase spoken by Julius Caesar meaning "I came, I saw, I conquered"

Manmade items

Etui - a small purse often used to hold sewing supplies
Ewer - a decorative pitcher
Olio - a miscellaneous mixture of elements, especially artistic works, musical pieces, writing, or food
Ulu - knife used by Yup'ik, Inuit, and Aleut women

Multiple meanings

DSM
 
IATA "baggage code" for Des Moines International Airport (rarely used)
The Distinguished Service Medal, a decoration awarded to members of the military
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders—a puzzle may also include a Roman numeral to indicate a specific edition (the current edition, DSM-V, is slated to be replaced by DSM-VI in 2013)

Mahi
 
as in mahi-mahi.
the Persian word for fish (also present in Hindi–Urdu as loanword).
as in the Mahi River in India.

MSG
 
Monosodium glutamate
Madison Square Garden
message (abbr.)

NEA
 
National Education Association - an American labor union for school teachers
National Endowment for the Arts

Obs
 
observatory (abbr.)
obsolete (abbr.)

Zooey
 
as in Zooey Glass, title character of the book ''Franny and Zooey by J. D. Salinger
as in American actress Zooey Deschanel
also a pet version of the names "Zachary" and "Zechariah"


Names of contemporary people (20th and 21st centuries)
(Note: The popularity of certain names used in crosswordese may wane with the passing of time. For instance, "Ito" -- as in Robert Ito, a Canadian-born actor of Japanese descent who was a regular on Quincy, M.E. from 1976 to 1983—continued to be a popular crosswordese reference throughout most of the 1980s. Yet, although he has remained active professionally, and the name got reexposed in the 1990s due to judge Lance Ito's presiding over the O. J. Simpson murder case, the appearance of the name in today's crosswords is a rare occurrence.)

Arlo - as in Arlo Guthrie, American folk singer
Elia – as in Elia Kazan, Greek-born American film and theater director
Enya – Irish New Age singer
Erle – as in Erle Stanley Gardner, an American lawyer, author of detective stories, creator of Perry Mason
Erté - Russian-born French graphics and costume designer.
Esai - as in Esai Morales, an American actor of Puerto Rican descent
Uta - as in Uta Hagen, an American actress born in Germany

Names of historical people

E Lee - As in Robert E. Lee, leader of the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War
El Cid - title given to Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar, an 11th-century Castilian soldier most famous for conquering Valencia, Spain; also a 1961 film of the same name starring Charlton Heston and Sophia Loren

Nature, references to

Aerie - the high nest of a bird of prey
Erne - a sea eagle.
Tse - as in the tsetse fly (often referred to as "half an African fly").

Poetic phrases and terms

E'en - contraction of "even"
Erin - poetic name for Ireland
O'er - contraction of "over"

Suffixes

Suffixes
 
-ite - a suffix with several meanings, including a faithful follower of a certain person, a mineral, and a native of a certain place
-ose - a suffix in chemistry indicating sugar
-ule - a suffix meaning small


Religious holidays, festivals, celebrations and observances

Eid - Arabic for "festival"; part of the names of several Islamic festivals
Hajj - the pilgrimage every faithful Muslim is obliged to perform; one of the Five Pillars of Islam
Purim - the festival celebrating the deliverance of the Jewish people from a plot to annihilate them, as told in the Book of Esther
Tết or Tết Nguyên Đán - the Vietnamese new year, Lunar new year

Roman numerals
Many puzzles ask for Roman numerals either as answers or as portions of answers. For instance:

a puzzle might ask for the solution of 1916 − 1662 as "MCMXVI minus MDCLXII." The answer (254) would be written as CCLIV.
LEOIV is the answer to a clue about Pope Leo IV.
a puzzle might ask which Super Bowl was the first to be played in Tampa, Florida. The answer is XVIII.

Standard Roman numerals run from 1 to 3999, or I to MMMLXXXIX. The first ten Roman numerals are:


 
  For numerals representing values equal to or greater than 4000, a line is placed above the numeral. The following table shows the numerals used in crossword puzzles.




Symbol

Value





I

1 (one) ()



V

5 (five) ()



X

10 (ten) ()



L

50 (fifty) ()



C

100 (one hundred) ()



D

500 (five hundred) ()



M

1,000 (one thousand) ()



For those who are curious, the chart below shows numeral values up to 900,000.





×1

×2

×3

×4

×5

×6

×7

×8

×9





Ones

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

IX



Tens

X

XX

XXX

XL

L

LX

LXX

LXXX

XC



Hundreds

C

CC

CCC

CD

D

DC

DCC

DCCC

CM



Thousands

M

MM

MMM



























Ten thousands







































Hundred thousands







































Use of medieval Roman numerals (an informalized system that spanned most of the Latin alphabet) is almost unheard of.
Sports and gaming

Alai – as in jai alai, a game played in a court with a ball and a wickerwork racket
Ante - a forced bet in poker
Epee - a modern version of a duelling sword
Nicknames based on nicknames
 
"Bosox" - the Boston Red Sox
"Buc" (team member) or "Bucs" - this spelling usually refers to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers but may also refer to the Pittsburgh Pirates
"Buck" (team member) or "Bucks" - when not used in reference to the Milwaukee Bucks, this spelling usually refers to the Pittsburgh Pirates but may also refer to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers
"The Caps" - usually refers to the Washington Capitals
"Cards" - usually refers to the St. Louis Cardinals
"Cav" (team member) or "Cavs" - usually refers to the Cleveland Cavaliers or the University of Virginia Cavaliers
"Chisox" - the Chicago White Sox
"Hab" (team member) or "Habs" - usually refers to the Montreal Canadiens
"Hog" (team member) or "The Hogs - the offensive line of the Washington Redskins, although some people assign the name to the entire team
"Mav" (team member) or "Mavs" - usually refers to the Dallas Mavericks
"Nats" - usually refers to the Washington Nationals
"Pat" (team member) or "Pats" - usually refers to the New England Patriots
"The Tide" - usually refers to the University of Alabama Crimson Tide
"The Tribe" - usually refers to the Cleveland Indians
"Yank" (team member) or "Yanks" - usually refers to the New York Yankees

RBI - a baseball term meaning "run batted in"; plural is RBIs
TKO - a boxing term meaning "technical knockout"; plural is "TKOs"
Three-letter scoreboard abbreviations of major league teams
 
ATL - Atlanta Braves, Falcons, Hawks and Thrashers
ARZ - Arizona (Phoenix) Cardinals and Diamondbacks (also ARI)
BAL - Baltimore Orioles and Ravens (also, formerly, Colts)
BOS - Boston Bruins, Celtics and Red Sox
BUF - Buffalo Bills and Sabres
CAL - Calgary Flames and Stampeders (also, more commonly, CGY) (also, formerly, the California Angels)
CAR - Carolina Hurricanes (located in Raleigh) and Panthers (located in Charlotte)
CBS - Columbus Blue Jackets (also CBJ, CLB and CLS)
CHA - Charlotte Bobcats (also, formerly, Hornets)
CHC - Chicago Cubs
CHI - Chicago Bears, Blackhawks, and Bulls
CIN - Cincinnati Bengals and Reds
COL - Colorado (Denver) Avalanche and Rockies
CLE - Cleveland Browns, Cavaliers and Indians
CWS - Chicago White Sox
DAL - Dallas Cowboys, Mavericks (Mavs) and Stars
DEN - Denver Broncos and Nuggets
DET - Detroit Lions, Pistons, Red Wings and Tigers
EDM - Edmonton Eskimos and Oilers
FLA - Florida (Miami) Marlins and Panthers
HOU - Houston Astros, Rockets and Texans (also, formerly, Oilers)
IND - Indianapolis Colts and Indiana Pacers
JAX - Jacksonville Jaguars
LAA - Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim
LAC - Los Angeles Clippers
LAD - Los Angeles Dodgers
LAL - Los Angeles Lakers
MEM - Memphis Grizzlies
MIA - Miami Dolphins and Heat
MIL - Milwaukee Brewers and Bucks
MIN - Minnesota (Minneapolis-St. Paul) Timberwolves, Twins, Vikings and Wild
MTL - Montreal Alouettes and Canadiens (also, formerly, Expos)
NAS - Nashville Predators
NYG - New York Giants
NYI - New York Islanders
NYJ - New York Jets
NYM - New York Mets
NYR - New York Rangers
NYY - New York Yankees
OAK - Oakland Athletics (A's) and Raiders
OKC - Oklahoma City Thunder
ORL - Orlando Magic
PHO - Phoenix Coyotes
PHL - Philadelphia Eagles, Flyers, Phillies and 76ers
PIT - Pittsburgh Penguins, Pirates and Steelers
POR - Portland Trail Blazers
PHX - Phoenix Suns
SAC - Sacramento Kings
SEA - Seattle Mariners and Seahawks
STL - St. Louis Blues, Cardinals and Rams
TEX - Texas (Arlington-Dallas-Fort Worth) Rangers
TOR - Toronto Argonauts, Blue Jays, Maple Leafs and Raptors
UTA - Utah (Salt Lake City) Jazz
WAS - Washington, D.C. Capitals, Nationals, Redskins and Wizards


Titles of books, plays, movies, etc.

OED - the Oxford English Dictionary
Omoo - an 1847 novel by Herman Melville

Titles used by royalty and the nobility

Aga - a Turkish honorific for a high-level government official; occasionally spelled "agha."
Emir - a title given to princes and/or sheikhs who rule certain Arab countries; may also be spelled amir, aamir or ameer

Transportation

BART - abbreviated name of the Bay Area Rapid Transit, the subway system that serves the San Francisco Bay Area.
Geo - line of compact cars sold by Chevrolet dealers, based on cars manufactured by Toyota and Suzuki
GTI - an abbreviation meaning Grand Tourer Injection, used on many sporty European and Japanese cars, most notably the Volkswagen Golf GTI.
GTO - an abbreviation of the Italian term Gran Turismo Omologato, most notably used on the Pontiac GTO muscle car which is nicknamed "The Goat."
IRT - abbreviated name of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company which used to operate a portion of the New York City subway system.
MARTA - abbreviated name of the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, the subway system that serves the Atlanta metropolitan area

U.S. states and Canadian provinces

Postal abbreviations: Since the late 1970s, the post offices in the United States and Canada have used computerized letter sorting. This prompted the creation of the two-capital-letter abbreviations used today for all states and most provinces (i.e., "MN" for Minnesota and "PQ" for Quebec). Previously, when mail was sorted by hand, many states and provinces had abbreviations of three to five letters. Many of these longer abbreviations are now part of crosswordese. (NOTES: (1)Except for Texas, states with four- or five-letter names were generally spelled out. (2)Other states and provinces not shown below had the same two-letter abbreviations that are still used today.)
 
Ala. - Alabama
Alb. - Alberta
Alas. - Alaska (unofficial)
Ariz. - Arizona
Ark. - Arkansas
Calif. - California (also, unofficially, "Cal.")
Colo. - Colorado
Conn. - Connecticut
Del. - Delaware
Fla. - Florida
Haw. - Hawaii (unofficial)
Ida. - Idaho (unofficial)
Ill. - Illinois
Ind. - Indiana
Kans. - Kansas (also, unofficially, "Kan." and "Kas.")
Man. - Manitoba
Mich. - Michigan
Minn. - Minnesota
Miss. - Mississippi
Mont. - Montana
Neb. - Nebraska
Nev. - Nevada
N. Mex. - New Mexico
N. Car. - North Carolina (unofficial)
N. Dak. - North Dakota
N.W.T. - Northwest Territories
Okla. - Oklahoma
Oreg. - Oregon (also, unofficially, "Ore.")
Ont. - Ontario
P.E.I. - Prince Edward Island
Penn. - Pennsylvania (unofficial)
Que. - Quebec
Sask. - Saskatchewan
S.Car. - South Carolina (unofficial)
S. Dak. - South Dakota
Tenn. - Tennessee
Tex. - Texas
Wash. - Washington
W. Va. - West Virginia
Wis. - Wisconsin (also, unofficially, "Wisc.")
Wyo. - Wyoming


World War II

Anzio - American invasion point into mainland Italy
 
Code names of landing beaches
 
Gold - British forces
Juno - British and Canadian forces
Omaha - American forces
Sword - British and Free French forces
Utah - American forces

Rivers
 
R. Aure
R. Odon
R. Orne

Towns
 
Caen
Lion-sur-Mer
Ste.-Mère-Église
St. Lo

Other
 
Pointe du Hoc
Vire-et-Taute Canal


ETO - European Theater of Operations
Iwo Jima

References
External links

Crosswordese Word of the Day
Talking Crosswordese Blues
An analysis of the "crosswordiest" words in the New York Times crossword puzzle

"
Category:Crosswords



Romano, Marc. Crossworld: One Man’s Journey into America’s Crossword Obsession.




