


Alternatization




Alternatization

In mathematics, more specifically in multilinear algebra, the notion of alternatization (or alternatisation in British English) is used to pass from any map to an alternating map.
An alternating map is a multilinear map (e.g., a bilinear map or a multilinear form) that is equal to zero for every tuple with two adjacent elements that are equal.
Definitions
Alternating bilinear map
Let S be a set, A be an abelian group, and 
 
 
 
  be a bilinear map. Then 
 
 
 
  is said to be an alternating bilinear map if








Alternating bilinear form
An alternating bilinear form is a special case of alternating bilinear map. As bilinear forms can be defined as maps between vector spaces or modules, we distinguish two cases.
:;Vector spaces

Let V be a vector space over a field K, and 
 
 
 
 
  be a bilinear form. Then 
 
 
 
  is said to be an alternating bilinear form if 12










:;Modules

Let M be a module over a ring R, and 
 
 
 
  be a bilinear form. Then 
 
 
 
  is said to be an alternating bilinear form if
 









Alternating multilinear form
An alternating multilinear form generalizes the concept of alternating bilinear form to n dimensions. As multilinear forms can be defined as maps between vector spaces or modules, we distinguish two cases.
:;Vector spaces

Let V be a vector space over a field K, and 
 
 
 
  be a multilinear form. Then 
 
 
 
  is said to be an alternating multilinear form if
 









:;Modules

Let M be a module over a ring R, and 
 
 
 
  be a multilinear form. Then 
 
 
 
 
  is said to be an alternating multilinear form if 3










Alternatization of a bilinear map
Let S be a set, A be an abelian group, and 
 
 
 
  be a bilinear map. 
 
 
 
  the alternatization of the map 
 
 
 
  is the map











Example

The Lie bracket is an alternating bilinear form.

Properties

Every alternating multilinear form is antisymmetric:4



 
 .







Proof for a bilinear form

















                                   
 
 




                                   
 
 




                                   
 
 








If the characteristic of the ring R is not equal to 2, then every antisymmetric multilinear form is alternating.5


The alternatization of an alternating map is its double.


The alternatization of a symmetric map is zero.


The alternatization of a bilinear map is bilinear. Most notably, the alternatization of any cocycle is bilinear. This fact plays a crucial role in identifying the second cohomology group of a lattice with the group of alternating bilinear forms on a lattice.


There may be non-bilinear maps whose alternatization is bilinear.

See also

Bilinear map
Map (mathematics)
Multilinear algebra
Multilinear map

Notes
References





fr:Application multilinéaire#Application alternée"
Category:Functions and mappings Category:Mathematical relations Category:Multilinear algebra



Rotman 1995, page 235.
Cohn 2003, page 298.
Lang 2002, page 511.
Rotman 1995, page 235.
Rotman 1995, page 235.




