


Whitening transformation




Whitening transformation

A whitening transformation is a decorrelation transformation that transforms an arbitrary set of variables having a known covariance matrix

 
  into a set of new variables whose covariance is the identity matrix (meaning that they are uncorrelated and all have variance 1).
The transformation is called "whitening" because it changes the input vector into a white noise vector. It differs from a general decorrelation transformation in that the latter only makes the covariances equal to zero, so that the correlation matrix may be any diagonal matrix.
The inverse coloring transformation transforms a vector 
 
 
 
  of uncorrelated variables (a white random vector) into a vector 
 
 
 
  with a specified covariance matrix.
Definition
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a random (column) vector with covariance matrix 
 
 
 
  and mean 
 
 
 
 . Typically (when 
 
 
 
  is not singular) whitening 
 
 
 
  means multiplying by 
 
 
 
 .
The matrix 
 
 
 
  can be written as the expected value of the outer product of 
 
 
 
  with itself, namely:


 
  When 
 
 
 
  is symmetric and positive definite (and therefore not singular), it has a positive definite symmetric square root

 
 , such that 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is positive definite, 
 
 
 
  is invertible, and the vector 
 
 
 
  has covariance matrix:



and is therefore a white random vector.
If 
 
 
 
  is singular (and hence not positive definite), then 
 
 
 
  is not invertible, and it is impossible to map 
 
 
 
  to a white vector with the same number of components. In that case the vector 
 
 
 
  can still be mapped to a smaller white vector 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  elements, where 
 
 
 
  is the number of non-zero eigenvalues of 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Decorrelation
Randomness extractor
Hardware random number generator
Principal component analysis

References
External links

http://courses.media.mit.edu/2010fall/mas622j/whiten.pdf
The ZCA whitening transformation. Appendix A of Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images by A. Krizhevsky.

"
Category:Classification algorithms


