


Sunflower (mathematics)




Sunflower (mathematics)

 In mathematics, a sunflower or Δ system is a collection of sets whose pairwise intersection is constant, and called the kernel.
The Δ lemma, sunflower lemma, and sunflower conjecture give various conditions that imply the existence of a large sunflower in a given collection of sets.
The original term for this concept was "Δ-system". More recently the term "sunflower", possibly introduced by , has been gradually replacing it.
Formal definition
Suppose U is a universe set and W is a collection of subsets of U. The collection W is a sunflower (or Δ-system) if there is a subset S of U such that for each distinct A and B in W, we have A ∩ B = S. In other words, W is a sunflower if the pairwise intersection of each set in W is constant.
Δ lemma
The Δ lemma states that every uncountable collection of finite sets contains an uncountable Δ-system.
The Δ lemma is a combinatorial set-theoretic tool used in proofs to impose an upper bound on the size of a collection of pairwise incompatible elements in a forcing poset. It may for example be used as one of the ingredients in a proof showing that it is consistent with Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory that the continuum hypothesis does not hold. It was introduced by .
Δ lemma for 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
 -sized collection of countable subsets of 
 
 
 
 
 , and if the continuum hypothesis holds, then there is an 
 
 
 
 -sized Δ-subsystem. Let 
 
 
 
  enumerate 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
 
 . By Fodor's lemma, fix 
 
 
 
  stationary in 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is constantly equal to 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
 
 . Build 
 
 
 
  of cardinality 
 
 
 
  such that whenever 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
 . Using the continuum hypothesis, there are only 
 
 
 
 
 -many countable subsets of $\beta$, so by further thinning we may stabilize the kernel.
Sunflower lemma and conjecture
proved the sunflower lemma, stating that if a and b are positive integers then a collection of b!ab+1 sets of cardinality at most b contains a sunflower with more than a sets. The sunflower conjecture is one of several variations of the conjecture of  that the factor of b! can be replaced by Cb for some constant C.
References







"
Category:Forcing (mathematics) Category:Set theory Category:Combinatorics


