


Spalart–Allmaras turbulence model




Spalart–Allmaras turbulence model

Overview
The Spalart–Allmaras model is a one-equation model that solves a modelled transport equation for the kinematic eddy turbulent viscosity. The Spalart-Allmaras model was designed specifically for aerospace applications involving wall-bounded flows and has been shown to give good results for boundary layers subjected to adverse pressure gradients. It is also gaining popularity in turbomachinery applications.
In its original form, the Spalart-Allmaras model is effectively a low-Reynolds number model, requiring the viscosity-affected region of the boundary layer to be properly resolved ( y+ ~1 meshes). In ANSYS FLUENT, the Spalart-Allmaras model has been extended with a y+ -insensitive wall treatment (Enhanced Wall Treatment), which allows the application of the model independent of the near wall y+ resolution.
The formulation blends automatically from a viscous sublayer formulation to a logarithmic formulation based on y+. On intermediate grids, (1\tilde{\nu}. This may be referred to as the Spalart–Allmaras variable.
Original model
The turbulent eddy viscosity is given by





















The rotation tensor is given by


 
  and d is the distance from the closest surface.
The constants are



Modifications to original model
According to Spalart it is safer to use the following values for the last two constants:



Other models related to the S-A model:
DES (1999) 1
DDES (2006)
Model for compressible flows
There are two approaches to adapting the model for compressible flows. In the first approach, the turbulent dynamic viscosity is computed from



where 
 
 
 
  is the local density. The convective terms in the equation for 
 
 
 
  are modified to



where the right hand side (RHS) is the same as in the original model.
Boundary conditions
Walls
 
 

Freestream:
Ideally 
 
 
 
 , but some solvers can have problems with a zero value, in which case 
 
 
 
  can be used.
This is if the trip term is used to "start up" the model. A convenient option is to set 
 
 
 
  in the freestream. The model then provides "Fully Turbulent" behavior, i.e., it becomes turbulent in any region that contains shear.
Outlet: convective outlet.
References

Spalart, P. R. and Allmaras, S. R., 1992, "A One-Equation Turbulence Model for Aerodynamic Flows" AIAA Paper 92-0439

External links

This article was based on the Spalart-Allmaras model article in CFD-Wiki
What Are the Spalart-Allmaras Turbulence Models? from kxcad.net
The Spalart-Allmaras Turbulence Model at NASA's Langley Research Center Turbulence Modelling Resource site

"
Category:Turbulence models


