


Symmetrization




Symmetrization

In mathematics, symmetrization is a process that converts any function in n variables to a symmetric function in n variables. Conversely, anti-symmetrization converts any function in n variables into an antisymmetric function.
2 variables
Let 
 
 
 
  be a set and 
 
 
 
  an Abelian group. Given a map 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 
  is termed a symmetric map if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 .
The symmetrization of a map 
 
 
 
  is the map 
 
 
 
 .
Conversely, the anti-symmetrization or skew-symmetrization of a map 
 
 
 
 
  is the map 
 
 
 
 .
The sum of the symmetrization and the anti-symmetrization is 
 
 
 
  Thus, away from 2, meaning if 2 is invertible, such as for the real numbers, one can divide by 2 and express every function as a sum of a symmetric function and an anti-symmetric function.
The symmetrization of a symmetric map is simply its double, while the symmetrization of an alternating map is zero; similarly, the anti-symmetrization of a symmetric map is zero, while the anti-symmetrization of an anti-symmetric map is its double.
Bilinear forms
The symmetrization and anti-symmetrization of a bilinear map are bilinear; thus away from 2, every bilinear form is a sum of a symmetric form and a skew-symmetric form, and there is no difference between a symmetric form and a quadratic form.
At 2, not every form can be decomposed into a symmetric form and a skew-symmetric form – for instance, over the integers, the associated symmetric form (over the rationals) may take half-integer values, while over 
 
 
 
  a function is skew-symmetric if and only if it is symmetric (as 
 
 
 
 ).
This leads to the notion of ε-quadratic forms and ε-symmetric forms.
Representation theory
In terms of representation theory:

exchanging variables gives a representation of the symmetric group on the space of functions in two variables,
the symmetric and anti-symmetric functions are the subrepresentations corresponding to the trivial representation and the sign representation, and
symmetrization and anti-symmetrization map a function into these subrepresentations – if one divides by 2, these yield projection maps.

As the symmetric group of order two equals the cyclic group of order two (
 
 
 
 
 ), this corresponds to the discrete Fourier transform of order two.
n variables
More generally, given a function in n variables, one can symmetrize by taking the sum over all 
 
 
 
  permutations of the variables,1 or anti-symmetrize by taking the sum over all 
 
 
even permutations and subtracting the sum over all 
 
 
 
  odd permutations.
Here symmetrizing (respectively anti-symmetrizing) a symmetric function multiplies by n! – thus if n! is invertible, such as if one is working over the rationals or over a field of characteristic 
 
 
 
  then these yield projections.
In terms of representation theory, these only yield the subrepresentations corresponding to the trivial and sign representation, but for 
 
 
 
 
  there are others – see representation theory of the symmetric group and symmetric polynomials.
Bootstrapping
Given a function in k variables, one can obtain a symmetric function in n variables by taking the sum over k element subsets of the variables. In statistics, this is referred to as bootstrapping, and the associated statistics are called U-statistics.
Notes


References



"
Category:Symmetric functions



Hazewinkel (1990), [ p. 344]↩




