


Robust optimization




Robust optimization

Robust optimization is a field of optimization theory that deals with optimization problems in which a certain measure of robustness is sought against uncertainty that can be represented as deterministic variability in the value of the parameters of the problem itself and/or its solution.
History
The origins of robust optimization date back to the establishment of modern decision theory in the 1950s and the use of worst case analysis and Wald's maximin model as a tool for the treatment of severe uncertainty. It became a discipline of its own in the 1970s with parallel developments in several scientific and technological fields. Over the years, it has been applied in statistics, but also in operations research,1 control theory,2 finance,3 portfolio management4 logistics,5 manufacturing engineering,6 chemical engineering,7 medicine,8 and computer science. In engineering problems, these formulations often take the name of "Robust Design Optimization", RDO or "Reliability Based Design Optimization", RBDO.
Example 1
Consider the following linear programming problem


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a given subset of 
 
 
 
 .
What makes this a 'robust optimization' problem is the 
 
 
 
 
  clause in the constraints. Its implication is that for a pair 
 
 
 
  to be admissible, the constraint 
 
 
 
  must be satisfied by the worst

 
  pertaining to 
 
 
 
 , namely the pair 
 
 
 
 
  that maximizes the value of 
 
 
 
  for the given value of 
 
 
 
 .
If the parameter space 
 
 
 
  is finite (consisting of finitely many elements), then this robust optimization problem itself is a linear programming problem: for each 
 
 
 
  there is a linear constraint 
 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
  is not a finite set, then this problem is a linear semi-infinite programming problem, namely a linear programming problem with finitely many (2) decision variables and infinitely many constraints.
Classification
There are a number of classification criteria for robust optimization problems/models. In particular, one can distinguish between problems dealing with local and global models of robustness; and between probabilistic and non-probabilistic models of robustness. Modern robust optimization deals primarily with non-probabilistic models of robustness that are worst case oriented and as such usually deploy Wald's maximin models.
Local robustness
There are cases where robustness is sought against small perturbations in a nominal value of a parameter. A very popular model of local robustness is the radius of stability model:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the nominal value of the parameter, 
 
 
 
  denotes a ball of radius 
 
 
 
 
  centered at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of values of 
 
 
 
  that satisfy given stability/performance conditions associated with decision 
 
 
 
 .
In words, the robustness (radius of stability) of decision 
 
 
 
 
  is the radius of the largest ball centered at 
 
 
 
  all of whose elements satisfy the stability requirements imposed on 
 
 
 
 . The picture is this:
(Figure)
Local robustness.png

where the rectangle 
 
 
 
  represents the set of all the values 
 
 
 
  associated with decision 
 
 
 
 
 .
Global robustness
Consider the simple abstract robust optimization problem



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of all possible values of 
 
 
 
  under consideration.
This is a global robust optimization problem in the sense that the robustness constraint 
 
 
 
  represents all the possible values of 
 
 
 
 
 .
The difficulty is that such a "global" constraint can be too demanding in that there is no 
 
 
 
  that satisfies this constraint. But even if such an 
 
 
 
  exists, the constraint can be too "conservative" in that it yields a solution 
 
 
 
  that generates a very small payoff 
 
 
 
  that is not representative of the performance of other decisions in 
 
 
 
 
 . For instance, there could be an 
 
 
 
  that only slightly violates the robustness constraint but yields a very large payoff 
 
 
 
 . In such cases it might be necessary to relax a bit the robustness constraint and/or modify the statement of the problem.
Example 2
Consider the case where the objective is to satisfy a constraint 
 
 
 
 . where 
 
 
 
  denotes the decision variable and 
 
 
 
 
  is a parameter whose set of possible values in 
 
 
 
 . If there is no 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , then the following intuitive measure of robustness suggests itself:



where 
 
 
 
 
  denotes an appropriate measure of the "size" of set 
 
 
 
 . For example, if 
 
 
 
  is a finite set, then 
 
 
 
  could be defined as the cardinality of set 
 
 
 
 .
In words, the robustness of decision is the size of the largest subset of 
 
 
 
 
  for which the constraint 
 
 
 
  is satisfied for each 
 
 
 
  in this set. An optimal decision is then a decision whose robustness is the largest.
This yields the following robust optimization problem:



This intuitive notion of global robustness is not used often in practice because the robust optimization problems that it induces are usually (not always) very difficult to solve.
Example 3
Consider the robust optimization problem


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is a real-valued function on 
 
 
 
 , and assume that there is no feasible solution to this problem because the robustness constraint 
 
 
 
  is too demanding.
To overcome this difficult, let 
 
 
 
  be a relatively small subset of 
 
 
 
  representing "normal" values of 
 
 
 
 
  and consider the following robust optimization problem:



Since 
 
 
 
  is much smaller than 
 
 
 
 , its optimal solution may not perform well on a large portion of 
 
 
 
  and therefore may not be robust against the variability of 
 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 .
One way to fix this difficulty is to relax the constraint 
 
 
 
  for values of 
 
 
 
  outside the set 
 
 
 
  in a controlled manner so that larger violations are allowed as the distance of 
 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  increases. For instance, consider the relaxed robustness constraint



where 
 
 
 
  is a control parameter and 
 
 
 
  denotes the distance of 
 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
 . Thus, for 
 
 
 
  the relaxed robustness constraint reduces back to the original robustness constraint. This yields the following (relaxed) robust optimization problem:



The function 
 
 
 
  is defined in such a manner that



and



and therefore the optimal solution to the relaxed problem satisfies the original constraint 
 
 
 
  for all values of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . In addition, it also satisfies the relaxed constraint



outside 
 
 
 
 .
Non-probabilistic robust optimization models
The dominating paradigm in this area of robust optimization is Wald's maximin model, namely



where the 
 
 
 
  represents the decision maker, the 
 
 
 
  represents Nature, namely uncertainty, 
 
 
 
 
  represents the decision space and 
 
 
 
  denotes the set of possible values of 
 
 
 
  associated with decision 
 
 
 
 . This is the classic format of the generic model, and is often referred to as minimax or maximin optimization problem. The non-probabilistic (deterministic) model has been and is being extensively used for robust optimization especially in the field of signal processing.91011
The equivalent mathematical programming (MP) of the classic format above is



Constraints can be incorporated explicitly in these models. The generic constrained classic format is



The equivalent constrained MP format is



Probabilistic robust optimization models
These models quantify the uncertainty in the "true" value of the parameter of interest by probability distribution functions. They have been traditionally classified as stochastic programming and stochastic optimization models.
Robust counterpart
The solution method to many robust program involves creating a deterministic equivalent, called the robust counterpart. The practical difficulty of a robust program depends on if its robust counterpart is computationally tractable.12
Applications
Robust optimization for oil field development planning
Many of the optimization problems in science and engineering involve nonlinear objective functions with uncertain model. In these cases, robust optimization is applied to optimize the expected objective (sample average) over a set of realizations generated using Monte Carlo simulation. For expensive function evaluations, model selection is used to reduce the number of realizations. Techniques such as out-of-sample validation is used to reduce the number of required realizations. Recently, optimization with sample validation (OSV) (also referred to as "multilevel optimization with validation", MLOV) is proposed to significantly reduce the computational cost in robust optimization for expensive function evaluations. Robust optimization using OSV has been applied for optimization of hydrocarbon field development planning. 13
See also

Stability radius
Minimax
Minimax estimator
Minimax regret
Robust statistics
Robust decision making
Stochastic programming
Stochastic optimization
Info-gap decision theory
Probabilistic-based design optimization
Taguchi methods

References
Further reading

H.J. Greenberg. Mathematical Programming Glossary. World Wide Web, http://glossary.computing.society.informs.org/, 1996-2006. Edited by the INFORMS Computing Society.
Ben-Tal, A., Nemirovski, A. (1998). Robust Convex Optimization. Mathematics of Operations Research 23, 769-805.


Ben-Tal A., El Ghaoui, L. and Nemirovski, A. (2006). Mathematical Programming, Special issue on Robust Optimization, Volume 107(1-2).
Ben-Tal A., El Ghaoui, L. and Nemirovski, A. (2009). Robust Optimization. Princeton Series in Applied Mathematics, Princeton University Press.







Kouvelis P. and Yu G. (1997). Robust Discrete Optimization and Its Applications, Kluwer.




Rustem B. and Howe M. (2002). Algorithms for Worst-case Design and Applications to Risk Management, Princeton University Press.





Wald, A. (1950). Statistical Decision Functions, John Wiley, NY.

External links

ROME: Robust Optimization Made Easy
[http://robust.moshe-online.com: Robust Decision-Making Under Severe Uncertainty]

"
Category:Mathematical optimization





[http://books.google.it/books?id=p6UHHfkQ9Y8C&lpg;;=PR11&ots;=AqlJfX5Z0X&dq;=economics%20robust%20optimization&lr;&hl;=it&pg;=PR11#v=onepage&q;&f;=false%20 Robust portfolio optimization]
Md. Asadujjaman and Kais Zaman, "Robust Portfolio Optimization under Data Uncertainty" 15th National Statistical Conference, December 2014, Dhaka, Bangladesh.






M. Danish Nisar. "Minimax Robustness in Signal Processing for Communications", Shaker Verlag, ISBN 978-3-8440-0332-1, August 2011.
Ben-Tal A., El Ghaoui, L. and Nemirovski, A. (2009). Robust Optimization. Princeton Series in Applied Mathematics, Princeton University Press, 9-16.





