   Graph embedding      Graph embedding   In topological graph theory , an embedding (also spelled imbedding ) of a graph    G   G   G   on a surface Σ is a representation of   G   G   G   on Σ in which points of Σ are associated to vertices and simple arcs ( homeomorphic images of [0,1]) are associated to edges in such a way that:   the endpoints of the arc associated to an edge   e   e   e   are the points associated to the end vertices of   e   e   e   ,  no arcs include points associated with other vertices,  two arcs never intersect at a point which is interior to either of the arcs.   Here a surface is a compact , connected 2- manifold .  Informally, an embedding of a graph into a surface is a drawing of the graph on the surface in such a way that its edges may intersect only at their endpoints. It is well known that any graph can be embedded in 3-dimensional Euclidean space    ℝ  3     superscript  ℝ  3    \mathbb{R}^{3}   and planar graphs can be embedded in 2-dimensional Euclidean space    ℝ  2     superscript  ℝ  2    \mathbb{R}^{2}   .  Often, an embedding is regarded as an equivalence class (under homeomorphisms of Σ) of representations of the kind just described.  Some authors define a weaker version of the definition of "graph embedding" by omitting the non-intersection condition for edges. In such contexts the stricter definition is described as "non-crossing graph embedding". 1  This article deals only with the strict definition of graph embedding. The weaker definition is discussed in the articles " graph drawing " and " crossing number ".  Terminology  If a graph   G   G   G   is embedded on a closed surface Σ, the complement of the union of the points and arcs associated to the vertices and edges of   G   G   G   is a family of regions (or faces ). 2 A 2-cell embedding or map is an embedding in which every face is homeomorphic to an open disk. 3 A closed 2-cell embedding is an embedding in which the closure of every face is homeomorphic to a closed disk.  The genus of a graph is the minimal integer n such that the graph can be embedded in a surface of genus  n . In particular, a planar graph has genus 0, because it can be drawn on a sphere without self-crossing. The non-orientable genus of a graph is the minimal integer n such that the graph can be embedded in a non-orientable surface of (non-orientable) genus n . 4  The Euler genus of a graph is the minimal integer n such that the graph can be embedded in an orientable surface of (orientable) genus n/2 or in a non-orientable surface of (non-orientable) genus n . A graph is orientably simple if its Euler genus is smaller than its non-orientable genus.  The maximum genus of a graph is the maximal integer n such that the graph can be 2-cell embedded in an orientable surface of genus  n .  Combinatorial embedding  An embedded graph uniquely defines cyclic orders of edges incident to the same vertex. The set of all these cyclic orders is called a rotation system . Embeddings with the same rotation system are considered to be equivalent and the corresponding equivalence class of embeddings is called combinatorial embedding (as opposed to the term topological embedding , which refers to the previous definition in terms of points and curves). Sometimes, the rotation system itself is called a "combinatorial embedding". 5 6 7  An embedded graph also defines natural cyclic orders of edges which constitutes the boundaries of the faces of the embedding. However handling these face-based orders is less straightforward, since in some cases some edges may be traversed twice along a face boundary. For example this is always the case for embeddings of trees, which have a single face. To overcome this combinatorial nuisance, one may consider that every edge is "split" lengthwise in two "half-edges", or "sides". Under this convention in all face boundary traversals each half-edge is traversed only once and the two half-edges of the same edge are always traversed in opposite directions.  Computational complexity  The problem of finding the graph genus is NP-hard (the problem of determining whether an n -vertex graph has genus g is NP-complete ). 8  At the same time, the graph genus problem is fixed-parameter tractable , i.e., polynomial time algorithms are known to check whether a graph can be embedded into a surface of a given fixed genus as well as to find the embedding.  The first breakthrough in this respect happened in 1979, when algorithms of time complexity  O ( n O ( g ) ) were independently submitted to the Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing : one by I. Filotti and G.L. Miller and another one by John Reif . Their approaches were quite different, but upon the suggestion of the program committee they presented a joint paper. 9  In 1999 it was reported that the fixed-genus case can be solved in time linear in the graph size and doubly exponential in the genus. 10  Embeddings of graphs into higher-dimensional spaces  It is known that any graph can be embedded into a three-dimensional space.  One method for doing this is to place the points on any line in space and to draw the m edges as curves each of which lies in one of m distinct halfplanes having that line as their common boundary. An embedding like this in which the edges are drawn on halfplanes is called a book embedding of the graph. This metaphor comes from imagining that each of the planes where an edge is drawn is like a page of a book. It was observed that in fact several edges may be drawn in the same "page"; the book thickness of the graph is the minimum number of halfplanes needed for such a drawing.  Alternatively, any graph can be drawn with straight-line edges in three dimensions without crossings by placing its vertices in general position so that no four are coplanar. For instance, this may be achieved by placing the i th vertex at the point ( i , i 2 , i 3 ) of the moment curve .  An embedding of a graph into three-dimensional space in which no two of the cycles are topologically linked is called a linkless embedding . A graph has a linkless embedding if and only if it does not have one of the seven graphs of the Petersen family as a minor .  See also   Embedding , for other kinds of embeddings  Book thickness  Geometric thickness  Graph thickness  Doubly connected edge list , a data structure to represent a graph embedding in the plane  Regular map (graph theory)  Fáry's theorem , which says that a straight line planar embedding of a planar graph is always possible.  Triangulation (geometry)   References  "  Category:Topological graph theory  Category:Graph algorithms     . ↩  . ↩  . ↩   . ↩  . ↩  . ↩  ↩  . ↩  ↩     