


Wiener deconvolution




Wiener deconvolution

 In mathematics, Wiener deconvolution is an application of the Wiener filter to the noise problems inherent in deconvolution. It works in the frequency domain, attempting to minimize the impact of deconvolved noise at frequencies which have a poor signal-to-noise ratio.
The Wiener deconvolution method has widespread use in image deconvolution applications, as the frequency spectrum of most visual images is fairly well behaved and may be estimated easily.
Wiener deconvolution is named after Norbert Wiener.
Definition
Given a system:



where 
 
 
 
  denotes convolution and:



 
  is some input signal (unknown) at time 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the known impulse response of a linear time-invariant system


 
  is some unknown additive noise, independent of 
 
 



 
  is our observed signal

Our goal is to find some 
 
 
 
  so that we can estimate 
 
 
 
  as follows:



where 
 
 
 
  is an estimate of 
 
 
 
  that minimizes the mean square error.
The Wiener deconvolution filter provides such a 
 
 
 
 . The filter is most easily described in the frequency domain:



where:



 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Fourier transforms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively at frequency 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is the mean power spectral density of the input signal 
 
 



 
  is the mean power spectral density of the noise 
 
 

the superscript 
 
 
 
  denotes complex conjugation.

The filtering operation may either be carried out in the time-domain, as above, or in the frequency domain:



(where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the Fourier transforms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively) and then performing an inverse Fourier transform on 
 
 
 
  to obtain 
 
 
 
 .
Note that in the case of images, the arguments 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  above become two-dimensional; however the result is the same.
Interpretation
The operation of the Wiener filter becomes apparent when the filter equation above is rewritten:



Here, 
 
 
 
  is the inverse of the original system, and 
 
 
 
  is the signal-to-noise ratio. When there is zero noise (i.e. infinite signal-to-noise), the term inside the square brackets equals 1, which means that the Wiener filter is simply the inverse of the system, as we might expect. However, as the noise at certain frequencies increases, the signal-to-noise ratio drops, so the term inside the square brackets also drops. This means that the Wiener filter attenuates frequencies dependent on their signal-to-noise ratio.
The Wiener filter equation above requires us to know the spectral content of a typical image, and also that of the noise. Often, we do not have access to these exact quantities, but we may be in a situation where good estimates can be made. For instance, in the case of photographic images, the signal (the original image) typically has strong low frequencies and weak high frequencies, and in many cases the noise content will be relatively flat with frequency.
Derivation
As mentioned above, we want to produce an estimate of the original signal that minimizes the mean square error, which may be expressed:



where 
 
 
 
 
  denotes expectation.
If we substitute in the expression for 
 
 
 
 , the above can be rearranged to



If we expand the quadratic, we get the following:



However, we are assuming that the noise is independent of the signal, therefore:



Also, we are defining the power spectral densities as follows:






Therefore, we have:



To find the minimum error value, we calculate the Wirtinger derivative with respect to 
 
 
 
  and set it equal to zero.



This final equality can be rearranged to give the Wiener filter.
See also

Deconvolution
Wiener filter
Point spread function
Blind deconvolution
Fourier transform

References

Rafael Gonzalez, Richard Woods, and Steven Eddins. Digital Image Processing Using Matlab. Prentice Hall, 2003.

External links

Comparison of different deconvolution methods.
Deconvolution with a Wiener filter

"
Category:Signal processing Category:Image noise reduction techniques Category:Estimation theory


