


Polynomial function theorems for zeros




Polynomial function theorems for zeros

Polynomial function theorems for zeros are a set of theorems aiming to find (or determine the nature of) the polynomial remainder theorem:

Factor theorem
Descartes' rule of signs
Gauss–Lucas theorem
Rational zeros theorem
Bounds on zeros theorem also known as the boundedness theorem
Intermediate value theorem
Complex conjugate root theorem
Properties of polynomial roots

Background
A polynomial function is a function of the form


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are complex numbers and 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is called a zero of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is real, then 
 
 
 
  is a real zero of 
 
 
 
 ; if 
 
 
 
  is imaginary, the 
 
 
 
  is a complex zero of 
 
 
 
 , although complex zeros include both real and imaginary zeros.
The fundamental theorem of algebra states that every polynomial function of degree 
 
 
 
  has at least one complex zero. It follows that every polynomial function of degree 
 
 
 
  has exactly 
 
 
 
 complex zeros, not necessarily distinct.

If the degree of the polynomial function is 1, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , then its (only) zero is 
 
 
 
 .
If the degree of the polynomial function is 2, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , then its two zeros (not necessarily distinct) are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

A degree one polynomial is also known as a linear function, whereas a degree two polynomial is also known as a quadratic function and its two zeros are merely a direct result of the quadratic formula. However, difficulty rises when the degree of the polynomial, n, is higher than 2. There is a cubic formula for a cubic function (a degree three polynomial) and there is a quartic formula for a quartic function (a degree four polynomial), but they are very complicated. There is no general formula for a polynomial function of degree 5 or higher (see Abel–Ruffini theorem).
The theorems
Remainder theorem
The remainder theorem states that if 
 
 
 
  is divided by 
 
 
 
 , then the remainder is 
 
 
 
 .
For example, when 
 
 
 
  is divided by 
 
 
 
 , the remainder (if we do not care about the quotient) will be 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  is divided by 
 
 
 
 , the remainder is 
 
 
 
 . However, this theorem is most useful when the remainder is 0 since it will yield a zero of 
 
 
 
 . For example, 
 
 
 
  is divided by 
 
 
 
 , the remainder is 
 
 
 
 , so 1 is a zero of 
 
 
 
  (by the definition of zero of a polynomial function).
de:Nullstelle"
Category:Theorems in complex analysis


