   Bifluoride      Bifluoride   Bifluoride is an inorganic  anion with the chemical formula HF (also written [HF 2 ] − ). It contributes no color to bifluoride salts. Salts of bifluoride are used to etch glass.  Acid-base properties and production  Bifluoride undergoes the typical chemical reactions of a weak acid. Upon treatment with a standard acid, it converts to hydrofluoric acid and a metal salt. Oxidation of bifluoride gives fluorine. When heated, bifluoride salts decompose to produce fluoride salts and hydrogen fluoride:   [HF 2 ] − HF + F −    Bifluoride protonates to give hydrogen fluoride:   HF + H + 2 HF   Because of this capture of a proton (H + ), bifluoride has basic character. Its conjugate acid is the reactive intermediate, μ-fluoro-fluorodihydrogen (H 2 F 2 ), which subsequently dissociates to become hydrogen fluoride. In solution, most bifluoride ions are dissociated.    +   2 HF +    Bifluoride salts arise by treatment of hydrogen fluoride with base:   HF + F − → [HF 2 ] −    Structure  This centrosymmetric triatomic anion features a symmetric hydrogen bond , the strongest known hydrogen bond , with an F − H length of 114 pm 1 and a bond strength of >155 kJ mol −1 . 2 A molecular orbital diagram reveals the atoms to be held together by a 3-center 4-electron bond . 3 It is isoelectronic with the fluoroheliate anion, FHeO − , whose existence is suspected 4 but not confirmed, and with the hypothetical compound helium difluoride, HeF 2 . "Hydrogen(difluoride)" is written as one word because it is an anion ; "hydrogen difluoride" would instead imply the electrically neutral compound HF 2 ( CAS number 12528-21-1). It is classified as a weak base .  Salts  Some HF 2 − salts are common, examples include potassium bifluoride (KHF 2 , also called potassium hydrogen fluoride) and ammonium bifluoride ([NH 4 ][HF 2 ]). Many salts claimed to be anhydrous sources of simple fluoride (F − ) ions, for example, tetra- n -butylammonium fluoride , can decompose to yield bifluoride instead.  Autodissociation of pure HF  The bifluoride ion also contributes to the unusually high auto-protolysis constant of liquid anhydrous hydrogen fluoride , which autodissociates in a manner similar to the self-ionization of water . This equilibrium can be denoted as   HF   ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons   H + + F −    However, both the H + and F − ions are solvated by HF, so a better descriptive equation is   3HF   ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons    H 2 F + (HF) + HF 2 − (HF)    References  "  Category:Anions  Category:Fluorides     ↩  Emsley, J., "Very Strong Hydrogen Bonds", Chemical Society Reviews, 1980, 9, 91-124. ↩  Pimentel, G. C. The Bonding of Trihalide and Bifluoride Ions by the Molecular Orbital Method. J. Chem. Phys.  1951 , 19 , 446-448. ↩  ↩     