


Strain energy density function




Strain energy density function

A strain energy density function or stored energy density function is a scalar valued function that relates the strain energy density of a material to the deformation gradient.


 
  Equivalently,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the (two-point) deformation gradient tensor, 
 
 
 
  is the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, 
 
 
 
  is the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor,12 and 
 
 
 
 
  is the rotation tensor from the polar decomposition of 
 
 
 
 .
For an anisotropic material, the strain energy density function 
 
 
 
  depends implicitly on reference vectors or tensors (such as the initial orientation of fibers in a composite) that characterize internal material texture. The spatial representation, 
 
 
 
  must further depend explicitly on the polar rotation tensor 
 
 
 
  to provide sufficient information to convect the reference texture vectors or tensors into the spatial configuration.
For an isotropic material, consideration of the principle of material frame indifference leads to the conclusion that the strain energy density function depends only on the invariants of 
 
 
 
 
  (or, equivalently, the invariants of 
 
 
 
  since both have the same eigenvalues). In other words, the strain energy density function can be expressed uniquely in terms of the principal stretches or in terms of the invariants of the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor or right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor and we have:
For isotropic materials,


 
  with


 
 
  For linear isotropic materials undergoing small strains, the strain energy density function specializes to


3
A strain energy density function is used to define a hyperelastic material by postulating that the stress in the material can be obtained by taking the derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to the strain. For an isotropic, hyperelastic material the function relates the energy stored in an elastic material, and thus the stress-strain relationship, only to the three strain (elongation) components, thus disregarding the deformation history, heat dissipation, stress relaxation etc.
For isothermal elastic processes, the strain energy density function relates to the Helmholtz free energy function 
 
 
 
 ,4


 
  For isentropic elastic processes, the strain energy density function relates to the internal energy function 
 
 
 
 ,



Examples of strain energy density functions
Some examples of hyperelastic constitutive equations are5

Saint Venant–Kirchhoff
Neo-Hookean
Generalized Rivlin
Mooney–Rivlin
Ogden
Yeoh
Arruda–Boyce model
Gent

References


See also

Helmholtz and Gibbs free energy in thermoelasticity
Hyperelastic material
Finite strain theory

ja:ひずみエネルギー"
Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Rubber properties Category:Solid mechanics







Muhr, A. H. (2005). Modeling the stress-strain behavior of rubber. Rubber chemistry and technology, 78(3), 391-425. 1




