


Mixed model




Mixed model

A mixed model is a statistical model containing both fixed effects and random effects. These models are useful in a wide variety of disciplines in the physical, biological and social sciences. They are particularly useful in settings where repeated measurements are made on the same statistical units (longitudinal study), or where measurements are made on clusters of related statistical units. Because of their advantage in dealing with missing values, mixed effects models are often preferred over more traditional approaches such as repeated measures ANOVA.
History and current status
Ronald Fisher introduced random effects models to study the correlations of trait values between relatives.1 In the 1950s, Charles Roy Henderson provided best linear unbiased estimates (BLUE) of fixed effects and best linear unbiased predictions (BLUP) of random effects.2345 Subsequently, mixed modeling has become a major area of statistical research, including work on computation of maximum likelihood estimates, non-linear mixed effect models, missing data in mixed effects models, and Bayesian estimation of mixed effects models. Mixed models are applied in many disciplines where multiple correlated measurements are made on each unit of interest. They are prominently used in research involving human and animal subjects in fields ranging from genetics to marketing, and have also been used in industrial statistics.
Definition
In matrix notation a mixed model can be represented as



where



 
  is a known vector of observations, with mean 
 
 
 
 ;




 
  is an unknown vector of fixed effects;




 
  is an unknown vector of random effects, with mean 
 
 
 
 
  and variance-covariance matrix

 
 ;




 
  is an unknown vector of random errors, with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
 
 ;




 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are known design matrices relating the observations 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively.

Estimation
The joint density of 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be written as
 
 
 
 . Assuming normality, 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , and maximizing the joint density for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , gives Henderson's "mixed model equations" (MME):678



The solutions to the MME, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are best linear unbiased estimates (BLUE) and predictors (BLUP) for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. This is a consequence of the Gauss-Markov theorem when the conditional variance of the outcome is not scalable to the identity matrix. When the conditional variance is known, then the inverse variance weighted least squares estimate is BLUE. However, the conditional variance is rarely, if ever, known. So it is desirable to jointly estimate the variance and weighted parameter estimates when solving MMEs.
One method used to fit such mixed models is that of the EM algorithm9 where the variance components are treated as unobserved nuisance parameters in the joint likelihood. Currently, this is the implemented method for the major statistical software packages R (lme in the nlme library) and SAS (proc mixed). The solution to the mixed model equations is a maximum likelihood estimate when the distribution of the errors is normal.1011
See also

Fixed effects model
Generalized linear mixed model
Linear regression
Mixed-design analysis of variance
Multilevel model
Random effects model
Repeated measures design

References
Further reading

Milliken, G. A., & Johnson, D. E. (1992). Analysis of messy data: Vol. I. Designed experiments. New York: Chapman & Hall.


West, B. T., Welch, K. B., & Galecki, A. T. (2007). Linear mixed models: A practical guide using statistical software. New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC.

Commercial

NCSS (statistical software) includes longitudinal mixed models analysis.

"
Category:Statistical methods Category:Regression analysis Category:Analysis of variance













Garrett M. Fitzmaurice, Nan M. Laird, and James H. Ware, 2004. Applied Longitudinal Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., p. 326-328.




