


Range criterion




Range criterion

In quantum mechanics, in particular quantum information, the Range criterion is a necessary condition that a state must satisfy in order to be separable. In other words, it is a separability criterion.
The result
Consider a quantum mechanical system composed of n subsystems. The state space H of such a system is the tensor product of those of the subsystems, i.e. 
 
 
 
 .
For simplicity we will assume throughout that all relevant state spaces are finite-dimensional.
The criterion reads as follows: If ρ is a separable mixed state acting on H, then the range of ρ is spanned by a set of product vectors.
Proof
In general, if a matrix M is of the form 
 
 
 
 , it is obvious that the range of M, Ran(M), is contained in the linear span of 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, we can also show 
 
 
 
  lies in Ran(M), for all i. Assume without loss of generality i = 1. We can write 
 
 
 
 , where T is Hermitian and positive semidefinite. There are two possibilities:
1) span

Ker(T). Clearly, in this case, 
 
 
Ran(M).
2) Notice 1) is true if and only if Ker(T)

span

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  denotes orthogonal compliment. By Hermiticity of T, this is the same as Ran(T)

span

 
 . So if 1) does not hold, the intersection Ran(T)

span

 
  is nonempty, i.e. there exists some complex number α such that 
 
 
 
 . So



Therefore 
 
 
 
  lies in Ran(M).
Thus Ran(M) coincides with the linear span of 
 
 
 
 . The range criterion is a special case of this fact.
A density matrix ρ acting on H is separable if and only if it can be written as



where 
 
 
 
  is a (un-normalized) pure state on the j-th subsystem. This is also



But this is exactly the same form as M from above, with the vectorial product state 
 
 
 
  replacing 
 
 
 
 . It then immediately follows that the range of ρ is the linear span of these product states. This proves the criterion.
References

P. Horodecki, "Separability Criterion and Inseparable Mixed States with Positive Partial Transposition", Physics Letters A 232, (1997).

"
Category:Quantum information science


