


Markov renewal process




Markov renewal process

In probability and statistics a Markov renewal process is a random process that generalizes the notion of Markov jump processes. Other random processes like Markov chain, Poisson process, and renewal process can be derived as a special case of an MRP (Markov renewal process).
Definition
Consider a state space 
 
 
 
  Consider a set of random variables 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are the jump times and 
 
 
 
  are the associated states in the Markov chain (see Figure). Let the inter-arrival time, 
 
 
 
 . Then the sequence (Xn, Tn) is called a Markov renewal process if






Relation to other stochastic processes

If we define a new stochastic process 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , then the process 
 
 
 
  is called a semi-Markov process. Note the main difference between an MRP and a semi-Markov process is that the former is defined as a two-tuple of states and times, whereas the latter is the actual random process that evolves over time and any realisation of the process has a defined state for any given time. The entire process is not Markovian, i.e., memoryless, as happens in a CTMC. Instead the process is Markovian only at the specified jump instants. This is the rationale behind the name, Semi-Markov.123 (See also: hidden semi-Markov model.)
A semi-Markov process (defined in the above bullet point) where all the holding times are exponentially distributed is called a continuous time Markov chain/process (CTMC). In other words, if the inter-arrival times are exponentially distributed and if the waiting time in a state and the next state reached are independent, we have a CTMC.
 
 





The sequence 
 
 
 
  in the MRP is a discrete-time Markov chain. In other words, if the time variables are ignored in the MRP equation, we end up with a DTMC.
 
 


If the sequence of 
 
 
 
 s are independent and identically distributed, and if their distribution does not depend on the state 
 
 
 
 , then the process is a renewal process. So, if the states are ignored and we have a chain of iid times, then we have a renewal process.
 
 



See also

Markov process
Renewal theory
Variable-order Markov model
Hidden semi-Markov model

References and Further Reading
"
Category:Markov processes










