


Vizing's theorem




Vizing's theorem

In graph theory, Vizing's theorem (named for Vadim G. Vizing who published it in 1964) states that the edges of every simple undirected graph may be colored using a number of colors that is at most one larger than the maximum degree

 
  of the graph.
At least 
 
 
 
  colors are always necessary, so the undirected graphs may be partitioned into two classes: "class one" graphs for which 
 
 
 
  colors suffice, and "class two" graphs for which 
 
 
 
  colors are necessary.
Examples
When 
 
 
 
 , the graph 
 
 
 
  must itself be a matching, with no two edges adjacent, and its edge chromatic number is one. That is, all graphs with 
 
 
 
  are of class one.
When 
 
 
 
 , the graph 
 
 
 
  must be a disjoint union of paths and cycles. If all cycles are even, they can be 2-edge-colored by alternating the two colors around each cycle. However, if there exists at least one odd cycle, then no 2-edge-coloring is possible. That is, a graph with 
 
 
 
  is of class one if and only if it is bipartite.
Multigraphs do not in general obey Vizing's theorem. For instance, the multigraph formed by doubling each edge of a triangle has maximum degree four but cannot be edge-colored with fewer than six colors.
Classification of graphs
Several authors have provided additional conditions that classify some graphs as being of class one or class two, but do not provide a complete classification. For instance, if the vertices of the maximum degree 
 
 
 
  in a graph 
 
 
 
  form an independent set, or more generally if the induced subgraph for this set of vertices is a forest, then 
 
 
 
  must be of class one.1  showed that almost all graphs are of class one. That is, in the Erdős–Rényi model of random graphs, in which all 
 
 
 
 -vertex graphs are equally likely, let 
 
 
 
  be the probability that an 
 
 
 
 -vertex graph drawn from this distribution is of class one; then 
 
 
 
  approaches one in the limit as 
 
 
 
  goes to infinity. For more precise bounds on the rate at which 
 
 
 
  converges to one, see .
Planar graphs
showed that a planar graph is of class one if its maximum degree is at least eight. In contrast, he observed that for any maximum degree in the range from two to five, there exist planar graphs of class two. For degree two, any odd cycle is such a graph, and for degree three, four, and five, these graphs can be constructed from platonic solids by replacing a single edge by a path of two adjacent edges.
In Vizing's planar graph conjecture,  states that all simple, planar graphs with maximum degree six or seven are of class one, closing the remaining possible cases.  partially proved Vizing's planar graph conjecture by showing that all planar graphs with maximum degree seven are of class one. Thus, the only case of the conjecture that remains unsolved is that of maximum degree six. This conjecture has implications for the total coloring conjecture.
The planar graphs of class two constructed by subdivision of the platonic solids are not regular: they have vertices of degree two as well as vertices of higher degree. The four color theorem, on vertex coloring of planar graphs, is equivalent to the statement that every bridgeless 3-regular planar graph is of class one . This statement is now known to be true, due to the proof of the four color theorem by .
Graphs on nonplanar surfaces
In 1969, Branko Grünbaum conjectured that every 3-regular graph with a polyhedral embedding on any two-dimensional oriented manifold such as a torus must be of class one. In this context, a polyhedral embedding is a graph embedding such that every face of the embedding is topologically a disk and such that the dual graph of the embedding is simple, with no self-loops or multiple adjacencies. If true, this would be a generalization of the four color theorem, which was shown by Tait to be equivalent to the statement that 3-regular graphs with a polyhedral embedding on a sphere are of class one. However,  showed the conjecture to be false by finding snarks that have polyhedral embeddings on high-genus orientable surfaces. Based on this construction, he also showed that it is NP-complete to tell whether a polyhedrally embedded graph is of class one.2
Algorithms
describe a polynomial time algorithm for coloring any graph with 
 
 
 
  colors, where 
 
 
 
  is the maximum degree of the graph. That is, the algorithm uses the optimal number of colors for graphs of class two, and uses at most one more color than necessary for all graphs. Their algorithm follows the same strategy as Vizing's original proof of his theorem: it starts with an uncolored graph, and then repeatedly finds a way of recoloring the graph in order to increase the number of colored edges by one.
More specifically, suppose that 
 
 
 
  is an uncolored edge in a partially colored graph. The algorithm of Misra and Gries may be interpreted as constructing a directed pseudoforest

 
  (a graph in which each vertex has at most one outgoing edge) on the neighbors of 
 
 
 
 : for each neighbor 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the algorithm finds a color 
 
 
 
  that is not used by any of the edges incident to 
 
 
 
 , finds the vertex 
 
 
 
  (if it exists) for which edge 
 
 
 
  has color 
 
 
 
 , and adds 
 
 
 
  as an edge to 
 
 
 
 . There are two cases:

If the pseudoforest 
 
 
 
  constructed in this way contains a path from 
 
 
 
  to a vertex 
 
 
 
  that has no outgoing edges in 
 
 
 
 , then there is a color 
 
 
 
  that is available both at 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Recoloring edge 
 
 
 
  with color 
 
 
 
  allows the remaining edge colors to be shifted one step along this path: for each vertex 
 
 
 
  in the path, edge 
 
 
 
  takes the color that was previously used by the successor of 
 
 
 
  in the path. This leads to a new coloring that includes edge 
 
 
 
 .
If, on the other hand, the path starting from 
 
 
 
  in the pseudoforest 
 
 
 
  leads to a cycle, let 
 
 
 
  be the neighbor of 
 
 
 
  at which the path joins the cycle, let 
 
 
 
  be the color of edge 
 
 
 
 , and let 
 
 
 
  be a color that is not used by any of the edges at vertex 
 
 
 
 . Then swapping colors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on a Kempe chain either breaks the cycle or the edge on which the path joins the cycle, leading to the previous case.

With some simple data structures to keep track of the colors that are used and available at each vertex, the construction of 
 
 
 
  and the recoloring steps of the algorithm can all be implemented in time 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the number of vertices in the input graph. Since these steps need to be repeated 
 
 
 
  times, with each repetition increasing the number of colored edges by one, the total time is 
 
 
 
 .
In an unpublished technical report,  claimed a faster 
 
 
 
  time bound for the same problem of coloring with 
 
 
 
  colors.
History
In both  and , Vizing mentions that his work was motivated by a theorem of  showing that multigraphs could be colored with at most 
 
 
 
  colors. Although Vizing's theorem is now standard material in many graph theory textbooks, Vizing had trouble publishing the result initially, and his paper on it appears in an obscure journal, Diskret. Analiz.3
See also

Brooks' theorem relating vertex colorings to maximum degree

Notes
References


.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. (In Russian.)

External links

[http://planetmath.org/?op=getobj&from;;=objects&id;=6932 Proof of Vizing's theorem] at PlanetMath.

"
Category:Graph coloring Category:Theorems in graph theory



.
.
The full name of this journal was Akademiya Nauk SSSR. Sibirskoe Otdelenie. Institut Matematiki. Diskretny˘ı Analiz. Sbornik Trudov. It was renamed Metody Diskretnogo Analiza in 1980 (the name given for it in ) and discontinued in 1991 1.




