


Topological entropy




Topological entropy

In mathematics, the topological entropy of a topological dynamical system is a nonnegative real number that is a measure of the complexity of the system. Topological entropy was first introduced in 1965 by Adler, Konheim and McAndrew. Their definition was modelled after the definition of the Kolmogorov–Sinai, or metric entropy. Later, Dinaburg and Rufus Bowen gave a different, weaker definition reminiscent of the Hausdorff dimension. The second definition clarified the meaning of the topological entropy: for a system given by an iterated function, the topological entropy represents the exponential growth rate of the number of distinguishable orbits of the iterates. An important variational principle relates the notions of topological and measure-theoretic entropy.
Definition
A topological dynamical system consists of a Hausdorff topological space X (usually assumed to be compact) and a continuous self-map f. Its topological entropy is a nonnegative real number that can be defined in various ways, which are known to be equivalent.
Definition of Adler, Konheim, and McAndrew
Let X be a compact Hausdorff topological space. For any finite open cover C of X, let H(C) be the logarithm (usually to base 2) of the smallest number of elements of C that cover X.1 For two covers C and D, let



be their (minimal) common refinement, which consists of all the non-empty intersections of a set from C with a set from D, and similarly for multiple covers. For any continuous map f: X → X, the following limit exists:



Then the topological entropy of f, denoted h(f), is defined to be the supremum of H(C, f) over all possible finite covers C of X.
Interpretation
The parts of C may be viewed as symbols that (partially) describe the position of a point x in X: all points x ∈ Ci are assigned the symbol Ci . Imagine that the position of x is (imperfectly) measured by a certain device and that each part of C corresponds to one possible outcome of the measurement. The integer 
 
 
 
  then represents the minimal number of "words" of length n needed to encode the points of X according to the behavior of their first n − 1 iterates under f, or, put differently, the total number of "scenarios" of the behavior of these iterates, as "seen" by the partition C. Thus the topological entropy is the average (per iteration) amount of information needed to describe long iterations of the map f.
Definition of Bowen and Dinaburg
This definition uses a metric on X (actually, uniform structure would suffice). This is a weaker definition than that of Adler, Konheim, and McAndrew, as it requires additional, unnecessary structure on the topological space. However, in practice, the Bowen-Dinaburg topological entropy is usually much easier to calculate.
Let (X, d) be a compact metric space and f: X → X be a continuous map. For each natural number n, a new metric dn is defined on X by the formula



Interpretation
Since X is compact, N(n, ε) is finite and represents the number of distinguishable orbit segments of length n, assuming that we cannot distinguish points within ε of one another. A straightforward argument shows that the limit defining h(f) always exists in the extended real line (but could be infinite). This limit may be interpreted as the measure of the average exponential growth of the number of distinguishable orbit segments. In this sense, it measures complexity of the topological dynamical system (X, f). Rufus Bowen extended this definition of topological entropy in a way which permits X to be noncompact.
Properties

Let 
 
 
 
  be an expansive homeomorphism of a compact metric space 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be a topological generator. Then the topological entropy of 
 
 
 
  relative to 
 
 
 
  is equal to the topological entropy of 
 
 
 
 , i.e.



 
  .

Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous transformation of a compact metric space 
 
 
 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the measure-theoretic entropy of 
 
 
 
  with respect to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the set of all 
 
 
 
 -invariant Borel probability measures. Then



 
 .

In general the maximum of the functions 
 
 
 
  over the set M(X,f) is not attained, but if additionally the entropy map



 
  is upper semicontinuous, the measure of maximal entropy exists.

If 
 
 
 
  has a unique measure of maximal entropy 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is ergodic with respect to 
 
 
 
 .

Examples

Let 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  denote the full two-sided k-shift on symbols 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  denote the partition of 
 
 
 
  into cylinders of length 1. Then 
 
 
 
  is a partition of 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  and the number of sets is 
 
 
 
  respectively. The partitions are open covers and 
 
 
 
  is a topological generator. Hence



 
 . The measure-theoretic entropy of the Bernoulli 
 
 
 
 -measure is also 
 
 
 
 . Hence it is a measure of maximal entropy. Further on it can be shown that no other measures of maximal entropy exist.

Let 
 
 
 
  be an irreducible 
 
 
 
  matrix with entries in 
 
 
 
  and let 
 
 
 
  be the corresponding subshift of finite type. Then 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the largest positive eigenvalue of $A$.

Notes


See also

Milnor–Thurston kneading theory
For the measure of correlations in systems with topological order see Topological entanglement entropy

References



Roy Adler, Tomasz Downarowicz, Michał Misiurewicz, Topological entropy at Scholarpedia


External links

http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Topological_entropy

"
Category:Entropy and information Category:Ergodic theory Category:Topological dynamics



Since X is compact, H(C) is always finite, even for an infinite cover C. The use of arbitrary covers yields the same value of entropy.↩




