


Stable manifold




Stable manifold

In mathematics, and in particular the study of dynamical systems, the idea of stable and unstable sets or stable and unstable manifolds give a formal mathematical definition to the general notions embodied in the idea of an attractor or repellor. In the case of hyperbolic dynamics, the corresponding notion is that of the hyperbolic set.
Definition
The following provides a definition for the case of a system that is either an iterated function or has discrete-time dynamics. Similar notions apply for systems whose time evolution is given by a flow.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a topological space, and 
 
 
 
  a homeomorphism. If 
 
 
 
  is a fixed point for 
 
 
 
 
 , the stable set of 
 
 
 is defined by


 
  and the unstable set of 
 
 
 is defined by



Here, 
 
 
 
 
  denotes the inverse of the function 
 
 
 
 , i.e. 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the identity map on 
 
 
 
 .
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a periodic point of least period 
 
 
 
 , then it is a fixed point of 
 
 
 
 , and the stable and unstable sets of 
 
 
 
  are


 
  and



Given a neighborhood

 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the local stable and unstable sets of 
 
 
 
  are defined by


 
  and



If 
 
 
 
  is metrizable, we can define the stable and unstable sets for any point by


 
  and



where 
 
 
 
  is a metric for 
 
 
 
 
 . This definition clearly coincides with the previous one when 
 
 
 
  is a periodic point.
Suppose now that 
 
 
 
  is a compact smooth manifold, and 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
diffeomorphism, 
 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  is a hyperbolic periodic point, the stable manifold theorem assures that for some neighborhood 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 , the local stable and unstable sets are 
 
 
 
  embedded disks, whose tangent spaces at 
 
 
 
 
  are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (the stable and unstable spaces of 
 
 
 
 ), respectively; moreover, they vary continuously (in a certain sense) in a neighborhood of 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
 
  topology of 
 
 
 
  (the space of all 
 
 
 
  diffeomorphisms from 
 
 
 
  to itself). Finally, the stable and unstable sets are 
 
 
 
  injectively immersed disks. This is why they are commonly called stable and unstable manifolds. This result is also valid for nonperiodic points, as long as they lie in some hyperbolic set (stable manifold theorem for hyperbolic sets).
Remark
If 
 
 
 
 
  is a (finite-dimensional) vector space and 
 
 
 
  an isomorphism, its stable and unstable sets are called stable space and unstable space, respectively.
See also

Limit set
Julia set
Center manifold

References

Ralph Abraham and Jerrold E. Marsden, Foundations of Mechanics, (1978) Benjamin/Cummings Publishing, Reading Mass. ISBN 0-8053-0102-X


S. S. Sritharan, "Invariant Manifold Theory for Hydrodynamic Transition", (1990), John Wiley & Sons, NY, ISBN 0-582-06781-2

ISBN 978-0-582-06781-3
"
Category:Limit sets Category:Dynamical systems Category:Manifolds


