


Limit set




Limit set

In mathematics, especially in the study of dynamical systems, a limit set is the state a dynamical system reaches after an infinite amount of time has passed, by either going forward or backwards in time. Limit sets are important because they can be used to understand the long term behavior of a dynamical system.
Types

fixed points
periodic orbits
limit cycles
attractors.

In general limits sets can be very complicated as in the case of strange attractors, but for 2-dimensional dynamical systems the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem provides a simple characterization of all possible limit sets as a union of fixed points and periodic orbits.
Definition for iterated functions
Let 
 
 
 
  be a metric space, and let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous function. The 
 
 
 
 -limit set of 
 
 
 
 , denoted by 
 
 
 
 , is the set of cluster points of the forward orbit 
 
 
 
  of the iterated function

 
 . Hence, 
 
 
if and only if there is a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 . Another way to express this is



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the closure of set 
 
 
 
 . The closure is here needed, since we have not assumed that the underlying metric space of interest to be a complete metric space. The points in the limit set are non-wandering (but may not be recurrent points). This may also be formulated as the outer limit (limsup) of a sequence of sets, such that



If 
 
 
 
  is a homeomorphism (that is, a bicontinuous bijection), then the 
 
 
 
 -limit set is defined in a similar fashion, but for the backward orbit; i.e.

 
 .
Both sets are 
 
 
 
 -invariant, and if 
 
 
 
  is compact, they are compact and nonempty.
Definition for flows
Given a real dynamical system (T, X, φ) with flow

 
 , a point x and an orbit γ through x, we call a point y an ω-limit point of x if there exists a sequence 
 
 
 
  in R so that





 
 .
Analogously we call y an α-limit point of x if there exists a sequence 
 
 
 
  in R so that





 
 .
The set of all ω-limit points (α-limit points) for a given orbit γ is called ω-limit set (α-limit set) for γ and denoted limω γ (limα γ).
If the ω-limit set (α-limit set) is disjoint from the orbit γ, that is limω γ ∩ γ = ∅ (limα γ ∩ γ = ∅), we call limω γ (limα γ) a ω-limit cycle (α-limit cycle).
Alternatively the limit sets can be defined as


 
  and


 
  of a dynamical system, limω

 
  = limα

 
  = $x_0$
Properties

limω γ and limα γ are closed
if X is compact then limω γ and limα γ are nonempty, compact and connected
limω γ and limα γ are φ-invariant, that is φ(R × limω γ) = limω γ and φ(R × limα γ) = limα γ

See also

Julia set
Stable set
Limit cycle
Periodic point
Non-wandering set
Kleinian group

References



"
 


