


Notation for theoretic scheduling problems




Notation for theoretic scheduling problems

A convenient notation for theoretic scheduling problems was introduced by Ronald Graham, Eugene Lawler, Jan Karel Lenstra and Alexander Rinnooy Kan in.1 It consists of three fields: α, β and γ.
Each field may be a comma separated list of words. The α field describes the machine environment, β the job characteristics, and γ the objective function.
Machine environment
Single stage problems
Each job comes with a given processing time.

1
there is a single machine
 
P
there are 
 
 
 
  parallel identical machines
 
Q
there are 
 
 
 
  parallel machines with different given speeds, length of job 
 
 
 
  on machine 
 
 
 
  is the processing time 
 
 
 
  divided by speed 
 
 

R
there are 
 
 
 
  parallel unrelated machines, there are given processing times 
 
 
 
  for job 
 
 
 
  on machine 
 
 


The last three letters might be followed by the number of machines which is then fixed, here 
 
 
 
  stands then for a fixed number.
Multi-stage problem

O : open shop problem
 F : flow shop problem
 J : job shop problem

Job characteristics
The processing time may be equal for all jobs (
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 ) or even of unit length (
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 ). This makes a difference because all release times, deadlines are assumed to be integer.




for each job a release time is given before which it cannot be scheduled, default is 0.
 



for each job a deadline is given after which it cannot be scheduled. If the objective is 
 
 
 
  for example, then this field is implicitly assumed.
 
pmtn
the jobs may be preempted and execution resumed later, possibly on a different machine
 



Each job comes with a number of machines on which it must be scheduled at the same time, default is 1.
 

Precedence relations might be given for the jobs, in form of a partial order, meaning that if i is a predecessor of i' in that order, i' can start only when i is completed.

prec
an arbitrary precedence relation is given
 
sp-tree, tree, intree, outtree, chain
specific partial orders
 

Objective functions
Most objective functions depend on the deadline 
 
 
 
  and the completion time 
 
 
 
  of job 
 
 
 
 . We define lateness 
 
 
 
 , earliness 
 
 
 
 , tardiness 
 
 
 
 , unit penalty 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  otherwise. The common objective functions are 
 
 
 
  or weighted version of these sums, where every job comes with a priority 
 
 
 
 .
Examples
Adapted from 2

1|prec|
 
 
 
 : a single machine, general precedence constraint, minimizing maximum lateness.


R|pmtn|
 
 
 
 : variable number of unrelated parallel machines, allowing preemption, minimizing total completion time.


J3|
 
 
 
 |
 
 
 
 : 3-machines job shop with unit processing times, minimizing maximum completion time.

References

B. Chen, C.N. Potts and G.J. Woeginger. "A review of machine scheduling: Complexity, algorithms and approximability". Handbook of Combinatorial Optimization (Volume 3) (Editors: D.-Z. Du and P. Pardalos), 1998, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 21-169. ISBN 0-7923-5285-8 (HB) 0-7923-5019-7 (Set)
Peter Brucker, Sigrid Knust. Complexity results for scheduling problems

"
Category:Theoretical computer science Category:Scheduling (computing)




↩




