


Cramér–von Mises criterion




Cramér–von Mises criterion

In statistics the Cramér–von Mises criterion is a criterion used for judging the goodness of fit of a cumulative distribution function

 
  compared to a given empirical distribution function

 
 , or for comparing two empirical distributions. It is also used as a part of other algorithms, such as minimum distance estimation. It is defined as



In one-sample applications 
 
 
 
  is the theoretical distribution and 
 
 
 
  is the empirically observed distribution. Alternatively the two distributions can both be empirically estimated ones; this is called the two-sample case.
The criterion is named after Harald Cramér and Richard Edler von Mises who first proposed it in 1928–1930.1 2 The generalization to two samples is due to Anderson.3
The Cramér–von Mises test is an alternative to the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.
Cramér–von Mises test (one sample)
Let 
 
 
 
  be the observed values, in increasing order. Then the statistic is45



If this value is larger than the tabulated value, then the hypothesis that the data come from the distribution 
 
 
 
  can be rejected.
Watson test
A modified version of the Cramér–von Mises test is the Watson test6 which uses the statistic U2, where7



where



Cramér–von Mises test (two samples)
Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be the observed values in the first and second sample respectively, in increasing order. Let 
 
 
 
  be the ranks of the x's in the combined sample, and let 
 
 
 
  be the ranks of the y's in the combined sample. Anderson8 shows that



where U is defined as



If the value of T is larger than the tabulated values,9 the hypothesis that the two samples come from the same distribution can be rejected. (Some books give critical values for U, which is more convenient, as it avoids the need to compute T via the expression above. The conclusion will be the same).
The above assumes there are no duplicates in the 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  sequences. So 
 
 
 
  is unique, and its rank is 
 
 
 
  in the sorted list 
 
 
 
 . If there are duplicates, and 
 
 
 
  through 
 
 
 
  are a run of identical values in the sorted list, then one common approach is the midrank10 method: assign each duplicate a "rank" of 
 
 
 
 . In the above equations, in the expressions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , duplicates can modify all four variables 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
References



Further reading



External links

C-vM Two Sample Test (Documentation for performing the test using R

"
Category:Statistical tests Category:Statistical distance measures Category:Non-parametric statistics Category:Normality tests



H. Cramér, On the composition of elementary errors, Scandinavian Actuarial Journal 1928
R. E. von Mises, Wahrscheinlichkeit, Statistik und Wahrheit, Julius Springer 1928


Pearson, E.S., Hartley, H.O. (1972) Biometrika Tables for Statisticians, Volume 2, CUP. ISBN 0-521-06937-8 (page 118 and Table 54)
Watson, G.S. (1961) "Goodness-Of-Fit Tests on a Circle", Biometrika, 48 (1/2), 109-114 



Ruymgaart, F. H., (1980) "A unified approach to the asymptotic distribution theory of certain midrank statistics". In: Statistique non Parametrique Asymptotique, 1±18, J. P. Raoult (Ed.), Lecture Notes on Mathematics, No. 821, Springer, Berlin.




