


Moore plane




Moore plane

In mathematics, the Moore plane, also sometimes called Niemytzki plane (or Nemytskii plane, Nemytskii's tangent disk topology), is a topological space. It is a completely regular Hausdorff space (also called Tychonoff space) which is not normal. It is named after Robert Lee Moore and Viktor Vladimirovich Nemytskii.
Definition
 If 
 
 
 
  is the upper half-plane 
 
 
 
 , then a topology may be defined on 
 
 
 
  by taking a local basis

 
  as follows:

Elements of the local basis at points 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  are the open discs in the plane which are small enough to lie within 
 
 
 
 . Thus the subspace topology inherited by 
 
 
 
  is the same as the subspace topology inherited from the standard topology of the Euclidean plane.


Elements of the local basis at points 
 
 
 
  are sets 
 
 
 
  where A is an open disc in the upper half-plane which is tangent to the x axis at p.

That is, the local basis is given by



Properties

The Moore plane 
 
 
 
  is separable, that is, it has a countable dense subset.
The Moore plane is a completely regular Hausdorff space (i.e. Tychonoff space), which is not normal.
The subspace 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  has, as its subspace topology, the discrete topology. Thus, the Moore plane shows that a subspace of a separable space need not be separable.
The Moore plane is first countable, but not second countable or Lindelöf.
The Moore plane is not locally compact.
The Moore plane is countably metacompact but not metacompact.

Proof that the Moore plane is not normal
The fact that this space M is not normal can be established by the following counting argument (which is very similar to the argument that the Sorgenfrey plane is not normal):

On the one hand, the countable set 
 
 
 
  of points with rational coordinates is dense in M; hence every continuous function 
 
 
 
  is determined by its restriction to 
 
 
 
 , so there can be at most 
 
 
 
  many continuous real-valued functions on M.
On the other hand, the real line 
 
 
 
  is a closed discrete subspace of M with 
 
 
 
  many points. So there are 
 
 
 
  many continuous functions from L to 
 
 
 
 . Not all these functions can be extended to continuous functions on M.
Hence M is not normal, because by the Tietze extension theorem all continuous functions defined on a closed subspace of a normal space can be extended to a continuous function on the whole space.

In fact, if X is a separable topological space having an uncountable closed discrete subspace, X cannot be normal.
See also

Moore space
Hedgehog space

References

Stephen Willard. General Topology, (1970) Addison-Wesley ISBN 0-201-08707-3.

(Example 82)


"
Category:Topological spaces


