


Fundamental thermodynamic relation




Fundamental thermodynamic relation

In thermodynamics, the fundamental thermodynamic relation is generally expressed as an infinitesimal change in internal energy in terms of infinitesimal changes in entropy, and volume for a closed system in thermal equilibrium in the following way.



Here, U is internal energy, T is absolute temperature, S is entropy, P is pressure, and V is volume.
This is only one expression of the fundamental thermodynamic relation. It may be expressed in other ways, using different variables (e.g. using thermodynamic potentials). For example, the fundamental relation may be expressed in terms of the Helmholtz free energy (F) as:



and in terms of the enthalpy as



Derivation from the first and second laws of thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics states that:



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are infinitesimal amounts of heat supplied to the system by its surroundings and work done by the system on its surroundings, respectively.
According to the second law of thermodynamics we have for a reversible process:



Hence:



By substituting this into the first law, we have:



Letting dW be reversible pressure-volume work, we have:



This equation has been derived in the case of reversible changes. However, since 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are thermodynamic functions of state, the above relation holds also for non-reversible changes. If the system has more external parameters than just the volume that can change and if the numbers of particles in the system can also change, the fundamental thermodynamic relation generalizes to:



Here the 
 
 
 
  are the generalized forces corresponding to the external parameters 
 
 
 
 . The 
 
 
 
  are the chemical potentials corresponding to particles of type 
 
 
 
 .
Derivation from statistical mechanical principles
The above derivation uses the first and second laws of thermodynamics. The first law of thermodynamics is essentially a definition of heat, i.e. heat is the change in the internal energy of a system that is not caused by a change of the external parameters of the system.
However, the second law of thermodynamics is not a defining relation for the entropy. The fundamental definition of entropy of an isolated system containing an amount of energy of 
 
 
 
  is:



where 
 
 
 
  is the number of quantum states in a small interval between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  is a macroscopically small energy interval that is kept fixed. Strictly speaking this means that the entropy depends on the choice of 
 
 
 
 . However, in the thermodynamic limit (i.e. in the limit of infinitely large system size), the specific entropy (entropy per unit volume or per unit mass) does not depend on 
 
 
 
 . The entropy is thus a measure of the uncertainty about exactly which quantum state the system is in, given that we know its energy to be in some interval of size 
 
 
 
 .
Deriving the fundamental thermodynamic relation from first principles thus amounts to proving that the above definition of entropy implies that for reversible processes we have:



The fundamental assumption of statistical mechanics is that all the 
 
 
 
  states are equally likely. This allows us to extract all the thermodynamical quantities of interest. The temperature is defined as:



This definition can be derived from the microcanonical ensemble, which is a system of a constant number of particles, a constant volume and that does not exchange energy with its environment. Suppose that the system has some external parameter, x, that can be changed. In general, the energy eigenstates of the system will depend on x. According to the adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics, in the limit of an infinitely slow change of the system's Hamiltonian, the system will stay in the same energy eigenstate and thus change its energy according to the change in energy of the energy eigenstate it is in.
The generalized force, X, corresponding to the external parameter x is defined such that 
 
 
 
  is the work performed by the system if x is increased by an amount dx. E.g., if x is the volume, then X is the pressure. The generalized force for a system known to be in energy eigenstate 
 
 
 
  is given by:



Since the system can be in any energy eigenstate within an interval of 
 
 
 
 , we define the generalized force for the system as the expectation value of the above expression:



To evaluate the average, we partition the 
 
 
 
  energy eigenstates by counting how many of them have a value for 
 
 
 
  within a range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Calling this number 
 
 
 
 , we have:



The average defining the generalized force can now be written:



We can relate this to the derivative of the entropy with respect to x at constant energy E as follows. Suppose we change x to x + dx. Then 
 
 
 
  will change because the energy eigenstates depend on x, causing energy eigenstates to move into or out of the range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Let's focus again on the energy eigenstates for which 
 
 
 
  lies within the range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since these energy eigenstates increase in energy by Y dx, all such energy eigenstates that are in the interval ranging from E - Y dx to E move from below E to above E. There are



such energy eigenstates. If 
 
 
 
 , all these energy eigenstates will move into the range between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and contribute to an increase in 
 
 
 
 . The number of energy eigenstates that move from below 
 
 
 
  to above 
 
 
 
  is, of course, given by 
 
 
 
 . The difference



is thus the net contribution to the increase in 
 
 
 
 . Note that if Y dx is larger than 
 
 
 
  there will be energy eigenstates that move from below 
 
 
 
  to above 
 
 
 
 . They are counted in both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , therefore the above expression is also valid in that case.
Expressing the above expression as a derivative with respect to E and summing over Y yields the expression:



The logarithmic derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to x is thus given by:



The first term is intensive, i.e. it does not scale with system size. In contrast, the last term scales as the inverse system size and thus vanishes in the thermodynamic limit. We have thus found that:



Combining this with



Gives:



which we can write as:



External links

The Fundamental Thermodynamic Relation
Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

"
Category:Thermodynamics Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Thermodynamic equations


