


Prony's method




Prony's method

Prony analysis (Prony's method) was developed by Gaspard Riche de Prony in 1795. However, practical use of the method awaited the digital computer.1 Similar to the Fourier transform, Prony's method extracts valuable information from a uniformly sampled signal and builds a series of damped complex exponentials or sinusoids. This allows for the estimation of frequency, amplitude, phase and damping components of a signal.
The method
Let 
 
 
 
  be a signal consisting of 
 
 
 
  evenly spaced samples. Prony's method fits a function



to the observed 
 
 
 
 . After some manipulation utilizing Euler's formula, the following result is obtained. This allows more direct computation of terms.



where:



 
  are the eigenvalues of the system,


 
  are the damping components,


 
  are the phase components,


 
  are the frequency components,


 
  are the amplitude components of the series, and


 
  is the imaginary unit (
 
 
 
 ).

Representations
Prony's method is essentially a decomposition of a signal with 
 
 
 
  complex exponentials via the following process:
Regularly sample 
 
 
 
  so that the 
 
 
 
 -th of 
 
 
 
  samples may be written as



If 
 
 
 
  happens to consist of damped sinusoids, then there will be pairs of complex exponentials such that


 
 
  where



Because the summation of complex exponentials is the homogeneous solution to a linear difference equation, the following difference equation will exist:



The key to Prony's Method is that the coefficients in the difference equation are related to the following polynomial:



These facts lead to the following three steps to Prony's Method:
1) Construct and solve the matrix equation for the 
 
 
 
  values:



Note that if 
 
 
 
 , a generalized matrix inverse may be needed to find the values 
 
 
 
 .
2) After finding the 
 
 
 
  values find the roots (numerically if necessary) of the polynomial



The 
 
 
 
 -th root of this polynomial will be equal to 
 
 
 
 .
3) With the 
 
 
 
  values the 
 
 
 
  values are part of a system of linear equations that may be used to solve for the 
 
 
 
  values:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  unique values 
 
 
 
  are used. It is possible to use a generalized matrix inverse if more than 
 
 
 
  samples are used.
Note that solving for 
 
 
 
  will yield ambiguities, since only 
 
 
 
  was solved for, and 
 
 
 
  for an integer 
 
 
 
 . This leads to the same Nyquist sampling criteria that discrete Fourier transforms are subject to:



Example
(Figure)
Prony2.jpg

Notes
References

Rob Carriere and Randolph L. Moses, "High Resolution Radar Target Modeling Using a Modified Prony Estimator", IEEE Trans. Antennas Propogat., vol.40, pp. 13–18, January 1992.

"
Category:Signal processing



Hauer, J.F. et al. (1990). "Initial Results in Prony Analysis of Power System Response Signals". IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 5, 1, 80-89.




