


Witt vector




Witt vector

In mathematics, a Witt vector is an infinite sequence of elements of a commutative ring. Ernst Witt showed how to put a ring structure on the set of Witt vectors, in such a way that the ring of Witt vectors over the finite field of order p is the ring of p-adic integers.
Motivation
Any 
 
 
 
 -adic integer (an element of 
 
 
 
 ) can be written as a power series

 
 , where the 
 
 
 
 's are usually taken from the set 
 
 
 
 . However, it is hard to figure out an algebraic expression for addition and multiplication, as one faces the problem of carry. Luckily, this set of representatives is not the only possible choice, and Teichmüller suggested an alternative set consisting of 0 together with the 
 
 
 
 st roots of 
 
 
 
 : in other words, the 
 
 
 
  roots of


 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
These Teichmüller representatives can be identified with the elements of the finite field

 
  of order 
 
 
 
  (by taking residues modulo 
 
 
 
 ), and elements of 
 
 
 
  are taken to their representatives by the Teichmüller character

 
 . This identifies the set of 
 
 
 
 -adic integers with infinite sequences of elements of 
 
 
 
 .
We now have the following problem: given two infinite sequences of elements of 
 
 
 
 , describe their sum and product as 
 
 
 
 -adic integers explicitly. This problem was solved by Witt using Witt vectors.
Details
We basically want to derive the ring 
 
 
 
 -adic integers 
 
 
 
  from the finite field with 
 
 
 
  elements, 
 
 
 
 , by some general construction.
A 
 
 
 
 -adic integer is a sequence 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 ,such that 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 : 
 
 
 
 , where the 
 
 
 
 's are usually taken from the set 
 
 
 
  (The equation is happening in 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  all images from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ). Set-theoretically it is 
 
 
 
 . But 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not isomorphic as rings. If we denote 
 
 
 
 , then the addition should instead be:








 
  But we lack some properties of the coefficients to produce a general formula.
Luckily, there is an alternative subset of 
 
 
 
  which can work as the coefficient set. This is the set of Teichmüller representatives of elements of 
 
 
 
 . Without 
 
 
 
  they form a subgroup of 
 
 
 
 , identified with 
 
 
 
  through the Teichmüller character

 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  is not additive, as the sum need not be a representative. Despite this, if 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . This is conceptually justified by 
 
 
 
  if we denote 
 
 
 
 .
Teichmüller representatives are explicitly calculated as roots of 
 
 
 
  through Hensel lifting. For example, in 
 
 
 
 , to calculate the representative of 
 
 
 
 , you first find the unique solution of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 ; you get 
 
 
 
 , then repeat it in 
 
 
 
 , with conditions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ; this time it is 
 
 
 
 , and so on. The existence of lift in each step is guaranteed by 
 
 
 
  in every 
 
 
 
 .
We can also write the representatives as 
 
 
 
 . Note for every 
 
 
 
 , there is exactly one representative, namely 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , so we can also expand every 
 
 
 
 -adic integer as a power series in 
 
 
 
 , with coefficients from the Teichmüller representatives.
Explicitly, if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 . Then you subtract 
 
 
 
  and proceed similarly. Note the coefficients you get most probably differ from the 
 
 
 
 's modulo 
 
 
 
 , except the first one.
This time we have additional properties of the coefficients like 
 
 
 
 , so we can make some changes to get a neat formula. Since the Teichmüller character is not additive, we don't have 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . But it happens in 
 
 
 
 , as the first congruence implies. So actually 
 
 
 
 , thus 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is divisible by 
 
 
 
 , this resolves the 
 
 
 
 -coefficient problem of 
 
 
 
  and gives 
 
 
 
 . Note this completely determines 
 
 
 
  by the lift. Moreover, the 
 
 
 
  indicates that the calculation can actually be done in 
 
 
 
 , satisfying our basic aim.
Now for 
 
 
 
 . It is already very cumbersome at this step. 
 
 
 
 . As for 
 
 
 
 , a single 
 
 
 
 th power is not enough: actually we take 
 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
  is not always divisible by 
 
 
 
 , but that only happens when 
 
 
 
 , in which case 
 
 
 
  combined with similar monomials in 
 
 
 
  would make a multiple of 
 
 
 
 .
At this step, we see that we are actually working with something like








 
  This motivates the definition of Witt vectors.
Construction of Witt rings
Fix a prime number p. A Witt vector over a commutative ring R is a sequence 
 
 
 
  of elements of R. Define the Witt polynomials

 
  by











and in general



 
  is called the ghost components of the Witt vector 
 
 
 
 , and is usually denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
Then Witt showed that there is a unique way to make the set of Witt vectors over any commutative ring R into a ring, called the ring of Witt vectors, such that

the sum and product are given by polynomials with integral coefficients that do not depend on R, and
Every Witt polynomial is a homomorphism from the ring of Witt vectors over R to R.

In other words, if



 
  and 
 
 
 
  are given by polynomials with integral coefficients that do not depend on R, and


 
 , 
 
 
 
 .

The first few polynomials giving the sum and product of Witt vectors can be written down explicitly. For example,






 
 .

Examples

The Witt ring of any commutative ring R in which p is invertible is just isomorphic to RN (the product of a countable number of copies of R). In fact the Witt polynomials always give a homomorphism from the ring of Witt vectors to RN, and if p is invertible this homomorphism is an isomorphism.
The Witt ring of the finite field of order p is the ring of p-adic integers, as is demonstrated above.
The Witt ring of a finite field of order pn is the unramified extension of degree n of the ring of p-adic integers.

Universal Witt vectors
The Witt polynomials for different primes p are special cases of universal Witt polynomials, which can be used to form a universal Witt ring (not depending on a choice of prime p). Define the universal Witt polynomials Wn for n≥1 by














and in general



Again, 
 
 
 
  is called the ghost components of the Witt vector 
 
 
 
 , and is usually denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
We can use these polynomials to define the ring of universal Witt vectors over any commutative ring R in much the same way as above (so the universal Witt polynomials are all homomorphisms to the ring R).
Generating Functions
Later Witt orally stated another approach using generating functions.1
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Witt vector and define


 
  For 
 
 
 
  let 
 
 
 
  denote the collection of subsets of 
 
 
 
  whose elements add up to 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 .
We can get the ghost components by taking the logarithmic derivative:



Sum
Now we can see 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . So that 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  are respective coefficients in the power series for 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial in 
 
 
 
  and likely for 
 
 
 
 , we can show by induction that 
 
 
 
  is a polynomial in 
 
 
 
 .
Product
If we set 
 
 
 
  then


 
  But


 
  Now 3-tuples 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  are in bijection with 3-tuples 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , via 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  is the Least common multiple), our series becomes


 
  So that


 
  where 
 
 
 
 s are polynomials of 
 
 
 
 . So by similar induction, suppose 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  can be solved as polynomials of 
 
 
 
 .
Ring schemes
The map taking a commutative ring R to the ring of Witt vectors over R (for a fixed prime p) is a functor from commutative rings to commutative rings, and is also representable, so it can be thought of as a ring scheme, called the Witt scheme, over Spec(Z). The Witt scheme can be canonically identified with the spectrum of the ring of symmetric functions.
Similarly the rings of truncated Witt vectors, and the rings of universal Witt vectors, correspond to ring schemes, called the truncated Witt schemes and the universal Witt scheme.
Moreover, the functor taking the commutative ring 
 
 
 
  to the set 
 
 
 
  is represented by the affine space 
 
 
 
 , and the ring structure on Rn makes 
 
 
 
  into a ring scheme denoted 
 
 
 
 . From the construction of truncated Witt vectors it follows that their associated ring scheme 
 
 
 
  is the scheme 
 
 
 
  with the unique ring structure such that the morphism 
 
 
 
  given by the Witt polynomials is a morphism of ring schemes.
Commutative unipotent algebraic groups
Over an algebraically closed field of characteristic 0, any unipotent abelian connected algebraic group is isomorphic to a product of copies of the additive group $G_a$. The analogue of this for fields of characteristic p is false: the truncated Witt schemes are counterexamples. (We make them into algebraic groups by forgetting the multiplication and just using the additive structure.) However these are essentially the only counterexamples: over an algebraically closed field of characteristic p, any unipotent abelian connected algebraic group is isogenous to a product of truncated Witt group schemes.
See also

Formal group
Artin–Hasse exponential

References





, section II.6


Greenberg, M. J. (1969), Lectures on Forms in Many Variables, New York and Amsterdam, Benjamin, , ASIN: B0006BX17M

"
Category:Ring theory Category:Algebraic groups Category:Combinatorics on words








