


Indefinite inner product space




Indefinite inner product space

In mathematics, in the field of functional analysis, an indefinite inner product space



is an infinite-dimensional complex vector space

 
  equipped with both an indefinite inner product



and a positive semi-definite inner product



where the metric operator

 
  is an endomorphism of 
 
 
 
  obeying



The indefinite inner product space itself is not necessarily a Hilbert space; but the existence of a positive semi-definite inner product on 
 
 
 
  implies that one can form a quotient space on which there is a positive definite inner product. Given a strong enough topology on this quotient space, it has the structure of a Hilbert space, and many objects of interest in typical applications fall into this quotient space.
An indefinite inner product space is called a Krein space (or 
 
 
-space) if 
 
 
 
  is positive definite and 
 
 
 
  possesses a majorant topology. Krein spaces are named in honor of the Ukrainian mathematician Mark Grigorievich Krein (3 April 1907 – 17 October 1989).
Inner products and the metric operator
Consider a complex vector space

 
  equipped with an indefinite hermitian form

 
 . In the theory of Krein spaces it is common to call such an hermitian form an indefinite inner product. The following subsets are defined in terms of the square norm induced by the indefinite inner product:


 
  ("neutral")


 
  ("positive")


 
  ("negative")


 
  ("non-negative")


 
  ("non-positive")
A subspace

 
  lying within 
 
 
 
  is called a neutral subspace. Similarly, a subspace lying within 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) is called positive (negative) semi-definite, and a subspace lying within 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) is called positive (negative) definite. A subspace in any of the above categories may be called semi-definite, and any subspace that is not semi-definite is called indefinite.
Let our indefinite inner product space also be equipped with a decomposition into a pair of subspaces 
 
 
 
 , called the fundamental decomposition, which respects the complex structure on 
 
 
 
 . Hence the corresponding linear projection operators

 
  coincide with the identity on 
 
 
 
  and annihilate 
 
 
 
 , and they commute with multiplication by the 
 
 
 
  of the complex structure. If this decomposition is such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is called an indefinite inner product space; if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is called a Krein space, subject to the existence of a majorant topology on 
 
 
 
 .
The operator

 
  is called the (real phase) metric operator or fundamental symmetry, and may be used to define the Hilbert inner product

 
 :



On a Krein space, the Hilbert inner product is positive definite, giving 
 
 
 
  the structure of a Hilbert space (under a suitable topology). Under the weaker constraint 
 
 
 
 , some elements of the neutral subspace 
 
 
 
  may still be neutral in the Hilbert inner product, but many are not. For instance, the subspaces 
 
 
 
  are part of the neutral subspace of the Hilbert inner product, because an element 
 
 
 
  obeys 
 
 
 
 . But an element 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) which happens to lie in 
 
 
 
  because 
 
 
 
  will have a positive square norm under the Hilbert inner product.
We note that the definition of the indefinite inner product as a Hermitian form implies that:



Therefore the indefinite inner product of any two elements 
 
 
 
  which differ only by an element 
 
 
 
  is equal to the square norm of their average 
 
 
 
 . Consequently, the inner product of any non-zero element 
 
 
 
  with any other element 
 
 
 
  must be zero, lest we should be able to construct some 
 
 
 
  whose inner product with 
 
 
 
  has the wrong sign to be the square norm of 
 
 
 
 .
Similar arguments about the Hilbert inner product (which can be demonstrated to be a Hermitian form, therefore justifying the name "inner product") lead to the conclusion that its neutral space is precisely 
 
 
 
 , that elements of this neutral space have zero Hilbert inner product with any element of 
 
 
 
 , and that the Hilbert inner product is positive semi-definite. It therefore induces a positive definite inner product (also denoted 
 
 
 
 ) on the quotient space 
 
 
 
 , which is the direct sum of 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is a Hilbert space (given a suitable topology).
Properties and applications
Krein spaces arise naturally in situations where the indefinite inner product has an analytically useful property (such as Lorentz invariance) which the Hilbert inner product lacks. It is also common for one of the two inner products, usually the indefinite one, to be globally defined on a manifold and the other to be coordinate-dependent and therefore defined only on a local section.
In many applications the positive semi-definite inner product

 
  depends on the chosen fundamental decomposition, which is, in general, not unique. But it may be demonstrated (e. g., cf. Proposition 1.1 and 1.2 in the paper of H. Langer below) that any two metric operators 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  compatible with the same indefinite inner product on 
 
 
 
  result in Hilbert spaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  whose decompositions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have equal dimensions. Although the Hilbert inner products on these quotient spaces do not generally coincide, they induce identical square norms, in the sense that the square norms of the equivalence classes 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  into which a given 
 
 
 
  falls are equal. All topological notions in a Krein space, like continuity, closed-ness of sets, and the spectrum of an operator on 
 
 
 
 , are understood with respect to this Hilbert space topology.
Isotropic part and degenerate subspaces
Let 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  be subspaces of 
 
 
 
 . The subspace

 
  for all 
 
 
 
  is called the orthogonal companion of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the isotropic part of 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is called non-degenerate; otherwise it is degenerate. If 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , then the two subspaces are said to be orthogonal, and we write 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , we write 
 
 
 
 . If, in addition, this is a direct sum, we write 
 
 
 
 .
Pontrjagin space
If 
 
 
 
 , the Krein space 
 
 
 
  is called a Pontrjagin space or 
 
 
 
 -space. (Conventionally, the indefinite inner product is given the sign that makes 
 
 
 
  finite.) In this case 
 
 
 
  is known as the number of positive squares of 
 
 
 
 . Pontrjagin spaces are named after Lev Semenovich Pontryagin.
Pesonen operator
A symmetric operator A on an indefinite inner product space K with domain K is called a Pesonen operator if (x,x) = 0 = (x,Ax) implies x = 0.
References

Azizov, T.Ya.; Iokhvidov, I.S. : Linear operators in spaces with an indefinite metric, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1989, ISBN 0-471-92129-7.
Bognár, J. : Indefinite inner product spaces, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1974, ISBN 3-540-06202-5.

Langer, H. : Spectral functions of definitizable operators in Krein spaces, Functional Analysis Proceedings of a conference held at Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, November 2-14, 1981, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 948, Springer-Verlag Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1982, 1-46, ISSN 0075-8434.



"
Category:Topological vector spaces Category:Operator theory


