


Squashed entanglement




Squashed entanglement

Squashed entanglement, also called CMI entanglement (CMI can be pronounced "see me"), is an information theoretic measure of quantum entanglement for a bipartite quantum system. If 
 
 
 
  is the density matrix of a system 
 
 
 
  composed of two subsystems 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , then the CMI entanglement 
 
 
 
  of system 
 
 
 
  is defined by
where 
 
 
 
  is the set of all density matrices 
 
 
 
  for a tripartite system 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Thus, CMI entanglement is defined as an extremum of a functional

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . We define 
 
 
 
 , the quantum Conditional Mutual Information (CMI), below. A more general version of Eq.(1) replaces the ``min" (minimum) in Eq.(1) by an ``inf" (infimum). When 
 
 
 
 
  is a pure state, 
 
 
 
 , in agreement with the definition of entanglement of formation for pure states. Here 
 
 
 
  is the Von Neumann entropy of density matrix 
 
 
 
 .
Motivation for definition of CMI entanglement
CMI entanglement has its roots in classical (non-quantum) information theory, as we explain next.
Given any two random variables

 
 , classical information theory defines the mutual information, a measure of correlations, as
For three random variables 
 
 
 
 
 , it defines the CMI as 
It can be shown that 
 
 
 
 .
Now suppose 
 
 
 
  is the density matrix for a tripartite system 
 
 
 
 . We will represent the partial trace of 
 
 
 
  with respect to one or two of its subsystems by 
 
 
 
 
  with the symbol for the traced system erased. For example, 
 
 
 
 . One can define a quantum analogue of Eq.(2) by
and a quantum analogue of Eq.(3) by
It can be shown that 
 
 
 
 . This inequality is often called the strong-subadditivity property of quantum entropy.
Consider three random variables 
 
 
 
  with probability distribution 
 
 
 
 , which we will abbreviate as 
 
 
 
 
 . For those special 
 
 
 
  of the form
it can be shown that 
 
 
 
 . Probability distributions of the form Eq.(6) are in fact described by the Bayesian network shown in Fig.1.
(Figure)
Fig.1: Bayesian Network representation of Eq.(6)

One can define a classical CMI entanglement by
where 
 
 
 
  is the set of all probability distributions 
 
 
 
  in three random variables 
 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
 for all 
 
 
 
 . Because, given a probability distribution 
 
 
 
 , one can always extend it to a probability distribution 
 
 
 
  that satisfies Eq.(6), it follows that the classical CMI entanglement, 
 
 
 
 
 , is zero for all 
 
 
 
 . The fact that 
 
 
 
  always vanishes is an important motivation for the definition of 
 
 
 
 . We want a measure of quantum entanglement that vanishes in the classical regime.
Suppose 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 
  is a set of non-negative numbers that add up to one, and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  is an orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space associated with a quantum system 
 
 
 
 . Suppose 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
  are density matrices for the systems 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively. It can be shown that the following density matrix
satisfies 
 
 
 
 . Eq.(8) is the quantum counterpart of Eq.(6). Tracing the density matrix of Eq.(8) over 
 
 
 
 
 , we get 
 
 
 
 , which is a separable state. Therefore, 
 
 
 
  given by Eq.(1) vanishes for all separable states.
When 
 
 
 
  is a pure state, one gets 
 
 
 
 . This agrees with the definition of entanglement of formation for pure states, as given in Ben96.
Next suppose 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  are some states in the Hilbert space associated with a quantum system 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of density matrices defined previously for Eq.(1). Define 
 
 
 
  to be the set of all density matrices 
 
 
 
 
  that are elements of 
 
 
 
  and have the special form 
 
 
 
 . It can be shown that if we replace in Eq.(1) the set 
 
 
 
  by its proper subset 
 
 
 
 , then Eq.(1) reduces to the definition of entanglement of formation for mixed states, as given in Ben96. 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  represent different degrees of knowledge as to how 
 
 
 
  was created. 
 
 
 
  represents total ignorance.
Since CMI entanglement reduces to entanglement of formation if one minimizes over 
 
 
 
  instead of 
 
 
 
 
 , one expects that CMI entanglement inherits many desirable properties from entanglement of formation.
History
The important inequality 
 
 
 
  was first proved by Lieb and Ruskai in LR73.
Classical CMI, given by Eq.(3), first entered information theory lore, shortly after Shannon's seminal 1948 paper and at least as early as 1954 in McG54. The quantum CMI, given by Eq.(5), was first defined by Cerf and Adami in Cer96. However, it appears that Cerf and Adami did not realize the relation of CMI to entanglement or the possibility of obtaining a measure of quantum entanglement based on CMI; this can be inferred, for example, from a later paper, Cer97, where they try to use 
 
 
 
  instead of CMI to understand entanglement. The first paper to explicitly point out a connection between CMI and quantum entanglement appears to be Tuc99.
The final definition Eq.(1) of CMI entanglement was first given by Tucci in a series of 6 papers. (See, for example, Eq.(8) of Tuc02 and Eq.(42) of Tuc01a). In Tuc00b, he pointed out the classical probability motivation of Eq.(1), and its connection to the definitions of entanglement of formation for pure and mixed states. In Tuc01a, he presented an algorithm and computer program, based on the Arimoto-Blahut method of information theory, for calculating CMI entanglement numerically. In Tuc01b, he calculated CMI entanglement analytically, for a mixed state of two qubits.
In Hay03, Hayden, Jozsa, Petz and Winter explored the connection between quantum CMI and separability.
It was not however, until Chr03, that it was shown that CMI entanglement is in fact an entanglement measure, i.e. that it does not increase under Local Operations and Classical Communication (LOCC). The proof adapted Ben96 arguments about entanglement of formation. In Chr03, they also proved many other interesting inequalities concerning CMI entanglement, including that it was additive, and explored its connection to other measures of entanglement. The name squashed entanglement first appeared in Chr03. In Chr05, Christandl and Winter calculated analytically the CMI entanglement of some interesting states.
In Ali03, Alicki and Fannes proved the continuity of CMI entanglement. In BCY10, Brandao, Christandl and Yard showed that CMI entanglement is zero if and only if the state is separable. In Hua14, Huang proved that computing squashed entanglement is NP-hard.
References

Ali03 
BCY10 
Ben96 
Cer96 
Cer97 
Chr03 
Chr05 
Chr06  Cambridge PhD thesis.
Hay03 
Hua14 
LR73 Elliott H. Lieb, Mary Beth Ruskai, "Proof of the Strong Subadditivity of Quantum-Mechanical Entropy", Journal of Mathematical Physics, vol. 14 (1973) pgs. 1938-1941.
McG54 W.J. McGill, "Multivariate Information Transmission", IRE Trans. Info. Theory 4(1954) 93-111.
Tuc99 
Tuc00a 
Tuc00b 
Tuc01a 
Tuc01b 
Tuc02 

External links

Faithful squashed entanglement

"
Category:Quantum information science


