


Von Mises–Fisher distribution




Von Mises–Fisher distribution

(Figure)
Points sampled from three von Mises–Fisher distributions on the sphere (blue
 
 
 
 , green
 
 
 
 , red
 
 
 
 ). The mean directions 
 
 
 
  are shown with arrows.

In directional statistics, the von Mises–Fisher distribution is a probability distribution on the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional sphere in 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  the distribution reduces to the von Mises distribution on the circle.
The probability density function of the von Mises–Fisher distribution for the random p-dimensional unit vector 
 
 
 
  is given by:



where 
 
 
 
  and the normalization constant 
 
 
 
  is equal to



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the modified Bessel function of the first kind at order 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , the normalization constant reduces to



The parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are called the mean direction and concentration parameter, respectively. The greater the value of 
 
 
 
 , the higher the concentration of the distribution around the mean direction 
 
 
 
 . The distribution is unimodal for 
 
 
 
 , and is uniform on the sphere for 
 
 
 
 .
The von Mises–Fisher distribution for 
 
 
 
 , also called the Fisher distribution, was first used to model the interaction of electric dipoles in an electric field (Mardia, 2000). Other applications are found in geology, bioinformatics, and text mining.
Estimation of parameters
A series of N independent measurements 
 
 
 
  are drawn from a von Mises–Fisher distribution. Define



Then (Sra, 2011) the maximum likelihood estimates of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are given by





 
  Thus 
 
 
 
  is the solution to


 
  A simple approximation to 
 
 
 
  is


 
  but a more accurate measure can be obtained by iterating the Newton method a few times






For N ≥ 25, the estimated spherical standard error of the sample mean direction can be computed as1


 
  where


 
  It's then possible to approximate a 
 
 
 
  confidence cone about 
 
 
 
  with semi-vertical angle


 
  where 
 
 
 
  For example, for a 95% confidence cone, 
 
 
 
  and thus 
 
 

See also

Kent distribution, a related distribution on the two-dimensional unit sphere
von Mises distribution, von Mises–Fisher distribution where p = 2, the one-dimensional unit circle
Bivariate von Mises distribution
Directional statistics

References

Dhillon, I., Sra, S. (2003) "Modeling Data using Directional Distributions". Tech. rep., University of Texas, Austin.
Fisher, RA, "Dispersion on a sphere'". (1953) Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A., 217: 295–305



"
Category:Probability distributions Category:Directional statistics Category:Multivariate continuous distributions Category:Exponential family distributions Category:Continuous distributions








