


Kent distribution




Kent distribution

(Figure)
Three points sets sampled from the Kent distribution. The mean directions are shown with arrows. The 
 
 
 
  parameter is highest for the red set.

The 5-parameter Fisher–Bingham distribution or Kent distribution, named after Ronald Fisher, Christopher Bingham, and John T. Kent, is a probability distribution on the two-dimensional unit sphere

 
  in 
 
 
 
  . It is the analogue on the two-dimensional unit sphere of the bivariate normal distribution with an unconstrained covariance matrix. The distribution belongs to the field of directional statistics. The Kent distribution was proposed by John T. Kent in 1982, and is used in geology, bioinformatics.
The probability density function

 
  of the Kent distribution is given by:



where 
 
 
 
  is a three-dimensional unit vector and the normalizing constant 
 
 
 
  is:



Where 
 
 
 
  is the modified Bessel function. Note that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the normalizing constant of the Von Mises–Fisher distribution.
The parameter 
 
 
 
  (with 
 
 
 
  ) determines the concentration or spread of the distribution, while 
 
 
 
  (with 
 
 
 
  ) determines the ellipticity of the contours of equal probability. The higher the 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  parameters, the more concentrated and elliptical the distribution will be, respectively. Vector 
 
 
 
  is the mean direction, and vectors 
 
 
 
  are the major and minor axes. The latter two vectors determine the orientation of the equal probability contours on the sphere, while the first vector determines the common center of the contours. The 3×3 matrix 
 
 
 
  must be orthogonal.
Generalization to higher dimensions
The Kent distribution can be easily generalized to spheres in higher dimensions. If 
 
 
 
  is a point on the unit sphere 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , then the density function of the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional Kent distribution is proportional to



Where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and the vectors 
 
 
 
  are orthonormal. However the normalization constant becomes very difficult to work with for 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Directional statistics
Von Mises–Fisher distribution
Bivariate von Mises distribution
Von Mises distribution
Bingham distribution

References

Boomsma, W., Kent, J.T., Mardia, K.V., Taylor, C.C. & Hamelryck, T. (2006) Graphical models and directional statistics capture protein structure. In S. Barber, P.D. Baxter, K.V.Mardia, & R.E. Walls (Eds.), Interdisciplinary Statistics and Bioinformatics, pp. 91–94. Leeds, Leeds University Press.


Hamelryck T, Kent JT, Krogh A (2006) [http://compbiol.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=get-document&doi;;=10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020131 Sampling Realistic Protein Conformations Using Local Structural Bias]. PLoS Comput Biol 2(9): e131


Kent, J. T. (1982) The Fisher–Bingham distribution on the sphere., J. Royal. Stat. Soc., 44:71–80.


Kent, J. T., Hamelryck, T. (2005). Using the Fisher–Bingham distribution in stochastic models for protein structure. In S. Barber, P.D. Baxter, K.V.Mardia, & R.E. Walls (Eds.), Quantitative Biology, Shape Analysis, and Wavelets, pp. 57–60. Leeds, Leeds University Press.


Mardia, K. V. M., Jupp, P. E. (2000) Directional Statistics (2nd edition), John Wiley and Sons Ltd. ISBN 0-471-95333-4


Peel, D., Whiten, WJ., McLachlan, GJ. (2001) Fitting mixtures of Kent distributions to aid in joint set identification. J. Am. Stat. Ass., 96:56–63

"
Category:Probability distributions Category:Directional statistics Category:Continuous distributions


