


Lie coalgebra




Lie coalgebra

In mathematics a Lie coalgebra is the dual structure to a Lie algebra.
In finite dimensions, these are dual objects: the dual vector space to a Lie algebra naturally has the structure of a Lie coalgebra, and conversely.
Definition
Let E be a vector space over a field k equipped with a linear mapping 
 
 
 
  from E to the exterior product of E with itself. It is possible to extend d uniquely to a graded derivation (this means that, for any a, b ∈ E which are homogeneous elements, 
 
 
 
 
 ) of degree 1 on the exterior algebra of E:


 
  Then the pair (E, d) is said to be a Lie coalgebra if d2 = 0, i.e., if the graded components of the exterior algebra with derivation 
 
 
 
  form a cochain complex:



Relation to de Rham complex
Just as the exterior algebra (and tensor algebra) of vector fields on a manifold form a Lie algebra (over the base field K), the de Rham complex of differential forms on a manifold form a Lie coalgebra (over the base field K). Further, there is a pairing between vector fields and differential forms.
However, the situation is subtler: the Lie bracket is not linear over the algebra of smooth functions 
 
 
 
  (the error is the Lie derivative), nor is the exterior derivative

 
  (it is a derivation, not linear over functions): they are not tensors. They are not linear over functions, but they behave in a consistent way, which is not captured simply by the notion of Lie algebra and Lie coalgebra.
Further, in the de Rham complex, the derivation is not only defined for 
 
 
 
 , but is also defined for 
 
 
 
 .
The Lie algebra on the dual
A Lie algebra structure on a vector space is a map 
 
 
 
  which is skew-symmetric, and satisfies the Jacobi identity. Equivalently, a map 
 
 
 
  that satisfies the Jacobi identity.
Dually, a Lie coalgebra structure on a vector space E is a linear map 
 
 
 
  which is antisymmetric (this means that it satisfies 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the canonical flip 
 
 
 
 ) and satisfies the so-called cocycle condition (also known as the co-Leibniz rule)


 
 .
Due to the antisymmetry condition, the map 
 
 
 
  can be also written as a map 
 
 
 
 .
The dual of the Lie bracket of a Lie algebra 
 
 
 
  yields a map (the cocommutator)


 
  where the isomorphism 
 
 
 
  holds in finite dimension; dually for the dual of Lie comultiplication. In this context, the Jacobi identity corresponds to the cocycle condition.
More explicitly, let E be a Lie coalgebra over a field of characteristic neither 2 nor 3. The dual space E* carries the structure of a bracket defined by

α([x, y]) = dα(x∧y), for all α ∈ E and x,y ∈ E*.
 

We show that this endows E* with a Lie bracket. It suffices to check the Jacobi identity. For any x, y, z ∈ E* and α ∈ E,


 
 
  where the latter step follows from the standard identification of the dual of a wedge product with the wedge product of the duals. Finally, this gives


 
  Since d2 = 0, it follows that


 
 , for any α, x, y, and z. Thus, by the double-duality isomorphism (more precisely, by the double-duality monomorphism, since the vector space needs not be finite-dimensional), the Jacobi identity is satisfied.
In particular, note that this proof demonstrates that the cocycle condition d2 = 0 is in a sense dual to the Jacobi identity.
References



"
Category:Coalgebras Category:Lie algebras


