


Gauss Moutinho Cordeiro




Gauss Moutinho Cordeiro

Gauss Moutinho Cordeiro (born April 17, 1952) is a Brazilian engineer, mathematician and statistician1 of international recognition who has made significant contributions to the theory of statistical inference, mainly through asymptotic theory and applied probability.
Education
He received his PhD in Statistics in 1982 at Imperial College London supervised by David Roxbee Cox. 2
Research
Currently, Cordeiro is a Class A researcher of the Brazilian Research Council-CNPq, Full Professor at Federal University of Pernambuco (Brazil) and Member of the Graduate Program in Statistics at the same university. He has published more than 260 research articles in international scientific journals with referee practice (2014) and supervised more than 50 MSc dissertations and DSc theses. He was also president of the Associação Brasileira de Estatística, 2000-2002. He was one of the founder editors of the Brazilian Journal of Probability and Statistics and the Editor in Chief of this journal between 1995-2000. Cordeiro's main research interests in statistics include asymptotic theory, probability distributions and regression models. He created, developed and organized several statistical meetings in Brazil. He has acted as referee for several important statistical journals such as the Annals of Statistics, Biometrical Journal, Biometrika, Brazilian Journal of Probability and Statistics, Canadian Journal of Statistics, Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods, Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation, Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, International Statistical Review, Journal of the American Statistical Association, Journal of Applied Probability, Journal of Applied Statistics, Journal of Data Science, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society A, B, C, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, Journal of Statistical Theory and Applications, Sankhya, Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, South African Statistical Journal, Statistica Neerlandica, Statistical Methodology, Statistical Papers, Statistics, Statistics and Probability Letters. In 2010, Cordeiro awarded from the Brazilian Government the National Medal for Scientific Merit at the order of Comendador. He is a member of the Academy of Sciences of Pernambuco (Brazil).
Publications
Books

An Introduction to Bartlett Correction and Bias Reduction. Printed by Springer Verlag, 2014.
Modelos Lineares Generalizados (Generalized Linear Models). Printed by Regional Brasileira da Sociedade Internacional de Biometria (RBRAS), 2007
Modelos Paramétricos (Parametric Models). Printed by Associação Brasileira de Estatística (ABE), 2004.
Introdução à Teoria Assintótica (Introduction to Asymptotic Theory). Printed by Associação Brasileira de Estatística (ABE), 1999.
Introdução à Teoria de Verossimilhança (Introduction to Likelihood Theory). Printed by Associação Brasileira de Estatística (ABE), 1992.
Modelos de Regressão para Análise de Dados Univariados (Regression Models for Analysis of Univariate Data). Printed by Sociedade Brasileira de Matemática (SBM), 1989.
Modelos Lineares Generalizados (Generalized Linear Models). Printed by Associação Brasileira de Estatística (ABE), 1986.

Articles in scientific periodicals

"Improved likelihood ratio statistics for generalized linear models", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 1983.
"On the Corrections to the Likelihood Ratio Statistics", Biometrika, 1987.
"Improved likelihood ratio statistics for exponential family nonlinear models", Biometrika, 1989.
"Bias correction in generalized linear models", JRSS-B, 1991.
"A modified score test statistic having chi-squared distribution to order 
 
 
 
 ", Biometrika, 1991.
"Improved score tests for generalized linear models", JRSS-B, 1993.
"Nonnull asymptotic distributions of three classic criteria in generalized linear models", Biometrika, 1994.
"Improved likelihood ratio tests for dispersion models", Int. Statist. Rev.", 1994.
"Bias correction in ARMA models", Statist. Prob. Lett., 1994.
"On Bartlett and Bartlett-type corrections, Econometric Reviews", 1996.
"Improved likelihood ratio tests for exponential censored data", J. Statist. Comp. Simul., 1997.
"Improved estimatores for generalized linear models with dispersion covariates", J. Statist. Comp. Simul., 1998.
"A formula to improve score test statistics", J. Statist. Comp. Simul., 1998.
"Improved heteroscedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimators", Biometrika, 2000.
"Higher order asymptotic refinements for score tests in proper dispersion models", Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 2001.
"Three corrected score tests for generalized linear models with dispersion covariates", Statistica Neerlandica, 2003.
"On Pearson´s residuals in generalized linear models", Statistics and Probability Letters, 2004.
"A third-order bias corrected estimate in generalized linear models", Test, 2007.
"A generalized modified Weibull distribution for lifetime modeling", Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 2008.
"The distribution of Pearson residuals in generalized linear models", Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 2009.
"Transformed generalized linear models", Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 2009.
"Power series generalized nonlinear models", Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 2009.
"The log-exponentiated Weibull regression model for interval-censored data", Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 2010.
"The beta modified Weibull distribution", Lifetime Data Analysis, 2010.
"The Kumaraswamy Weibull distribution with application to failure data", Journal of the Franklin Institute, 2010.
"The beta generalized half-normal distribution", Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 2010.

Personal life
In 1975 he married Zilma Cordeiro, and they have two daughters, Lelaine and Lillian (both are medical doctors), and a son Lucas (economist) and three granddaughters (Luiza, Mariana and Manuela).
References
"
Category:1952 births Category:Living people Category:20th-century mathematicians Category:21st-century mathematicians Category:Brazilian mathematicians Category:Brazilian statisticians Category:Brazilian scientists Category:Brazilian writers Category:Presidents of the Associação Brasileira de Estatística Category:Federal University of Pernambuco alumni Category:Federal University of Rio de Janeiro alumni



↩
↩




