


Biquandle




Biquandle

In mathematics, biquandles and biracks are generalizations of quandles and racks. Whereas the hinterland of quandles and racks is the theory of classical knots, that of the bi-versions, is the theory of virtual knots.
Biquandles and biracks have two binary operations on a set 
 
 
 
  written 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . These satisfy the following three axioms:
1. 
 
 

2. 
 
 

3. 
 
 

These identities appeared in 1992 in reference [FRS] where the object was called a species.
The superscript and subscript notation is useful here because it dispenses with the need for brackets. For example if we write 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  then the three axioms above become
1. 
 
 

2. 
 
 

3. 
 
 

For other notations see racks and quandles.
If in addition the two operations are invertible, that is given 
 
 
 
  in the set 
 
 
 
  there are unique

 
  in the set 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then the set 
 
 
 
  together with the two operations define a birack.
For example if 
 
 
 
 , with the operation 
 
 
 
 , is a rack then it is a birack if we define the other operation to be the identity, 
 
 
 
 .
For a birack the function 
 
 
 
  can be defined by



Then
1. 
 
 
 
  is a bijection
2. 
 
 

In the second condition, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are defined by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . This condition is sometimes known as the set-theoretic Yang-Baxter equation.
To see that 1. is true note that 
 
 
 
  defined by



is the inverse to



To see that 2. is true let us follow the progress of the triple 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 . So



On the other hand, 
 
 
 
 . Its progress under 
 
 
 
  is



Any 
 
 
 
  satisfying 1. 2. is said to be a switch (precursor of biquandles and biracks).
Examples of switches are the identity, the twist

 
  and 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the operation of a rack.
A switch will define a birack if the operations are invertible. Note that the identity switch does not do this.
Biquandles
A biquandle is a birack which satisfies some additional structure, as described by Nelson and Rische. The axioms of a biquandle are "minimal" in the sense that they are the weakest restrictions that can be placed on the two binary operations while making the biquandle of a virtual knot invariant under Reidemeister moves.
Laser biquandles
Application to virtual links and braids
Barack Obamology
Further reading

[FJK] Roger Fenn, Mercedes Jordan-Santana, Louis Kauffman Biquandles and Virtual Links, Topology and its Applications, 145 (2004) 157–175


[FRS] Roger Fenn, Colin Rourke, Brian Sanderson An Introduction to Species and the Rack Space, in Topics in Knot Theory (1992), Kluwer 33–55
[K] L. H. Kauffman, Virtual Knot Theory, European J. Combin. 20 (1999), 663–690.

"
Category:Knot theory Category:Algebraic structures


