


Empirical measure




Empirical measure

In probability theory, an empirical measure is a random measure arising from a particular realization of a (usually finite) sequence of random variables. The precise definition is found below. Empirical measures are relevant to mathematical statistics.
The motivation for studying empirical measures is that it is often impossible to know the true underlying probability measure

 
 . We collect observations 
 
 
 
  and compute relative frequencies. We can estimate 
 
 
 
 , or a related distribution function 
 
 
 
  by means of the empirical measure or empirical distribution function, respectively. These are uniformly good estimates under certain conditions. Theorems in the area of empirical processes provide rates of this convergence.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of independent identically distributed random variables with values in the state space S with probability measure P.
Definition

The empirical measure Pn is defined for measurable subsets of S and given by
 
 



where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function and 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac measure.
 

For a fixed measurable set A, nPn(A) is a binomial random variable with mean nP(A) and variance nP(A)(1 − P(A)). In particular, Pn(A) is an unbiased estimator of P(A).
Definition


 
  is the empirical measure indexed by 
 
 
 
 , a collection of measurable subsets of S.
To generalize this notion further, observe that the empirical measure 
 
 
 
  maps measurable functions

 
  to their empirical mean,



In particular, the empirical measure of A is simply the empirical mean of the indicator function, Pn(A) = Pn IA.
For a fixed measurable function 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a random variable with mean 
 
 
 
  and variance 
 
 
 
 .
By the strong law of large numbers, Pn(A) converges to P(A) almost surely for fixed A. Similarly 
 
 
 
  converges to 
 
 
 
  almost surely for a fixed measurable function 
 
 
 
 . The problem of uniform convergence of Pn to P was open until Vapnik and Chervonenkis solved it in 1968.1
If the class 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ) is Glivenko–Cantelli with respect to P then ''Pn converges to P uniformly over 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ). In other words, with probability 1 we have






Empirical distribution function
The empirical distribution function provides an example of empirical measures. For real-valued iid random variables 
 
 
 
  it is given by



In this case, empirical measures are indexed by a class 
 
 
 
  It has been shown that 
 
 
 
  is a uniform Glivenko–Cantelli class, in particular,



with probability 1.
See also

Poisson random measure

References
Further reading







"
Category:Probability theory Category:Measures (measure theory) Category:Empirical process








