


Backward Euler method




Backward Euler method

In numerical analysis and scientific computing, the backward Euler method (or implicit Euler method) is one of the most basic numerical methods for the solution of ordinary differential equations. It is similar to the (standard) Euler method, but differs in that it is an implicit method. The backward Euler method has order one and is A-stable.
Description
Consider the ordinary differential equation


 
  with initial value 
 
 
 
  Here the function 
 
 
 
  and the initial data 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are known; the function 
 
 
 
  depends on the real variable 
 
 
 
  and is unknown. A numerical method produces a sequence 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  approximates 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is called the step size.
The backward Euler method computes the approximations using


1 This differs from the (forward) Euler method in that the latter uses 
 
 
 
  in place of 
 
 
 
 .
The backward Euler method is an implicit method: the new approximation 
 
 
 
  appears on both sides of the equation, and thus the method needs to solve an algebraic equation for the unknown 
 
 
 
 . Sometimes, this can be done by fixed-point iteration:


 
  If this sequence converges (within a given tolerance), then the method takes its limit as the new approximation 
 
 
 
 . 2
Alternatively, one can use (some modification of) the Newton–Raphson method to solve the algebraic equation.
Derivation
Integrating the differential equation 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  yields


 
  Now approximate the integral on the right by the right-hand rectangle method (with one rectangle):


 
  Finally, use that 
 
 
 
  is supposed to approximate 
 
 
 
  and the formula for the backward Euler method follows.3
The same reasoning leads to the (standard) Euler method if the left-hand rectangle rule is used instead of the right-hand one.
Analysis
 The backward Euler method has order one. This means that the local truncation error (defined as the error made in one step) is 
 
 
 
 , using the big O notation. The error at a specific time 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 .
The region of absolute stability for the backward Euler method is the complement in the complex plane of the disk with radius 1 centered at 1, depicted in the figure.4 This includes the whole left half of the complex plane, so the backward Euler method is A-stable, making it suitable for the solution of stiff equations.5 In fact, the backward Euler method is even L-stable.
Extensions and modifications
The backward Euler method is a variant of the (forward) Euler method. Other variants are the semi-implicit Euler method and the exponential Euler method.
The backward Euler method can be seen as a Runge–Kutta method with one stage, described by the Butcher tableau:



The backward Euler method can also be seen as a linear multistep method with one step. It is the first method of the family of Adams–Moulton methods, and also of the family of backward differentiation formulas.
Notes
References


.

"
Category:Numerical differential equations Category:Runge–Kutta methods












