


Godunov's theorem




Godunov's theorem

In numerical analysis and computational fluid dynamics, Godunov's theorem — also known as Godunov's order barrier theorem — is a mathematical theorem important in the development of the theory of high resolution schemes for the numerical solution of partial differential equations.
The theorem states that:

Linear numerical schemes for solving partial differential equations (PDE's), having the property of not generating new extrema (monotone scheme), can be at most first-order accurate.


Professor Sergei K. Godunov originally proved the theorem as a Ph.D. student at Moscow State University. It is his most influential work in the area of applied and numerical mathematics and has had a major impact on science and engineering, particularly in the development of methods used in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and other computational fields. One of his major contributions was to prove the theorem (Godunov, 1954; Godunov, 1959), that bears his name.
The theorem
We generally follow Wesseling (2001).
Aside
Assume a continuum problem described by a PDE is to be computed using a numerical scheme based upon a uniform computational grid and a one-step, constant step-size, M grid point, integration algorithm, either implicit or explicit. Then if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , such a scheme can be described by



In other words, the solution 
 
 
 
  at time 
 
 
 
  and location 
 
 
 
  is a linear function of the solution at the previous time step 
 
 
 
 . We assume that 
 
 
 
  determines 
 
 
 
  uniquely. Now, since the above equation represents a linear relationship between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we can perform a linear transformation to obtain the following equivalent form,



Theorem 1: Monotonicity preserving
The above scheme of equation (2) is monotonicity preserving if and only if



Proof - Godunov (1959)
Case 1: (sufficient condition)
Assume (3) applies and that 
 
 
 
  is monotonically increasing with 
 
 
 
 .
Then, because 
 
 
 
  it therefore follows that 
 
 
 
  because



This means that monotonicity is preserved for this case.
Case 2: (necessary condition)
We prove the necessary condition by contradiction. Assume that 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
  and choose the following monotonically increasing 
 
 
 
 ,



Then from equation (2) we get



Now choose 
 
 
 
 , to give



which implies that 
 
 
 
  is NOT increasing, and we have a contradiction. Thus, monotonicity is NOT preserved for 
 
 
 
 , which completes the proof.
Theorem 2: Godunov’s Order Barrier Theorem
Linear one-step second-order accurate numerical schemes for the convection equation



cannot be monotonicity preserving unless



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the signed Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy condition (CFL) number.
Proof - Godunov (1959)
Assume a numerical scheme of the form described by equation (2) and choose



The exact solution is



If we assume the scheme to be at least second-order accurate, it should produce the following solution exactly



Substituting into equation (2) gives:



Suppose that the scheme IS monotonicity preserving, then according to the theorem 1 above, 
 
 
 
 
 .
Now, it is clear from equation (15) that



Assume 
 
 
 
  and choose 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  . This implies that 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  .
It therefore follows that,



which contradicts equation (16) and completes the proof.
The exceptional situation whereby 
 
 
 
  is only of theoretical interest, since this cannot be realised with variable coefficients. Also, integer CFL numbers greater than unity would not be feasible for practical problems.
See also

Finite volume method
Flux limiter
Total variation diminishing

References

Godunov, Sergei K. (1954), Ph.D. Dissertation: Different Methods for Shock Waves, Moscow State University.
Godunov, Sergei K. (1959), A Difference Scheme for Numerical Solution of Discontinuous Solution of Hydrodynamic Equations, Math. Sbornik, 47, 271-306, translated US Joint Publ. Res. Service, JPRS 7226, 1969.
'''Wesseling, Pieter ''' (2001), Principles of Computational Fluid Dynamics, Springer-Verlag.

Further reading

Hirsch, C. (1990), Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows, vol 2, Wiley.
Laney, Culbert B. (1998), Computational Gas Dynamics, Cambridge University Press.
Toro, E. F. (1999), Riemann Solvers and Numerical Methods for Fluid Dynamics, Springer-Verlag.
Tannehill, John C., et al., (1997), Computational Fluid mechanics and Heat Transfer, 2nd Ed., Taylor and Francis.

"
Category:Numerical differential equations Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Computational fluid dynamics


