


Total variation diminishing




Total variation diminishing

In numerical methods, total variation diminishing (TVD) is a property of certain discretization schemes used to solve hyperbolic partial differential equations. The most notable application of this method is in computational fluid dynamics. The concept of TVD was introduced by Ami Harten.1
Model equation
In systems described by partial differential equations, such as the following hyperbolic advection equation,



the total variation (TV) is given by,



and the total variation for the discrete case is,



A numerical method is said to be total variation diminishing (TVD) if,



Characteristics
A numerical scheme is said to be monotonicity preserving if the following properties are maintained:

If 
 
 
 
  is monotonically increasing (or decreasing) in space, then so is 
 
 
 
 .

proved the following properties for a numerical scheme,

A monotone scheme is TVD, and


A TVD scheme is monotonicity preserving.

Application in CFD
In Computational Fluid Dynamics, TVD scheme is employed to capture sharper shock predictions without any misleading oscillations when variation of field variable “Ø” is discontinuous. To capture the variation fine grids (∆x = very small) are needed and the computation becomes heavy and therefore uneconomic. The use of coarse grids with central difference scheme, upwind scheme, hybrid difference scheme, and power law scheme gives false shock predictions. TVD scheme enables sharper shock predictions on coarse grids saving computation time and as the scheme preserves monotonicity there are no spurious oscillations in the solution.
Discretisation
Consider the steady state one-dimensional convection diffusion equation,



Where, 
 
 
 
  is the density, 
 
 
 
  is the velocity vector, 
 
 
 
  is the property being transported, 
 
 
 
  is the coefficient of diffusion and 
 
 
 
  is the source term responsible for generation of the property 
 
 

Making the flux balance of this property about a control volume we get,




Here 
 
 
 
  is the normal to the surface of control volume.
Ignoring the source term, the equation further reduces to:



(Figure)
A picture showing the control volume with velocities at the faces,nodes and the distance between them, where 'P' is the node at the center.

Assuming


 
  and



The equation reduces to



Say,






From the figure:






The equation becomes, 
 
 

Also the continuity equation has to be satisfied,



Assuming diffusivity is a homogeneous property and equal grid spacing we can say



we get 
 
 
 
  The equation further reduces to 
 
 
 
  This can be written as 
 
 
 
 , where P is the Péclet number.



TVD scheme
Total variation diminishing scheme23 makes an assumption for the values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to be substituted in the discretized equation as follows:






Where 
 
 
 
  is the Peclet number and 
 
 
 
  is the weighing function to be determined from,



where U refers to upstream, UU refers to upstream of U and D refers to downstream.
Note that 
 
 
 
  is the weighing function when the flow is in positive direction i.e., from left to right and 
 
 
 
  is the weighing function when the flow is in the negative direction from right to left. So,



If the flow is in positive direction then, peclet number 
 
 
 
  is positive and the term 
 
 
 
 , so the function 
 
 
 
  won’t play any role in the assumption of Ør and Øl. Likewise when the flow is in negative direction, 
 
 
 
  is negative and the term 
 
 
 
 , so the function 
 
 
 
  won’t play any role in the assumption of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
It therefore takes into account the values of property depending on the direction of flow and using the weighted functions tries to achieve monotonicity in the solution thereby producing results with no spurious shocks.
Limitations
Monotone schemes are attractive for solving engineering and scientific problems because they do not produce non-physical solutions. Godunov's theorem proves that linear schemes which preserve monotonicity are, at most, only first order accurate. Higher order linear schemes, although more accurate for smooth solutions, are not TVD and tend to introduce spurious oscillations (wiggles) where discontinuities or shocks arise. To overcome these drawbacks, various high-resolution, non-linear techniques have been developed, often using flux/slope limiters.
See also

Flux limiters
Godunov's theorem
High-resolution scheme
MUSCL scheme
Sergei K. Godunov
Total variation

References
Further reading

Hirsch, C. (1990), Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows, Vol 2, Wiley.
Laney, C. B. (1998), Computational Gas Dynamics, Cambridge University Press.
Toro, E. F. (1999), Riemann Solvers and Numerical Methods for Fluid Dynamics, Springer-Verlag.
Tannehill, J. C., Anderson, D. A., and Pletcher, R. H. (1997), Computational Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer, 2nd Ed., Taylor & Francis.
Wesseling, P. (2001), Principles of Computational Fluid Dynamics, Springer-Verlag.
Anil W. Date Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University Press.

"
Category:Numerical differential equations Category:Computational fluid dynamics



↩
↩
↩




