


Displacement operator




Displacement operator

The displacement operator for one mode in quantum optics is the shift operator


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the amount of displacement in optical phase space, 
 
 
 
  is the complex conjugate of that displacement, and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the lowering and raising operators, respectively. The name of this operator is derived from its ability to displace a localized state in phase space by a magnitude 
 
 
 
 . It may also act on the vacuum state by displacing it into a coherent state. Specifically, 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a coherent state, which is the eigenstates of the annihilation (lowering) operator.
Properties
The displacement operator is a unitary operator, and therefore obeys 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the identity operator. Since 
 
 
 
 , the hermitian conjugate of the displacement operator can also be interpreted as a displacement of opposite magnitude (
 
 
 
 ). The effect of applying this operator in a similarity transformation of the ladder operators results in their displacement.






The product of two displacement operators is another displacement operator, apart from a phase factor, has the total displacement as the sum of the two individual displacements. This can be seen by utilizing the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula.



which shows us that:



When acting on an eigenket, the phase factor 
 
 
 
  appears in each term of the resulting state, which makes it physically irrelevant.1
Alternative expressions
Two alternative ways to express the displacement operator are:






Multimode displacement
The displacement operator can also be generalized to multimode displacement. A multimode creation operator can be defined as


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
  is the wave vector and its magnitude is related to the frequency 
 
 
 
  according to 
 
 
 
 . Using this definition, we can write the multimode displacement operator as


 
 ,
and define the multimode coherent state as


 
 .
References


Notes
See also

Optical Phase Space

"
Category:Quantum optics



Christopher Gerry and Peter Knight: Introductory Quantum Optics. Cambridge (England): Cambridge UP, 2005.




