


Fidelity of quantum states




Fidelity of quantum states

In quantum information theory, fidelity is a measure of the "closeness" of two quantum states. It is not a metric on the space of density matrices, but it can be used to define the Bures metric on this space.
Motivation
Given two random variables X, Y with values (1...n) and probabilities p = (p1...pn) and q = (q1...qn). The fidelity of X and Y is defined to be the quantity


 
 .
The fidelity deals with the marginal distribution of the random variables. It says nothing about the joint distribution of those variables. In other words, the fidelity F(X,Y) is the inner product of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  viewed as vectors in Euclidean space. Notice that F(X,Y) = 1 if and only if p = q. In general, 
 
 
 
 . This measure is known as the Bhattacharyya coefficient.
Given a classical measure of the distinguishability of two probability distributions, one can motivate a measure of distinguishability of two quantum states as follows. If an experimenter is attempting to determine whether a quantum state is either of two possibilities 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , the most general possible measurement he can make on the state is a POVM, which is described by a set of Hermitian positive semidefinite operators

 
 . If the state given to the experimenter is 
 
 
 
 , he will witness outcome 
 
 
 
  with probability 
 
 
 
 , and likewise with probability 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . His ability to distinguish between the quantum states 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is then equivalent to his ability to distinguish between the classical probability distributions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Naturally, the experimenter will choose the best POVM he can find, so this motivates defining the quantum fidelity as the Bhattacharyya coefficient when extremized over all possible POVMs 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .




 
 .
 



It was shown by Fuchs and Caves that this manifestly symmetric definition is equivalent to the simple asymmetric formula given in the next section.1
Definition
Given two density matrices ρ and σ, the fidelity is defined by



By M½ of a positive semidefinite matrix M, we mean its unique positive square root given by the spectral theorem. The Euclidean inner product from the classical definition is replaced by the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product. When the states are classical, i.e. when ρ and σ commute, the definition coincides with that for probability distributions.
An equivalent definition is given by


 
  where the norm is the trace norm (sum of the singular values). This definition has the advantage that it clearly shows that the fidelity is symmetric in its two arguments.
Notice by definition F is non-negative, and F(ρ,ρ) = 1. In the following section it will be shown that it can be no larger than 1.
In the original 1994 paper of Jozsa the name 'fidelity' was used for the quantity 
 
 
 
  and this convention is often used in the literature. According to this convention 'fidelity' has a meaning of probability.
Simple examples
Pure states
Suppose that one of the states is pure
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  and the fidelity is



If the other state is also pure, 
 
 
 
 , then the fidelity is



This is sometimes called the overlap between two states. If, say, 
 
 
 
  is an eigenstate of an observable, and the system is prepared in 
 
 
 
 , then F(ρ, σ)2 is the probability of the system being in state 
 
 
 
  after the measurement.
Commuting states
Let ρ and σ be two density matrices that commute. Therefore they can be simultaneously diagonalized by unitary matrices, and we can write


 
  and 
 
 

for some orthonormal basis 
 
 
 
 . Direct calculation shows the fidelity is



This shows that, heuristically, fidelity of quantum states is a genuine extension of the notion from probability theory.
Some properties
Unitary invariance
Direct calculation shows that the fidelity is preserved by unitary evolution, i.e.



for any unitary operator U.
Uhlmann's theorem
We saw that for two pure states, their fidelity coincides with the overlap. Uhlmann's theorem generalizes this statement to mixed states, in terms of their purifications:
Theorem Let ρ and σ be density matrices acting on Cn. Let ρ½ be the unique positive square root of ρ and



be a purification of ρ (therefore 
 
 
 
 
  is an orthonormal basis), then the following equality holds:



where 
 
 
 
  is a purification of σ. Therefore, in general, the fidelity is the maximum overlap between purifications.
Proof: A simple proof can be sketched as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the vector



and σ½ be the unique positive square root of σ. We see that, due to the unitary freedom in square root factorizations and choosing orthonormal bases, an arbitrary purification of σ is of the form



where Vi's are unitary operators. Now we directly calculate



But in general, for any square matrix A and unitary U, it is true that |Tr(AU)| ≤ Tr ((A*A)½). Furthermore, equality is achieved if U* is the unitary operator in the polar decomposition of A. From this follows directly Uhlmann's theorem.
Consequences
Some immediate consequences of Uhlmann's theorem are

Fidelity is symmetric in its arguments, i.e. F (ρ,σ) = F (σ,ρ). Notice this is not obvious from the definition.
F (ρ,σ) lies in [0,1], by the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality.
F (ρ,σ) = 1 if and only if ρ = σ, since Ψρ = Ψσ implies ρ = σ.

So we can see that fidelity behaves almost like a metric. This can be formalised and made useful by defining


 
  As the angle between the states 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . It follows from the above properties that 
 
 
 
  is non-negative, symmetric in its inputs, and is equal to zero if and only if 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, it can be proved that it obeys the triangle inequality,2 so this angle is a metric on the state space: the Fubini–Study metric.3
Relationship to trace distance
We can define the trace distance between two matrices A and B in terms of the trace norm by



When A and B are both density operators, this is a quantum generalization of the statistical distance. This is relevant because the trace distance provides upper and lower bounds on the fidelity as quantified by the Fuchs–van de Graaf inequalities,4



Often the trace distance is easier to calculate or bound than the fidelity, so these relationships are quite useful. In the case that at least one of the states is a pure state Ψ, the lower bound can be tightened.



References



A. Uhlmann "The "Transition Probability" in the State Space of a *-Algebra". Rep. Math. Phys. 9 (1976) 273–279. PDF
R. Jozsa, "Fidelity for mixed quantum states", Journal of Modern Optics, 1994, vol. 41, 2315–2323.
J. A. Miszczak, Z. Puchała, P. Horodecki, A. Uhlmann, K. Życzkowski, arXiv:0805.2037 "Sub- and super-fidelity as bounds for quantum fidelity", Quantum Information & Computation, Vol.9 No.1&2 (2009)

"
Category:Quantum information science



C. A. Fuchs, C. M. Caves: "Ensemble-Dependent Bounds for Accessible Information in Quantum Mechanics", Physical Review Letters 73, 3047(1994)
M. Nielsen, I. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge University Press, 2000, 409–416
K. Życzkowski, I. Bengtsson, Geometry of Quantum States, Cambridge University Press, 2008, 131
C. A. Fuchs and J. van de Graaf, "Cryptographic Distinguishability Measures for Quantum Mechanical States", IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 45, 1216 (1999). arXiv:quant-ph/9712042




