


Virtual screening




Virtual screening

Virtual screening (VS) is a computational technique used in drug discovery to search libraries of small molecules in order to identify those structures which are most likely to bind to a drug target, typically a protein receptor or enzyme.12
Virtual screening has been defined as the "automatically evaluating very large libraries of compounds" using computer programs.3 As this definition suggests, VS has largely been a numbers game focusing on how the enormous chemical space of over 1060 conceivable compounds4 can be filtered to a manageable number that can be synthesized, purchased, and tested. Although searching the entire chemical universe may be a theoretically interesting problem, more practical VS scenarios focus on designing and optimizing targeted combinatorial libraries and enriching libraries of available compounds from in-house compound repositories or vendor offerings. As the accuracy of the method has increased, virtual screening has become an integral part of the drug discovery process.5
Methods
There are two broad categories of screening techniques: ligand-based and structure-based.6
Ligand-based
Given a set of structurally diverse ligands that binds to a receptor, a model of the receptor can be built by exploiting the collective information contained in such set of ligands. These are known as pharmacophore models. A candidate ligand can then be compared to the pharmacophore model to determine whether it is compatible with it and therefore likely to bind.7
A different strategy is to develop logic-based rules describing features of substructures and chemical properties related to activity using support vector inductive logic programming.8 The logic-based features provide insights into activity which can be understood by medicinal chemists. Support vector machine integrate the features to yield a quantitative QSAR, which is then used to screen a database of molecules. This approach is well suited to scaffold hopping to identify novel active molecules and is implemented in the package INDDEx.
Another approach to ligand-based virtual screening is to use 2D chemical similarity analysis methods9 to scan a database of molecules against one or more active ligand structure.
A popular approach to ligand-based virtual screening is based on searching molecules with shape similar to that of known actives, as such molecules will fit the target's binding site and hence will be likely to bind the target. There are a number of prospective applications of this class of techniques in the literature.1011
Ligand-based virtual screening methods have been extensively compared on the large ChEMBL database in several machine learning challenges, where Deep Learning emerged as the best performing technique.1213141516
Structure-based
Structure-based virtual screening involves docking of candidate ligands into a protein target followed by applying a scoring function to estimate the likelihood that the ligand will bind to the protein with high affinity.1718
Computing Infrastructure
The computation of pair-wise interactions between atoms, which is a prerequisite for the operation of many virtual screening programs, is of 
 
 
 
  computational complexity, where N is the number of atoms in the system. Because of the quadratic scaling with respect to the number of atoms, the computing infrastructure may vary from a laptop computer for a ligand-based method to a mainframe for a structure-based method.
Ligand-based
Ligand-based methods typically require a fraction of a second for a single structure comparison operation. A single CPU is enough to perform a large screening within hours. However, several comparisons can be made in parallel in order to expedite the processing of a large database of compounds.
Structure-based
The size of the task requires a parallel computing infrastructure, such as a cluster of Linux systems, running a batch queue processor to handle the work, such as Sun Grid Engine or Torque PBS.
A means of handling the input from large compound libraries is needed. This requires a form of compound database that can be queried by the parallel cluster, delivering compounds in parallel to the various compute nodes. Commercial database engines may be too ponderous, and a high speed indexing engine, such as Berkeley DB, may be a better choice. Furthermore, it may not be efficient to run one comparison per job, because the ramp up time of the cluster nodes could easily outstrip the amount of useful work. To work around this, it is necessary to process batches of compounds in each cluster job, aggregating the results into some kind of log file. A secondary process, to mine the log files and extract high scoring candidates, can then be run after the whole experiment has been run.
Accuracy
The aim of virtual screening is to identify molecules of novel chemical structure that bind to the macromolecular target of interest. Thus, success of a virtual screen is defined in terms of finding interesting new scaffolds rather than the total number of hits. Interpretations of virtual screening accuracy should therefore be considered with caution. Low hit rates of interesting scaffolds are clearly preferable over high hit rates of already known scaffolds.
Most tests of virtual screening studies in the literature are retrospective. In these studies, the performance of a VS technique is measured by its ability to retrieve a small set of previously known molecules with affinity to the target of interest (active molecules or just actives) from a library containing a much higher proportion of assumed inactives or decoys. By contrast, in prospective applications of virtual screening, the resulting hits are subjected to experimental confirmation (e.g., IC50 measurements). There is consensus that retrospective benchmarks are not good predictors of prospective performance and consequently only prospective studies constitute conclusive proof of the suitability of a technique for a particular target.19202122
See also

Grid computing
High-throughput screening
Drug discovery
Docking (molecular)
Scoring functions
ZINC database

References
Further reading









External links

MolSoft ICM — ligand and structure-based virtual screening
Glide — ligand-receptor docking and virtual screening software
INDDEx — ligand-based hit discovery for scaffold hopping using SVILP machine learning
ZINC — a free database of commercially-available compounds for virtual screening.
Virtual Screening Methods
mcule — Easy-to-use, online virtual screening.
Free service to screen for GPCR ligands, ion channel blockers and kinase inhibitors
Brutus — a similarity analysis tool for ligand-based virtual screening.
NovaMechanics Cheminformatics Research Combined structure & ligand based chemistry driven virtual screening.
VLS3D - List of over 2000 databases, online and standalone in silico tools collected over a decade by Dr. B. Villoutreix, Inserm, France.

"
Category:Bioinformatics Category:Drug discovery Category:Cheminformatics Category:Alternatives to animal testing














"Announcement of the winners of the Merck Molecular Activity Challenge" https://www.kaggle.com/c/MerckActivity/details/winners.
Dahl, G. E.; Jaitly, N; & Salakhutdinov, R. (2014) "Multi-task Neural Networks for QSAR Predictions," ArXiv, 2014.
"Toxicology in the 21st century Data Challenge" https://tripod.nih.gov/tox21/challenge/leaderboard.jsp
"NCATS Announces Tox21 Data Challenge Winners" http://www.ncats.nih.gov/news-and-events/features/tox21-challenge-winners.html
Unterthiner, T.; Mayr, A.; Klambauer, G.; Steijaert, M.; Ceulemans, H.; Wegner, J. K.; & Hochreiter, S. (2014) "Deep Learning as an Opportunity in Virtual Screening". Workshop on Deep Learning and Representation Learning (NIPS2014).










