


Feedback linearization




Feedback linearization

(Figure)
Block diagram illustrating the feedback linearization of a nonlinear system

Feedback linearization is a common approach used in controlling nonlinear systems. The approach involves coming up with a transformation of the nonlinear system into an equivalent linear system through a change of variables and a suitable control input. Feedback linearization may be applied to nonlinear systems of the form



where 
 
 
 
  is the state vector, 
 
 
 
  is the vector of inputs, and 
 
 
 
  is the vector of outputs. The goal is to develop a control input


 
  that renders a linear input–output map between the new input 
 
 
 
  and the output. An outer-loop control strategy for the resulting linear control system can then be applied.
Feedback Linearization of SISO Systems
Here, we consider the case of feedback linearization of a single-input single-output (SISO) system. Similar results can be extended to multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems. In this case, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . We wish to find a coordinate transformation 
 
 
 
  that transforms our system (1) into the so-called normal form which will reveal a feedback law of the form


 
  that will render a linear input–output map from the new input 
 
 
 
  to the output 
 
 
 
 . To ensure that the transformed system is an equivalent representation of the original system, the transformation must be a diffeomorphism. That is, the transformation must not only be invertible (i.e., bijective), but both the transformation and its inverse must be smooth so that differentiability in the original coordinate system is preserved in the new coordinate system. In practice, the transformation can be only locally diffeomorphic, but the linearization results only hold in this smaller region.
We require several tools before we can solve this problem.
Lie derivative
The goal of feedback linearization is to produce a transformed system whose states are the output 
 
 
 
  and its first 
 
 
 
  derivatives. To understand the structure of this target system, we use the Lie derivative. Consider the time derivative of (2), which we can compute using the chain rule,



Now we can define the Lie derivative of 
 
 
 
  along 
 
 
 
  as,



and similarly, the Lie derivative of 
 
 
 
  along 
 
 
 
  as,



With this new notation, we may express 
 
 
 
  as,



Note that the notation of Lie derivatives is convenient when we take multiple derivatives with respect to either the same vector field, or a different one. For example,



and



Relative degree
In our feedback linearized system made up of a state vector of the output 
 
 
 
  and its first 
 
 
 
  derivatives, we must understand how the input 
 
 
 
  enters the system. To do this, we introduce the notion of relative degree. Our system given by (1) and (2) is said to have relative degree 
 
 
 
  at a point 
 
 
 
  if,


 
  in a neighbourhood of 
 
 
 
  and all 
 
 




Considering this definition of relative degree in light of the expression of the time derivative of the output 
 
 
 
 , we can consider the relative degree of our system (1) and (2) to be the number of times we have to differentiate the output 
 
 
 
  before the input 
 
 
 
  appears explicitly. In an LTI system, the relative degree is the difference between the degree of the transfer function's denominator polynomial (i.e., number of poles) and the degree of its numerator polynomial (i.e., number of zeros).
Linearization by feedback
For the discussion that follows, we will assume that the relative degree of the system is 
 
 
 
 . In this case, after differentiating the output 
 
 
 
  times we have,



where the notation 
 
 
 
  indicates the 
 
 
 
 th derivative of 
 
 
 
 . Because we assumed the relative degree of the system is 
 
 
 
 , the Lie derivatives of the form 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  are all zero. That is, the input 
 
 
 
  has no direct contribution to any of the first 
 
 
 
 th derivatives.
The coordinate transformation 
 
 
 
  that puts the system into normal form comes from the first 
 
 
 
  derivatives. In particular,



transforms trajectories from the original 
 
 
 
  coordinate system into the new 
 
 
 
  coordinate system. So long as this transformation is a diffeomorphism, smooth trajectories in the original coordinate system will have unique counterparts in the 
 
 
 
  coordinate system that are also smooth. Those 
 
 
 
  trajectories will be described by the new system,



Hence, the feedback control law



renders a linear input–output map from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 . The resulting linearized system



is a cascade of 
 
 
 
  integrators, and an outer-loop control 
 
 
 
  may be chosen using standard linear system methodology. In particular, a state-feedback control law of



where the state vector 
 
 
 
  is the output 
 
 
 
  and its first 
 
 
 
  derivatives, results in the LTI system



with,



So, with the appropriate choice of 
 
 
 
 , we can arbitrarily place the closed-loop poles of the linearized system.
Unstable zero dynamics
Feedback linearization can be accomplished with systems that have relative degree less than 
 
 
 
 . However, the normal form of the system will include zero dynamics (i.e., states that are not observable from the output of the system) that may be unstable. In practice, unstable dynamics may have deleterious effects on the system (e.g., it may be dangerous for internal states of the system to grow unbounded). These unobservable states may be controllable or at least stable, and so measures can be taken to ensure these states do not cause problems in practice.
See also

Nonlinear control

Further reading

A. Isidori, Nonlinear Control Systems, third edition, Springer Verlag, London, 1995.
H. K. Khalil, Nonlinear Systems, third edition, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2002.
M. Vidyasagar, Nonlinear Systems Analysis second edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1993.
B. Friedland, Advanced Control System Design Facsimile edition, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle river, New Jersey, 1996.

External links

ECE 758: Modeling and Nonlinear Control of a Single-link Flexible Joint Manipulator – Gives explanation and an application of feedback linearization.
ECE 758: Ball-in-Tube Linearization Example – Trivial application of linearization for a system already in normal form (i.e., no coordinate transformation necessary).
Wolfram language functions to do feedback linearization, compute relative orders, and determine zero dynamics.

"
Category:Control theory Category:Nonlinear control


