


Arc (projective geometry)




Arc (projective geometry)

(Figure)
A 4-arc (red points) in the projective plane of order 2 (Fano plane).

A (simple) arc in finite projective geometry is a set of points which satisfies, in an intuitive way, a feature of curved figures in continuous geometries. Loosely speaking, they are sets of points that are far from "line-like" in a plane or far from "plane-like" in a three-dimensional space. In this finite setting it is typical to include the number of points in the set in the name, so these simple arcs are called ''k''-arcs. An important generalization of the k-arc concept, also referred to as arcs in the literature, are the (k, d)-arcs.
k-arcs in a projective plane
In a finite projective plane π (not necessarily Desarguesian) a set A of k (k ≥ 3) points such that no three points of A are collinear (on a line) is called a ''k''-arc. If the plane π has order q then k ≤ q + 2, however the maximum value of k can only be achieved if q is even.1 In a plane of order q, a (q + 1)-arc is called an oval and, if q is even, a (q + 2)-arc is called a hyperoval.
A k-arc which can not be extended to a larger arc is called a complete arc. In the Desarguesian projective planes, PG(2,q), no q-arc is complete, so they may all be extended to ovals.2
k-arcs in a projective space
In the finite projective space PG(n, q) with n ≥ 3, a set A of k ≥ n + 1 points such that no n + 1 points lie in a common hyperplane is called a (spacial) ''k''-arc. This definition generalizes the definition of a k-arc in a plane (where n = 2).
(k, d)-arcs in a projective plane
A (k, d)-arc (k, d > 1) in a finite projective plane π (not necessarily Desarguesian) is a set, A of k points of 
 
 
 
  such that each line intersects A in at most d points, and there is at least one line that does intersect A in d points. A (k, 2)-arc is a k-arc and may be referred to as simply an arc if the size is not a concern.
The number of points k of a (k, d)-arc A in a projective plane of order q is at most qd + d − q. When equality occurs, one calls A a maximal arc.
Hyperovals are maximal arcs. Complete arcs need not be maximal arcs.
See also
Oval (projective plane)
Normal rational curve
Notes
References






External links



"
Category:Projective geometry Category:Incidence geometry



↩
↩




