


Zsigmondy's theorem




Zsigmondy's theorem

In number theory, Zsigmondy's theorem, named after Karl Zsigmondy, states that if  are coprime integers, then for any integer n ≥ 1, there is a prime number p (called a primitive prime divisor) that divides  and does not divide  for any positive integer , with the following exceptions:


, and ;



, , and ; or



is a power of two, and .

This generalizes Bang's theorem, which states that if  and n is not equal to 6, then  has a prime divisor not dividing any  with .
Similarly,  has at least one primitive prime divisor with the exception .
Zsigmondy's theorem is often useful, especially in group theory, where it is used to prove that various groups have distinct orders except when they are known to be the same.
History
The theorem was discovered by Zsigmondy working in Vienna from 1894 until 1925.
Generalizations
Let 
 
 
 
  be a sequence of nonzero integers. The Zsigmondy set associated to the sequence is the set



i.e., the set of indices 
 
 
 
  such that every prime dividing 
 
 
 
  also divides some 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
 . Thus Zsigmondy's theorem implies that 
 
 
 
 , and Carmichael's theorem says that the Zsigmondy set of the Fibonacci sequence is 
 
 
 
 , and that of the Pell sequence is 
 
 
 
 . In 2001 Bilu, Hanrot, and Voutier1 proved that in general, if 
 
 
 
  is a Lucas sequence or a Lehmer sequence, then 
 
 
 
 . Lucas and Lehmer sequences are examples of divisibility sequences.
It is also known that if 
 
 
 
  is an elliptic divisibility sequence, then its Zsigmondy set 
 
 
 
  is finite.2 However, the result is ineffective in the sense that the proof does give an explicit upper bound for the largest element in 
 
 
 
 , although it is possible to give an effective upper bound for the number of elements in 
 
 
 
 .3
See also

Carmichael's theorem

References







External links



"
Category:Theorems in number theory



Y. Bilu, G. Hanrot, P.M. Voutier, Existence of primitive divisors of Lucas and Lehmer numbers, J. Reine Angew. Math. 539 (2001), 75-122
J.H. Silverman, Wieferich's criterion and the abc-conjecture, J. Number Theory 30 (1988), 226-237
P. Ingram, J.H. Silverman, Uniform estimates for primitive divisors in elliptic divisibility sequences, Number theory, Analysis and Geometry, Springer-Verlag, 2010, 233-263.




