


Landau's problems




Landau's problems

At the 1912 International Congress of Mathematicians, Edmund Landau listed four basic problems about primes. These problems were characterised in his speech as "unattackable at the present state of science" and are now known as Landau's problems. They are as follows:

Goldbach's conjecture: Can every even integer greater than 2 be written as the sum of two primes?
Twin prime conjecture: Are there infinitely many primes p such that p + 2 is prime?
Legendre's conjecture: Does there always exist at least one prime between consecutive perfect squares?
Are there infinitely many primes p such that p − 1 is a perfect square? In other words: Are there infinitely many primes of the form n2 + 1? .

, all four problems are unresolved.
Progress toward solutions
Goldbach's conjecture
Vinogradov's theorem proves Goldbach's weak conjecture for sufficiently large n. In 2013 Harald Helfgott proved the weak conjecture for all odd numbers greater than 5.123
Chen's theorem proves that for all sufficiently large n, 
 
 
 
  where p is prime and q is either prime or semiprime. Montgomery and Vaughan showed that the exceptional set (even numbers not expressible as the sum of two primes) was of density zero.4
Twin prime conjecture
Yitang Zhang5 showed that there are infinitely many prime pairs with gap bounded by 70 million, and this result has been improved to gaps of length 246 by a collaborative effort.6 Under the generalized Elliott–Halberstam conjecture this was improved to 6, extending earlier work by Maynard7 and Goldston, Pintz & Yıldırım.8
Chen showed that there are infinitely many primes p (later called Chen primes) such that p+2 is either a prime or a semiprime.
Legendre's conjecture
It suffices to check that each prime gap starting at p is smaller than 
 
 
 
 . A table of maximal prime gaps shows that the conjecture holds to 4×1018.9 A counterexample near 1018 would require a prime gap fifty million times the size of the average gap. Matomäki shows that there are at most 
 
 
 
  exceptional primes followed by gaps larger than 
 
 
 
 
 ; in particular,


10
A result due to Ingham shows that there is a prime between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for every large enough n.11
Near-square primes
The Friedlander–Iwaniec theorem shows that infinitely many primes are of the form 
 
 
 
 .
Iwaniec showed that there are infinitely many numbers of the form 
 
 
 
 
  with at most two prime factors.1213
Notes
External links



"
Category:Conjectures about prime numbers Category:Unsolved problems in mathematics



↩
↩
↩
↩
Yitang Zhang, Bounded gaps between primes, Annals of Mathematics 179 (2014), pp. 1121–1174 from Volume 179 (2014), Issue 3↩
D. H. J. Polymath, Variants of the Selberg sieve, and bounded intervals containing many primes. To appear, Research in the Mathematical Sciences.↩
J. Maynard, Small gaps between primes. To appear, Annals of Mathematics.↩
Daniel Alan Goldston, Yoichi Motohashi, János Pintz and Cem Yalçın Yıldırım, [http://projecteuclid.org/DPubS?service=UI&version;;=1.0&verb;=Display&handle;=euclid.pja/1146576181 Small Gaps between Primes Exist]. '' Proceedings of the Japan Academy, Series A Mathematical Sciences'' 82 4 (2006), pp. 61-65.↩
Jens Kruse Andersen, Maximal Prime Gaps.↩
.↩
↩
↩
.↩




