


Quasiconvex function




Quasiconvex function

 
In mathematics, a quasiconvex function is a real-valued function defined on an interval or on a convex subset of a real vector space such that the inverse image of any set of the form 
 
 
 
  is a convex set. Informally, along any stretch of the curve the highest point is one of the endpoints. The negative of a quasiconvex function is said to be quasiconcave.
All convex functions are also quasiconvex, but not all quasiconvex functions are convex, so quasiconvexity is a generalization of convexity. Quasiconvexity and quasiconcavity extend to functions with multiple arguments the notion of unimodality of functions with a single real argument.
Definition and properties
A function 
 
 
 
  defined on a convex subset S of a real vector space is quasiconvex if for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have



In words, if f is such that it is always true that a point directly between two other points does not give a higher value of the function than both of the other points do, then f is quasiconvex. Note that the points x and y, and the point directly between them, can be points on a line or more generally points in n-dimensional space.
(Figure)
A quasilinear function is both quasiconvex and quasiconcave.

(Figure)
The graph of a function that is both concave and quasi-convex on the nonnegative real numbers.

An alternative way (see introduction) of defining a quasi-convex function 
 
 
 
  is to require that each sub-levelset 
 
 
 
  is a convex set.
If furthermore



for all 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is strictly quasiconvex. That is, strict quasiconvexity requires that a point directly between two other points must give a lower value of the function than one of the other points does.
A quasiconcave function is a function whose negative is quasiconvex, and a strictly quasiconcave function is a function whose negative is strictly quasiconvex. Equivalently a function 
 
 
 
  is quasiconcave if



and strictly quasiconcave if



A (strictly) quasiconvex function has (strictly) convex lower contour sets, while a (strictly) quasiconcave function has (strictly) convex upper contour sets.
A function that is both quasiconvex and quasiconcave is quasilinear.
A particular case of quasi-concavity, if 
 
 
 
 , is unimodality, in which there is a locally maximal value.
Applications
Quasiconvex functions have applications in mathematical analysis, in mathematical optimization, and in game theory and economics.
Mathematical optimization
In nonlinear optimization, quasiconvex programming studies iterative methods that converge to a minimum (if one exists) for quasiconvex functions. Quasiconvex programming is a generalization of convex programming.1 Quasiconvex programming is used in the solution of "surrogate" dual problems, whose biduals provide quasiconvex closures of the primal problem, which therefore provide tighter bounds than do the convex closures provided by Lagrangian dual problems.2 In theory, quasiconvex programming and convex programming problems can be solved in reasonable amount of time, where the number of iterations grows like a polynomial in the dimension of the problem (and in the reciprocal of the approximation error tolerated);3 however, such theoretically "efficient" methods use "divergent-series" stepsize rules, which were first developed for classical subgradient methods. Classical subgradient methods using divergent-series rules are much slower than modern methods of convex minimization, such as subgradient projection methods, bundle methods of descent, and nonsmooth filter methods.
Economics and partial differential equations: Minimax theorems
In microeconomics, quasiconcave utility functions imply that consumers have convex preferences. Quasiconvex functions are important also in game theory, industrial organization, and general equilibrium theory, particularly for applications of Sion's minimax theorem. Generalizing a minimax theorem of John von Neumann, Sion's theorem is also used in the theory of partial differential equations.
Preservation of quasiconvexity
Operations preserving quasiconvexity

non-negative weighted maximum of quasiconvex functions (i.e. 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  non-negative)
composition with a non-decreasing function (i.e. 
 
 
 
  quasiconvex, 
 
 
 
  non-decreasing, then 
 
 
 
  is quasiconvex)
minimization (i.e. 
 
 
 
  quasiconvex, 
 
 
 
  convex set, then 
 
 
 
  is quasiconvex)

Operations not preserving quasiconvexity

The sum of quasiconvex functions defined on the same domain need not be quasiconvex: In other words, if 
 
 
 
  are quasiconvex, then 
 
 
 
  need not be quasiconvex.
The sum of quasiconvex functions defined on different domains (i.e. if 
 
 
 
  are quasiconvex, 
 
 
 
 ) need not be quasiconvex. Such functions are called "additively decomposed" in economics and "separable" in mathematical optimization.

Examples

Every convex function is quasiconvex.
A concave function can be quasiconvex function. For example 
 
 
 
  is concave, and it is quasiconvex.
Any monotonic function is both quasiconvex and quasiconcave. More generally, a function which decreases up to a point and increases from that point on is quasiconvex (compare unimodality).
The floor function

 
  is an example of a quasiconvex function that is neither convex nor continuous.
If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are positive convex decreasing functions, then 
 
 
 
  is quasiconvex.

See also

Convex function
Concave function
Pseudoconvexity in the sense of several complex variables (not generalized convexity)
Pseudoconvex function
Invex function

References



Avriel, M., Diewert, W.E., Schaible, S. and Zang, I., Generalized Concavity, Plenum Press, 1988.

Singer, Ivan Abstract convex analysis. Canadian Mathematical Society Series of Monographs and Advanced Texts. A Wiley-Interscience Publication. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1997. xxii+491 pp. ISBN 0-471-16015-6

External links

SION, M., "On general minimax theorems", Pacific J. Math. 8 (1958), 171-176.
Mathematical programming glossary
Concave and Quasi-Concave Functions - by Charles Wilson, NYU Department of Economics
Quasiconcavity and quasiconvexity - by Martin J. Osborne, University of Toronto Department of Economics

"
Category:Real analysis Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Types of functions Category:Convex analysis Category:Generalized convexity



: ↩
↩
 Kiwiel acknowledges that Yuri Nesterov first established that quasiconvex minimization problems can be solved efficiently.↩




