


List of formulas in Riemannian geometry




List of formulas in Riemannian geometry

This is a list of formulas encountered in Riemannian geometry.
Christoffel symbols, covariant derivative
In a smooth coordinate chart, the Christoffel symbols of the first kind are given by



and the Christoffel symbols of the second kind by



Here 
 
 
 
  is the inverse matrix to the metric tensor 
 
 
 
 . In other words,



and thus



is the dimension of the manifold.
Christoffel symbols satisfy the symmetry relations


 
  or, respectively, 
 
 
 
 ,
the second of which is equivalent to the torsion-freeness of the Levi-Civita connection.
The contracting relations on the Christoffel symbols are given by



and



where |g| is the absolute value of the determinant of the metric tensor 
 
 
 
 . These are useful when dealing with divergences and Laplacians (see below).
The covariant derivative of a vector field with components 
 
 
 
  is given by:



and similarly the covariant derivative of a 
 
 
 
 -tensor field with components 
 
 
 
  is given by:



For a 
 
 
 
 -tensor field with components 
 
 
 
  this becomes



and likewise for tensors with more indices.
The covariant derivative of a function (scalar) 
 
 
 
  is just its usual differential:



Because the Levi-Civita connection is metric-compatible, the covariant derivatives of metrics vanish,


 
  as well as the covariant derivatives of the metric's determinant (and volume element)


 
  The geodesic

 
  starting at the origin with initial speed 
 
 
 
  has Taylor expansion in the chart:



Curvature tensors
Riemann curvature tensor
If one defines the curvature operator as 
 
 
 
  and the coordinate components of the 
 
 
 
 -Riemann curvature tensor by 
 
 
 
 , then these components are given by:



Lowering indices with 
 
 
 
 
  one gets



The symmetries of the tensor are


 
  and 
 
 

That is, it is symmetric in the exchange of the first and last pair of indices, and antisymmetric in the flipping of a pair.
The cyclic permutation sum (sometimes called first Bianchi identity) is



The (second) Bianchi identity is



that is,



which amounts to a cyclic permutation sum of the last three indices, leaving the first two fixed.
Ricci and scalar curvatures
Ricci and scalar curvatures are contractions of the Riemann tensor. They simplify the Riemann tensor, but contain less information.
The Ricci curvature tensor is essentially the unique nontrivial way of contracting the Riemann tensor:



The Ricci tensor 
 
 
 
  is symmetric.
By the contracting relations on the Christoffel symbols, we have



The scalar curvature is the trace of the Ricci curvature,


 
 .
The "gradient" of the scalar curvature follows from the Bianchi identity (proof):



that is,



Einstein tensor
The Einstein tensor Gab is defined in terms of the Ricci tensor Rab and the Ricci scalar R,



where g is the metric tensor.
The Einstein tensor is symmetric, with a vanishing divergence (proof) which is due to the Bianchi identity:



Weyl tensor
The Weyl tensor is given by



where 
 
 
 
  denotes the dimension of the Riemannian manifold.
The Weyl tensor satisfies the first (algebraic) Bianchi identity:



The Weyl tensor is a symmetric product of alternating 2-forms,



just like the Riemann tensor. Moreover, taking the trace over any two indices gives zero,



The Weyl tensor vanishes (
 
 
 
 ) if and only if a manifold 
 
 
 
  of dimension 
 
 
 
 
  is locally conformally flat. In other words, 
 
 
 
  can be covered by coordinate systems in which the metric 
 
 
 
  satisfies



This is essentially because 
 
 
 
  is invariant under conformal changes.
Gradient, divergence, Laplace–Beltrami operator
The gradient of a function 
 
 
 
 
  is obtained by raising the index of the differential 
 
 
 
 , whose components are given by:



The divergence of a vector field with components 
 
 
 
  is



The Laplace–Beltrami operator acting on a function 
 
 
 
 
  is given by the divergence of the gradient:



The divergence of an antisymmetric tensor field of type 
 
 
 
  simplifies to



The Hessian of a map 
 
 
 
  is given by



Kulkarni–Nomizu product
The Kulkarni–Nomizu product is an important tool for constructing new tensors from existing tensors on a Riemannian manifold. Let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be symmetric covariant 2-tensors. In coordinates,



Then we can multiply these in a sense to get a new covariant 4-tensor, which is often denoted 
 
 
 
 . The defining formula is



Clearly, the product satisfies



In an inertial frame
An orthonormal inertial frame is a coordinate chart such that, at the origin, one has the relations 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (but these may not hold at other points in the frame). These coordinates are also called normal coordinates. In such a frame, the expression for several operators is simpler. Note that the formulae given below are valid at the origin of the frame only.



Under a conformal change
Let 
 
 
 
  be a Riemannian metric on a smooth manifold 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  a smooth real-valued function on 
 
 
 
 . Then



is also a Riemannian metric on 
 
 
 
 . We say that 
 
 
 
  is conformal to 
 
 
 
 . Evidently, conformality of metrics is an equivalence relation. Here are some formulas for conformal changes in tensors associated with the metric. (Quantities marked with a tilde will be associated with 
 
 
 
 , while those unmarked with such will be associated with 
 
 
 
 .)






Note that the difference between the Christoffel symbols of two different metrics always form the components of a tensor.
We can also write this in a coordinate-free manner:


 
 ,
(where 
 
 
 
  is the conformal map, i.e.
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are vector fields.)



Here 
 
 
 
  is the Riemannian volume element.



Here 
 
 
 
  is the Kulkarni–Nomizu product defined earlier in this article. The symbol 
 
 
 
  denotes partial derivative, while 
 
 
 
  denotes covariant derivative.



Beware that here the Laplacian 
 
 
 
  is minus the trace of the Hessian on functions,



Thus the operator 
 
 
 
  is elliptic because the metric 
 
 
 
  is Riemannian.






If the dimension 
 
 
 
 , then this simplifies to






We see that the (3,1) Weyl tensor is invariant under conformal changes.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a differential 
 
 
 
 -form. Let 
 
 
 
  be the Hodge star, and 
 
 
 
  the codifferential. Under a conformal change, these satisfy






See also

Liouville equations
List of formulas in elementary geometry

"
formulas Riemannian geometry formulas


