


Nicola Cabibbo




Nicola Cabibbo

Nicola Cabibbo (10 April 1935 – 16 August 20101) was an Italian physicist, best known for his work on the weak interaction. He was also the president of the Italian National Institute of Nuclear Physics from 1983 to 1992, and from 1993 until his death he was the president of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences.2 He was born in Rome.
Work
(Figure)
The Cabibbo angle represents the rotation of the mass eigenstate vector space formed by the mass eigenstates $\scriptstyle{| d \rangle , \ | s \rangle}$ into the weak eigenstate vector space formed by the weak eigenstates $\scriptstyle{| d^\prime \rangle , \ | s^\prime \rangle}$. The rotation angle is  13.04°}}.

Cabibbo's major work on the weak interaction originated from a need to explain two observed phenomena:

The transitions between up and down quarks, between electrons and electron neutrinos, and between muons and muon neutrinos had similar likelihood of occurring (similar amplitudes); and
The transitions with change in strangeness had amplitudes equal to one fourth of those with no change in strangeness.

Cabibbo addressed these issues, following Gell-Mann and Levy, by postulating weak universality, which involves a similarity in the weak interaction coupling strength between different generations of particles. He addressed the second issue with a mixing angle θC (now3 called the Cabibbo angle), between the down and strange quarks. Modern measurements show that  13.04°}}.
Before the discovery of the third generation of quarks, this work was extended by Makoto Kobayashi and Toshihide Maskawa to the Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa matrix. In 2008, Kobayashi and Maskawa shared one half of the Nobel Prize in Physics for their work. Some physicists had bitter feelings that the Nobel Prize committee failed to reward Gell-Mann, Levy, and possibly Cabibbo for their part.45 Asked for a reaction on the prize, Cabibbo preferred to give no comment. According to sources close to him, however, he was embittered.6
Later, Cabibbo researched applications of supercomputers to address problems in modern physics with the experiments APE 100 and APE 1000.
Cabibbo supported attempts to rehabilitate executed Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno, citing the apologies on Galileo Galilei as a possible model to correct the historical wrongs done by the Church.7
After his death in 2011, the Franklin Institute awarded him with the Benjamin Franklin Medal in Physics.8
Death
He died from respiratory problems in a Rome hospital on August 16, 2010 at the age of 75.
References
External links

Cabibbo biography from the Istituto e Museo di Storia della Scienza 


"
Category:1935 births Category:2010 deaths Category:People from Rome Category:Italian physicists Category:Italian Roman Catholics Category:Sapienza University of Rome faculty Category:Members of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences Category:Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Category:Foreign Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences Category:Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars Category:Theoretical physicists Category:J. J. Sakurai Prize for Theoretical Particle Physics recipients





Introduced by Murray Gell-Mann and Maurice Lévy, in and referenced by Cabbibo in his paper









