


Abel equation




Abel equation

The Abel equation, named after Niels Henrik Abel, is a type of functional equations which can be written in the form


 
  or, equivalently,


 
  and controls the iteration of   
 
 
 
 .
Equivalence
These equations are equivalent. Assuming that 
 
 
 
  is an invertible function, the second equation can be written as



Taking  α−1(y)}}, the equation can be written as








For a function 
 
 
 
  assumed to be known, the task is to solve the functional equation for the function , possibly satisfying additional requirements, such as  1}}.
The change of variables  Ψ(x)}}, for a real parameter 
 
 
 
 , brings Abel's equation into the celebrated Schröder's equation, 
 
 
 
  .
The further change  exp(sα(x))}} into Böttcher's equation,  F(x)s}}.
The Abel equation is a special case of (and easily generalizes to) the translation equation,1


 
  e.g., for 
 
 
 
 
 ,


 
 .     (Observe 
 
 
 
 .) 
History
Initially, the equation in the more general form 2 3 was reported. Even in the case of a single variable, the equation is non-trivial, and admits special analysis.4 56
In the case of a linear transfer function, the solution is expressible compactly. 7
Special cases
The equation of tetration is a special case of Abel's equation, with 
 
 
 
 .
In the case of an integer argument, the equation encodes a recurrent procedure, e.g.,


 
  and so on,



Fatou coordinates represent solutions of Abel's equation, describing local dynamics of discrete dynamical system near a parabolic fixed point.8
See also

Functional equation
Iterated function
Schröder's equation
Böttcher's equation
Infinite compositions of analytic functions

References


"
Category:Niels Henrik Abel Category:Functional equations



Aczél, János, (1966): Lectures on Functional Equations and Their Applications, Academic Press, reprinted by Dover Publications, ISBN 0486445232 .↩
↩
↩
Korkine, A (1882). "Sur un problème d'interpolation", Bull Sci Math & Astron 6(1) 228—242. online↩
↩
↩
↩
Dudko, Artem (2012). Dynamics of holomorphic maps: Resurgence of Fatou coordinates, and Poly-time computability of Julia sets Ph.D. Thesis↩




