


Elasticity of substitution




Elasticity of substitution
'''Elasticity of substitution''' is the [[elasticity (economics)|elasticity]] of the ratio of two inputs to a production (or utility) function with respect to the ratio of their marginal products (or utilities).{{cite book |authorlink=Knut Sydsæter |last=Sydsaeter |first=Knut |last2=Hammond |first2=Peter |title=Mathematics for Economic Ana
 lysis |location= |publisher=Prentice Hall |year=1995 |pages=561–562 |isbn= }} It measures the curvature of an isoquant and thus, the substitutability between inputs (or goods), i.e. how easy it is to substitute one input (or good) for the other.1 In the modern period, John Hicks is considered to have formally introduced this concept in 1932, however he had, by his own admission, introduced the inverse of the elasticity of substitution, or the elasticity of complementarity. The credit then, also by Hicks' own admission, should go to Joan Robinson.
Mathematical definition
Let the utility over consumption be given by 
 
 
 
 . Then the elasticity of substitution is:



where 
 
 
 
  is the marginal rate of substitution. The last equality presents 
 
 
 
 
  which is a relationship from the first order condition for a consumer utility maximization problem in Arrow-Debreu interior equilibrium. Intuitively we are looking at how a consumer's relative choices over consumption items change as their relative prices change.
Note also that 
 
 
 
 :



An equivalent characterization of the elasticity of substitution is:Given that:


 
  an equivalent way to define the elasticity of substitution is:


 
 .



In discrete-time models, the elasticity of substitution of consumption in periods 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is known as elasticity of intertemporal substitution.
Similarly, if the production function is 
 
 
 
  then the elasticity of substitution is:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the marginal rate of technical substitution.
The inverse of elasticity of substitution is elasticity of complementarity.
Example
Consider Cobb–Douglas production function

 
 .
The marginal rate of technical substitution is



It is convenient to change the notations. Denote



Rewriting this we have



Then the elasticity of substitution is



Economic interpretation
Given an original allocation/combination and a specific substitution on allocation/combination for the original one, the larger the magnitude of the elasticity of substitution (the marginal rate of substitution elasticity of the relative allocation) means the more likely to substitute. There are always 2 sides to the market; here we are talking about the receiver, since the elasticity of preference is that of the receiver.
The elasticity of substitution also governs how the relative expenditure on goods or factor inputs changes as relative prices change. Let 
 
 
 
  denote expenditure on 
 
 
 
  relative to that on 
 
 
 
 . That is:



As the relative price 
 
 
 
  changes, relative expenditure changes according to:



Thus, whether or not an increase in the relative price of 
 
 
 
 
  leads to an increase or decrease in the relative expenditure on 
 
 
 
  depends on whether the elasticity of substitution is less than or greater than one.
Intuitively, the direct effect of a rise in the relative price of 
 
 
 
  is to increase expenditure on 
 
 
 
 , since a given quantity of 
 
 
 
  is more costly. On the other hand, assuming the goods in question are not Giffen goods, a rise in the relative price of 
 
 
 
 
  leads to a fall in relative demand for 
 
 
 
 , so that the quantity of 
 
 
 
  purchased falls, which reduces expenditure on 
 
 
 
 .
Which of these effects dominates depends on the magnitude of the elasticity of substitution. When the elasticity of substitution is less than one, the first effect dominates: relative demand for 
 
 
 
  falls, but by proportionally less than the rise in its relative price, so that relative expenditure rises. In this case, the goods are gross complements.
Conversely, when the elasticity of substitution is greater than one, the second effect dominates: the reduction in relative quantity exceeds the increase in relative price, so that relative expenditure on 
 
 
 
 
  falls. In this case, the goods are gross substitutes.
Note that when the elasticity of substitution is exactly one (as in the Cobb–Douglas case), expenditure on 
 
 
 
  relative to 
 
 
 
  is independent of the relative prices.
See also

Constant elasticity of substitution
Marginal rate of technical substitution

Notes
References


First defined there.




External links

The Elasticity of Substitution, Gonçalo L. Fonseca, essay, The New School for Social Research.

"
Category:Consumer theory Category:Elasticity (economics) Category:1932 in economics



Technically speaking, curvature and elasticity are unrelated, but isoquants with different elasticities take on different shapes that might appear to differ in a general sense of curvature (see )




