


Discrete Poisson equation




Discrete Poisson equation

In mathematics, the discrete Poisson equation is the finite difference analog of the Poisson equation. In it, the discrete Laplace operator takes the place of the Laplace operator. The discrete Poisson equation is frequently used in numerical analysis as a stand-in for the continuous Poisson equation, although it is also studied in its own right as a topic in discrete mathematics.
On a two-dimensional rectangular grid
Using the finite difference numerical method to discretize the 2-dimensional Poisson equation (assuming a uniform spatial discretization, 
 
 
 
 ) on an m × n grid gives the following formula:1



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The preferred arrangement of the solution vector is to use natural ordering which, prior to removing boundary elements, would look like:



This will result in an mn × mn linear system:



where



 
  is the m × m identity matrix, and 
 
 
 
 , also m × m, is given by:


2 and 
 
 
 
  is defined by



For each 
 
 
 
  equation, the columns of 
 
 
 
  correspond to a block of 
 
 
 
  components in 
 
 
 
 :



while the columns of 
 
 
 
  to the left and right of 
 
 
 
  each correspond to other blocks of 
 
 
 
  components within 
 
 
 
 :



and



respectively.
From the above, it can be inferred that there are 
 
 
 
  block columns of 
 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . It is important to note that prescribed values of 
 
 
 
  (usually lying on the boundary) would have their corresponding elements removed from 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For the common case that all the nodes on the boundary are set, we have 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and the system would have the dimensions (m − 2)(n − 2) × (m − 2)(n − 2), where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  would have dimensions (m − 2) × (m − 2).
Example
For a 5×5 ( 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  ) grid with all the boundary nodes prescribed, the system would look like:



with



and



As can be seen, the boundary 
 
 
 
 's are brought to the right-hand-side of the equation.3 The entire system is 9 × 9 while 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are 3 × 3 and given by:



and



Methods of solution
Because 
 
 
 
  is block tridiagonal and sparse, many methods of solution have been developed to optimally solve this linear system for 
 
 
 
 . Among the methods are a generalized Thomas algorithm, cyclic reduction, successive overrelaxation, and Fourier transforms. A theoretically optimal 
 
 
 
  solution can also be computed using multigrid methods.
Applications
In computational fluid dynamics, for the solution of an incompressible flow problem, the incompressibility condition acts as a constraint for the pressure. There is no explicit form available for pressure in this case due to a strong coupling of the velocity and pressure fields. In this condition, by taking the divergence of all terms in the momentum equation, one obtains the pressure poisson equation.
For an incompressible flow this constraint is given by:



where 
 
 
 
  is the velocity in the 
 
 
 
  direction, 
 
 
 
  is velocity in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the velocity in the 
 
 
 
  direction. Taking divergence of the momentum equation and using the incompressibility constraint, the pressure poisson equation is formed given by:



where 
 
 
 
  is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid and 
 
 
 
  is the velocity vector.4
The discrete Poisson's equation arises in the theory of Markov chains. It appears as the relative value function for the dynamic programming equation in a Markov decision process, and as the control variate for application in simulation variance reduction.567
Footnotes


References

Hoffman, Joe D., '' Numerical Methods for Engineers and Scientists, 4th Ed.'', McGraw–Hill Inc., New York, 1992.
Sweet, Roland A., '' SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, Vol. 11, No. 3 '', June 1974, 506–520.


"
Category:Finite differences Category:Numerical differential equations



.↩
Golub, Gene H. and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations, 3rd Ed., The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1996, pages 177–180.↩
Cheny, Ward and David Kincaid, Numerical Mathematics and Computing 2nd Ed., Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, Pacific Grove, 1985, pages 443–448.↩
Fletcher, Clive A. J., Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics: Vol I, 2nd Ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991, page 334–339.↩
S. P. Meyn and R.L. Tweedie, 2005. Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability. Second edition to appear, Cambridge University Press, 2009.↩
S. P. Meyn, 2007. Control Techniques for Complex Networks, Cambridge University Press, 2007.↩
Asmussen, Søren, Glynn, Peter W., 2007. "Stochastic Simulation: Algorithms and Analysis". Springer. Series: Stochastic Modelling and Applied Probability, Vol. 57, 2007.↩




