


Lindley's paradox




Lindley's paradox

Lindley's paradox is a counterintuitive situation in statistics in which the Bayesian and frequentist approaches to a hypothesis testing problem give different results for certain choices of the prior distribution. The problem of the disagreement between the two approaches was discussed in Harold Jeffreys' 1939 textbook;1 it became known as Lindley's paradox after Dennis Lindley called the disagreement a paradox in a 1957 paper.2
Although referred to as a paradox, the differing results from the Bayesian and frequentist approaches can be explained as using them to answer fundamentally different questions, rather than actual disagreement between the two methods.
Description of the paradox
Consider the result 
 
 
 
  of some experiment, with two possible explanations, hypotheses 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and some prior distribution 
 
 
 
  representing uncertainty as to which hypothesis is more accurate before taking into account 
 
 
 
 .
Lindley's paradox occurs when

The result 
 
 
 
  is "significant" by a frequentist test of 
 
 
 
 , indicating sufficient evidence to reject 
 
 
 
 , say, at the 5% level, and
The posterior probability of 
 
 
 
  given 
 
 
 
  is high, indicating strong evidence that 
 
 
 
  is in better agreement with 
 
 
 
  than 
 
 
 
 .

These results can occur at the same time when 
 
 
 
  is very specific, 
 
 
 
  more diffuse, and the prior distribution does not strongly favor one or the other, as seen below.
Numerical example
We can illustrate Lindley's paradox with a numerical example. Imagine a certain city where 49,581 boys and 48,870 girls have been born over a certain time period. The observed proportion 
 
 
 
  of male births is thus 49,581/98,451 ≈ 0.5036. We assume the number of male births is a binomial variable with parameter 
 
 
 
 . We are interested in testing whether 
 
 
 
  is 0.5 or some other value. That is, our null hypothesis is 
 
 
 
  and the alternative is 
 
 
 
 .
Frequentist approach
The frequentist approach to testing 
 
 
 
  is to compute a p-value, the probability of observing a fraction of boys at least as large as 
 
 
 
  assuming 
 
 
 
  is true. Because the number of births is very large, we can use a normal approximation for the fraction of male births 
 
 
 
 , with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , to compute



We would have been equally surprised if we had seen 49,581 female births, i.e. 
 
 
 
 , so a frequentist would usually perform a two-sided test, for which the p-value would be 
 
 
 
 . In both cases, the p-value is lower than the significance level of 5%, so the frequentist approach rejects 
 
 
 
  as it disagrees with the observed data.
Bayesian approach
Assuming no reason to favor one hypothesis over the other, the Bayesian approach would be to assign prior probabilities 
 
 
 
  and a uniform distribution to 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
 , and then to compute the posterior probability of 
 
 
 
  using Bayes' theorem,



After observing 
 
 
 
  boys out of 
 
 
 
  births, we can compute the posterior probability of each hypothesis using the probability mass function for a binomial variable,


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Beta function.
From these values, we find the posterior probability of 
 
 
 
 
 , which strongly favors 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 .
The two approaches—the Bayesian and the frequentist—appear to be in conflict, and this is the "paradox".
The lack of an actual paradox
The apparent disagreement between the two approaches is caused by a combination of factors. First, the frequentist approach above tests 
 
 
 
  without reference to 
 
 
 
 . The Bayesian approach evaluates 
 
 
 
 
  as an alternative to 
 
 
 
 , and finds the first to be in better agreement with the observations. This is because the latter hypothesis is much more diffuse, as 
 
 
 
  can be anywhere in 
 
 
 
 , which results in it having a very low posterior probability. To understand why, it is helpful to consider the two hypotheses as generators of the observations:

Under 
 
 
 
 , we choose 
 
 
 
 
 , and ask how likely it is to see 49,581 boys in 98,451 births.
Under 
 
 
 
 , we choose 
 
 
 
  randomly from anywhere within 0 to 1, and ask the same question.

Most of the possible values for 
 
 
 
  under 
 
 
 
  are very poorly supported by the observations. In essence, the apparent disagreement between the methods is not a disagreement at all, but rather two different statements about how the hypotheses relate to the data:

The frequentist finds that 
 
 
 
 
  is a poor explanation for the observation.
The Bayesian finds that 
 
 
 
  is a far better explanation for the observation than 
 
 
 
 .

The ratio of the sex of newborns is improbably 50/50 male/female, according the frequentist test. Yet 50/50 is a better approximation than most, but not all, other ratios. The hypothesis 
 
 
 
  would have fit the observation much better than almost all other ratios, including 
 
 
 
 .
For example, this choice of hypotheses and prior probabilities implies the statement: "if 
 
 
 
 
  > 0.49 and 
 
 
 
  \theta being exactly 0.5 is 0.50/0.51 
 
 
 
  98%." Given such a strong preference for 
 
 
 
 , it is easy to see why the Bayesian approach favors 
 
 
 
  in the face of 
 
 
 
 
 , even though the observed value of 
 
 
 
  lies 
 
 
 
  away from 0.5. The deviation of over 2 sigma from 
 
 
 
  is considered significant in the frequentist approach, but its significance is overruled by the prior in the Bayesian approach.
Looking at it another way, we can see that the prior distribution is essentially flat with a delta function at 
 
 
 
 . Clearly this is dubious. In fact if you were to picture real numbers as being continuous, then it would be more logical to assume that it would impossible for any given number to be exactly the parameter value, i.e., we should assume P(theta = 0.5) = 0.
A more realistic distribution for 
 
 
 
 
  in the alternative hypothesis produces a less surprising result for the posterior of 
 
 
 
 . For example, if we replace 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , i.e., the maximum likelihood estimate for 
 
 
 
 , the posterior probability of 
 
 
 
 
  would be only 0.07 compared to 0.93 for 
 
 
 
  (Of course, one cannot actually use the MLE as part of a prior distribution).
Reconciling the Bayesian and frequentist approaches
If one uses an uninformative prior and tests a hypothesis more similar to that in the frequentist approach, the paradox disappears.
For example, if we calculate the posterior distribution 
 
 
 
 , using a uniform prior distribution on 
 
 
 
  (i.e., 
 
 
 
 ), we find



If we use this to check the probability that a newborn is more likely to be a boy than a girl, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , we find







In other words, it is very likely that the proportion of male births is above 0.5.
Neither analysis gives an estimate of the effect size, directly, but both could be used to determine, for instance, if the fraction of boy births is likely to be above some particular threshold.
Recent discussion
The paradox continues to be a source of active discussion.3
See also

Bayes factor

Notes
References



"
Category:Hypothesis testing Category:Statistical paradoxes Category:Statistical inference



↩
↩
 ↩




