


Bessel–Clifford function




Bessel–Clifford function

In mathematical analysis, the Bessel–Clifford function, named after Friedrich Bessel and William Kingdon Clifford, is an entire function of two complex variables that can be used to provide an alternative development of the theory of Bessel functions. If



is the entire function defined by means of the reciprocal Gamma function, then the Bessel–Clifford function is defined by the series



The ratio of successive terms is z/k(n + k), which for all values of z and n tends to zero with increasing k. By the ratio test, this series converges absolutely for all z and n, and uniformly for all regions with bounded |z|, and hence the Bessel–Clifford function is an entire function of the two complex variables n and z.
Differential equation of the Bessel–Clifford function
It follows from the above series on differentiating with respect to x that 
 
 
 
  satisfies the linear second-order homogeneous differential equation



This equation is of generalized hypergeometric type, and in fact the Bessel–Clifford function is up to a scaling factor a Pochhammer–Barnes hypergeometric function; we have



Unless n is a negative integer, in which case the right hand side is undefined, the two definitions are essentially equivalent; the hypergeometric function being normalized so that its value at z = 0 is one.
Relation to Bessel functions
The Bessel function of the first kind can be defined in terms of the Bessel–Clifford function as



when n is not an integer we can see from this that the Bessel function is not entire. Similarly, the modified Bessel function of the first kind can be defined as



The procedure can of course be reversed, so that we may define the Bessel–Clifford function as



but from this starting point we would then need to show 
 
 
 
 
  was entire.
Recurrence relation
From the defining series, it follows immediately that 
 
 

Using this, we may rewrite the differential equation for 
 
 
 
  as



which defines the recurrence relationship for the Bessel–Clifford function. This is equivalent to a similar relation for 0F1. We have, as a special case of Gauss's continued fraction



It can be shown that this continued fraction converges in all cases.
The Bessel–Clifford function of the second kind
The Bessel–Clifford differential equation



has two linearly independent solutions. Since the origin is a regular singular point of the differential equation, and since 
 
 
 
  is entire, the second solution must be singular at the origin.
If we set



which converges for 
 
 
 
 , and analytically continue it, we obtain a second linearly independent solution to the differential equation.
The factor of 1/2 is inserted in order to make 
 
 
 
  correspond to the Bessel functions of the second kind. We have



and



In terms of K, we have



Hence just as the Bessel function and modified Bessel function of the first kind can both be expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
 , those of the second kind can both be expressed in terms of 
 
 
 
 .
Generating function
If we multiply the absolutely convergent series for exp(t) and exp(z/t) together, we get (when t is not zero) an absolutely convergent series for exp(t + z/t). Collecting terms in t, we find on comparison with the power series definition for 
 
 
 
 
  that we have



This generating function can then be used to obtain further formulas, in particular we may use Cauchy's integral formula and obtain 
 
 
 
  for integer n as



References


.

.

.

.

.

.

"
Category:Special hypergeometric functions


