


Hamiltonian (control theory)




Hamiltonian (control theory)

The Hamiltonian of optimal control theory was developed by Lev Pontryagin as part of his minimum principle.1 It was inspired by, but is distinct from, the Hamiltonian of classical mechanics. Pontryagin proved that a necessary condition for solving the optimal control problem is that the control should be chosen so as to minimize the Hamiltonian. For details see Pontryagin's minimum principle.
Notation and Problem statement
A control 
 
 
 
  is to be chosen so as to minimize the objective function



where 
 
 
 
  is the system state, which evolves according to the state equations



and the control must satisfy the constraints



Definition of the Hamiltonian



where 
 
 
 
  is a vector of costate variables of the same dimension as the state variables 
 
 
 
 .
For information on the properties of the Hamiltonian, see Pontryagin's maximum principle.
The Hamiltonian in discrete time
When the problem is formulated in discrete time, the Hamiltonian is defined as:



and the costate equations are


 
  (Note that the discrete time Hamiltonian at time 
 
 
 
  involves the costate variable at time 
 
 
2 This small detail is essential so that when we differentiate with respect to 
 
 
 
  we get a term involving 
 
 
 
  on the right hand side of the costate equations. Using a wrong convention here can lead to incorrect results, i.e. a costate equation which is not a backwards difference equation).
The Hamiltonian of control compared to the Hamiltonian of mechanics
William Rowan Hamilton defined the Hamiltonian as a function of three variables:



where 
 
 
 
  is defined implicitly by



Hamilton then formulated his equations as






Similarly the Hamiltonian of control theory (as normally defined) is a function of 4 variables



and the associated conditions for a maximum are









This definition agrees with that given by the article by Sussmann and Willems.3 (see p. 39, equation 14). Sussmann-Willems show how the control Hamiltonian can be used in dynamics e.g. for the brachystochrone problem, but do not mention the prior work of Carathéodory on this approach .4
References
External links

P. Varaiya: Lecture Notes on Optimization, 2d. ed. (1998) 1
I. M. Ross, Pontryagin's Hamiltonian Illustrated with Examples, 2009, Chapter 2 download

"
Category:Optimal control



I. M. Ross A Primer on Pontryagin's Principle in Optimal Control, Collegiate Publishers, 2009.↩
Varaiya, Chapter 6↩
↩
See H. J. Pesch- R. Bulirsch: J.O.T.A. 80 1994 199-225↩




