


Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness




Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness

The Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness problem concerns the mathematical properties of solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations, one of the pillars of fluid mechanics (such as with turbulence). These equations describe the motion of a fluid (that is, a liquid or a gas) in space. Solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations are used in many practical applications. However, theoretical understanding of the solutions to these equations is incomplete. In particular, solutions of the Navier–Stokes equations often include turbulence, which remains one of the greatest unsolved problems in physics, despite its immense importance in science and engineering.
Even much more basic properties of the solutions to Navier–Stokes have never been proven. For the three-dimensional system of equations, and given some initial conditions, mathematicians have not yet proved that smooth solutions always exist, or that if they do exist, they have bounded energy per unit mass. This is called the Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness problem.
Since understanding the Navier–Stokes equations is considered to be the first step to understanding the elusive phenomenon of turbulence, the Clay Mathematics Institute in May 2000 made this problem one of its seven Millennium Prize problems in mathematics. It offered a US$1,000,000 prize to the first person providing a solution for a specific statement of the problem:1
The Navier–Stokes equations
In mathematics, the Navier–Stokes equations are a system of nonlinear partial differential equations for abstract vector fields of any size. In physics and engineering, they are a system of equations that models the motion of liquids or non-rarefied gases (in which the mean free path is short enough so that it can be thought of as a continuum mean instead of a collection of particles) using continuum mechanics. The equations are a statement of Newton's second law, with the forces modeled according to those in a viscous Newtonian fluid—as the sum of contributions by pressure, viscous stress and an external body force. Since the setting of the problem proposed by the Clay Mathematics Institute is in three dimensions, for an incompressible and homogeneous fluid, only that case is considered below.
Let 
 
 
 
  be a 3-dimensional vector field, the velocity of the fluid, and let 
 
 
 
  be the pressure of the fluid.2 The Navier–Stokes equations are:



where 
 
 
 
  is the kinematic viscosity, 
 
 
 
  the external volumetric force, 
 
 
 
  is the gradient operator and 
 
 
 
  is the Laplacian operator, which is also denoted by 
 
 
 
 . Note that this is a vector equation, i.e. it has three scalar equations. Writing down the coordinates of the velocity and the external force



then for each 
 
 
 
  there is the corresponding scalar Navier–Stokes equation:



The unknowns are the velocity 
 
 
 
  and the pressure 
 
 
 
 . Since in three dimensions, there are three equations and four unknowns (three scalar velocities and the pressure), then a supplementary equation is needed. This extra equation is the continuity equation for incompressible fluids that describes the conservation of mass of the fluid:



Due to this last property, the solutions for the Navier–Stokes equations are searched in the set of solenoidal ("divergence-free") functions. For this flow of a homogeneous medium, density and viscosity are constants.
The pressure p can be eliminated by taking an operator rot (alternative notation curl) of both sides of the Navier–Stokes equations. In this case the Navier–Stokes equations reduce to the vorticity-transport equations.
Two settings: unbounded and periodic space
There are two different settings for the one-million-dollar-prize Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness problem. The original problem is in the whole space 
 
 
 
 , which needs extra conditions on the growth behavior of the initial condition and the solutions. In order to rule out the problems at infinity, the Navier–Stokes equations can be set in a periodic framework, which implies that they are no longer working on the whole space 
 
 
 
  but in the 3-dimensional torus 
 
 
 
 . Each case will be treated separately.
Statement of the problem in the whole space
Hypotheses and growth conditions
The initial condition 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be a smooth and divergence-free function (see smooth function) such that, for every multi-index 
 
 
 
  (see multi-index notation) and any 
 
 
 
 , there exists a constant 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  for all 
 
 

The external force 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be a smooth function as well, and satisfies a very analogous inequality (now the multi-index includes time derivatives as well):


 
  for all 
 
 

For physically reasonable conditions, the type of solutions expected are smooth functions that do not grow large as 
 
 
 
 . More precisely, the following assumptions are made:




There exists a constant 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 


Condition 1 implies that the functions are smooth and globally defined and condition 2 means that the kinetic energy of the solution is globally bounded.
The Millennium Prize conjectures in the whole space
(A) Existence and smoothness of the Navier–Stokes solutions in 
 
 

Let 
 
 
 
 . For any initial condition 
 
 
 
  satisfying the above hypotheses there exist smooth and globally defined solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations, i.e. there is a velocity vector 
 
 
 
  and a pressure 
 
 
 
  satisfying conditions 1 and 2 above.
(B) Breakdown of the Navier–Stokes solutions in 
 
 

There exists an initial condition 
 
 
 
  and an external force 
 
 
 
  such that there exists no solutions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfying conditions 1 and 2 above.
Statement of the periodic problem
Hypotheses
The functions sought now are periodic in the space variables of period 1. More precisely, let 
 
 
 
  be the unitary vector in the i- direction:



Then 
 
 
 
  is periodic in the space variables if for any 
 
 
 
 , then:



Notice that this is considering the coordinates mod 1. This allows working not on the whole space 
 
 
 
  but on the quotient space

 
 , which turns out to be the 3-dimensional torus:



Now the hypotheses can be stated properly. The initial condition 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be a smooth and divergence-free function and the external force 
 
 
 
  is assumed to be a smooth function as well. The type of solutions that are physically relevant are those who satisfy these conditions:
3. 
 
 

4. There exists a constant 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

Just as in the previous case, condition 3 implies that the functions are smooth and globally defined and condition 4 means that the kinetic energy of the solution is globally bounded.
The periodic Millennium Prize theorems
(C) Existence and smoothness of the Navier–Stokes solutions in 
 
 

Let 
 
 
 
 . For any initial condition 
 
 
 
  satisfying the above hypotheses there exist smooth and globally defined solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations, i.e. there is a velocity vector 
 
 
 
  and a pressure 
 
 
 
  satisfying conditions 3 and 4 above.
(D) Breakdown of the Navier–Stokes solutions in 
 
 

There exists an initial condition 
 
 
 
  and an external force 
 
 
 
  such that there exists no solutions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfying conditions 3 and 4 above.
Partial results

The Navier–Stokes problem in two dimensions has already been solved positively since the 1960s: there exist smooth and globally defined solutions.3
If the initial velocity 
 
 
 
  is sufficiently small then the statement is true: there are smooth and globally defined solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations.4
Given an initial velocity 
 
 
 
  there exists a finite time T, depending on 
 
 
 
  such that the Navier–Stokes equations on 
 
 
 
  have smooth solutions 
 
 
 
  and $p(x,t)$. It is not known if the solutions exist beyond that "blowup time" T.5
Jean Leray in 1934 proved the existence of so-called weak solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations, satisfying the equations in mean value, not pointwise.6
Terence Tao in February 2014 announced a finite time blowup result for an averaged version of the 3-dimensional Navier–Stokes equation. He writes that the result formalizes a "supercriticality barrier" for the global regularity problem for the true Navier–Stokes equations, and claims that the method of proof in fact hints at a possible route to establishing blowup for the true equations.78

Attempt at solution
In 2013, Mukhtarbay Otelbaev of the Eurasian National University in Astana, Kazakhstan, proposed a solution. As an attempt to solve an important open problem, the proof was immediately inspected by others in the field, who found at least one serious flaw.9 Otelbaev is attempting to fix the proof, but other mathematicians are skeptical.
Notes
References
External links

The Clay Mathematics Institute's Navier–Stokes equation prize
Why global regularity for Navier–Stokes is hard — Possible routes to resolution are scrutinized by Terence Tao.
Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness (Millennium Prize Problem) A lecture on the problem by Luis Caffarelli.

"
Category:Partial differential equations Category:Fluid dynamics Category:Unsolved problems in mathematics Category:Millennium Prize Problems



Official statement of the problem, Clay Mathematics Institute.↩
More precisely, $p ( \mathbf{ x } , t )$ is the pressure divided by the fluid density, and the density is constant for this incompressible and homogeneous fluid.↩
↩


↩
↩
↩
↩




