


Transcendental equation




Transcendental equation

A transcendental equation is an equation containing a transcendental function of the variable(s) being solved for. Such equations often do not have closed-form solutions. Examples include:






Solvable transcendental equations
Equations where the variable to be solved for appears only once, as an argument to the transcendental function, are easily solvable with inverse functions; similarly if the equation can be factored or transformed to such a case:




Equation

Solutions





















 
  (for 
 
 
 
  an integer)







using the double-angle formula, equivalent to 
 
 
 
 
 ; whose solutions are those of 
 
 
 
  and of 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (for 
 
 
 
 
  integers)



Some transcendental equations can be shown to have no real solution, or to have only trivial solutions.




Equation

Solutions









No real solutions, as 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 










 
 
  is the only real solution



Some can be solved because they are compositions of algebraic functions with transcendental functions.




Equation

Solutions









solve 
 
 
 
 , giving 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 
 , so 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 




But most equations where the variable appears both as an argument to a transcendental function and elsewhere in the equation are not solvable in closed form.
Approximate solutions
Approximate numerical solutions to transcendental equations can be found using numerical, analytical approximations, or graphical methods.
Numerical methods for solving arbitrary equations are called root-finding algorithms.
In some cases, the equation can be well approximated using Taylor series near the zero. For example, for 
 
 
 
 , the solutions of 
 
 
 
  are approximately those of 
 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
For a graphical solution, one method is to set each side of a single variable transcendental equation equal to a dependent variable and plot the two graphs, using their intersecting points to find solutions.
In some cases, special functions can be used to write the solutions to transcendental equations in closed form. In particular, 
 
 
 
  has a solution in terms of the Lambert W Function.
References
"
Category:Equations


