


G-factor (physics)




G-factor (physics)

A g-factor (also called g value or dimensionless magnetic moment) is a dimensionless quantity that characterizes the magnetic moment and gyromagnetic ratio of a particle or nucleus. It is essentially a proportionality constant that relates the observed magnetic moment μ of a particle to its angular momentum quantum number and a unit of magnetic moment, usually the Bohr magneton or nuclear magneton.
Definition
Dirac particle
The spin magnetic moment of a charged, spin-1/2 particle that does not possess any internal structure (a Dirac particle) is given by1



where μ is the spin magnetic moment of the particle, g is the g-factor of the particle, e is the elementary charge, m is the mass of the particle, and S is the spin angular momentum of the particle (with magnitude ħ/2 for Dirac particles).
Baryon or nucleus
Protons, neutrons, nuclei and other composite baryonic particles have magnetic moments arising from their spin (both of which may be zero). Conventionally, the associated g-factors are defined using the nuclear magneton, and thus implicitly using the proton's mass rather than the particle's mass as for a Dirac particle. The formula used under this convention is



where μ is the magnetic moment of the nucleon or nucleus resulting from its spin, g is the effective g-factor, I is its spin angular momentum, μN is the nuclear magneton, e is the elementary charge and mp is the proton rest mass.
Calculation
Electron g-factors
There are three magnetic moments associated with an electron: one from its spin angular momentum, one from its orbital angular momentum, and one from its total angular momentum (the quantum-mechanical sum of those two components). Corresponding to these three moments are three different g-factors:
Electron spin g-factor
The most famous of these is the electron spin g-factor (more often called simply the electron g-factor), ge, defined by



where μs is the magnetic moment resulting from the spin of an electron, S is its spin angular momentum, and μB is the Bohr magneton. In atomic physics, the electron spin g-factor is often defined as the absolute value or negative of ge:



The z-component of the magnetic moment then becomes



The value gs is roughly equal to 2.002319, and is known to extraordinary precision.23 The reason it is not precisely two is explained by quantum electrodynamics calculation of the anomalous magnetic dipole moment.4
Electron orbital g-factor
Secondly, the electron orbital g-factor, gL, is defined by



where μL is the magnetic moment resulting from the orbital angular momentum of an electron, L is its orbital angular momentum, and μB is the Bohr magneton. The value of gL is exactly equal to one, by a quantum-mechanical argument analogous to the derivation of the classical magnetogyric ratio. For an electron in an orbital with a magnetic quantum number ml, the z-component of the orbital angular momentum is



which, since gL = 1, is μBml
Total angular momentum (Landé) g-factor
Thirdly, the Landé g-factor, gJ, is defined by



where μ is the total magnetic moment resulting from both spin and orbital angular momentum of an electron,  is its total angular momentum, and μB is the Bohr magneton. The value of gJ is related to gL and gs by a quantum-mechanical argument; see the article Landé g-factor.
Muon g-factor
 The muon, like the electron, has a g-factor associated with its spin, given by the equation



where μ is the magnetic moment resulting from the muon’s spin, S is the spin angular momentum, and mμ is the muon mass.
That the muon g-factor is not quite the same as the electron g-factor is mostly explained by quantum electrodynamics and its calculation of the anomalous magnetic dipole moment. Almost all of the small difference between the two values (99.96% of it) is due to a well-understood lack of a heavy-particle diagrams contributing to the probability for emission of a photon representing the magnetic dipole field, which are present for muons, but not electrons, in QED theory. These are entirely a result of the mass difference between the particles.
However, not all of the difference between the g-factors for electrons and muons is exactly explained by the Standard Model. The muon g-factor can, in theory, be affected by physics beyond the Standard Model, so it has been measured very precisely, in particular at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. In the E821 collaboration final report in November 2006, the experimental measured value is , compared to the theoretical prediction of .5 This is a difference of 3.4 standard deviations, suggesting that beyond-the-Standard-Model physics may be having an effect. The Brookhaven muon storage ring has been transported to Fermilab where the g−2 experiment will use it to make more precise measurements of muon g-factor.6
Measured g-factor values




Particle

Symbol

g-factor

Uncertainty





electron

ge





muon

gμ





neutron

gn





proton

gp







Currently accepted NIST g-factor values 7



The electron g-factor is one of the most precisely measured values in physics, with a relative standard uncertainty of .
Notes and references
See also

Anomalous magnetic dipole moment
Electron magnetic moment
CODATA recommendations 2006

"
Category:Atomic physics Category:Nuclear physics Category:Particle physics Category:Physical constants














