


Widom scaling




Widom scaling

Widom scaling (after Benjamin Widom) is a hypothesis in statistical mechanics regarding the free energy of a magnetic system near its critical point which leads to the critical exponents becoming no longer independent so that they can be parameterized in terms of two values. The hypothesis can be seen to arise as a natural consequence of the block-spin renormalization procedure, when the block size is chosen to be of the same size as the correlation length.1
Widom scaling is an example of universality.
Definitions
The critical exponents 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are defined in terms of the behaviour of the order parameters and response functions near the critical point as follows


 
 , for 
 
 



 
 , for 
 
 







where


 
  measures the temperature relative to the critical point.
Near the critical point, Widom's scaling relation reads


 
 .
where 
 
 
 
  has an expansion


 
 , with 
 
 
 
  being Wegner's exponent governing the approach to scaling.
Derivation
The scaling hypothesis is that near the critical point, the free energy 
 
 
 
 , in 
 
 
 
  dimensions, can be written as the sum of a slowly varying regular part 
 
 
 
  and a singular part 
 
 
 
 , with the singular part being a scaling function, i.e., a homogeneous function, so that



Then taking the partial derivative with respect to H and the form of M(t,H) gives



Setting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in the preceding equation yields


 
  for 
 
 

Comparing this with the definition of 
 
 
 
  yields its value,



Similarly, putting 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  into the scaling relation for M yields



Hence



Applying the expression for the isothermal susceptibility

 
  in terms of M to the scaling relation yields



Setting H=0 and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  (resp. 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 ) yields



Similarly for the expression for specific heat

 
  in terms of M to the scaling relation yields



Taking H=0 and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  yields



As a consequence of Widom scaling, not all critical exponents are independent but they can be parameterized by two numbers 
 
 
 
  with the relations expressed as






The relations are experimentally well verified for magnetic systems and fluids.
References

H. E. Stanley, Introduction to Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena
H. Kleinert and V. Schulte-Frohlinde, Critical Properties of φ4-Theories, World Scientific (Singapore, 2001); Paperback ISBN 981-02-4658-7'' (also available [http://users.physik.fu-berlin.de/~kleinert/kleinert/?p=booklist&details;;=6 online])''

"
Category:Critical phenomena Category:Statistical mechanics



Kerson Huang, Statistical Mechanics. John Wiley and Sons, 1987↩




