


Transport of structure




Transport of structure

In mathematics, transport of structure is the definition of a new structure on an object by reference to another object on which a similar structure already exists. Definitions by transport of structure are regarded as canonical.
Since mathematical structures are often defined in reference to an underlying space, many examples of transport of structure involve spaces and mappings between them. For example, if V and W are vector spaces, and if 
 
 
 
  is an isomorphism, and if 
 
 
 
  is an inner product on 
 
 
 
 , then we can define an inner product 
 
 
 
  on V by


 
 . Although the equation makes sense even when 
 
 
 
  is not an isomorphism, it only defines an inner product on V when 
 
 
 
  is, since otherwise it will cause 
 
 
 
  to be degenerate. The idea is that 
 
 
 
  allows us to consider V and W as "the same" vector space, and if we follow this analogy, we can transport an inner product from one to the other.
A more involved example comes from differential topology, in which we have the notion of a smooth manifold. If M is such a manifold, and if X is any topological space which is homeomorphic to M, we can consider X as a smooth manifold as well. That is, let 
 
 
 
  be a homeomorphism; we must define coordinate charts on X, which we will do by "pulling back" coordinate charts on M through 
 
 
 
 . Recall that a coordinate chart on 
 
 
 
  is an open set U together with an injective map


 
  for some n; to get such a chart on X, we let


 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, it is required that the charts cover M, we must check that the transported charts cover X, which follows immediately from the fact that 
 
 
 
  is a bijection. Finally, since M is a smooth manifold, we have that if U and V, with their maps


 
  and 
 
 
 
 , are two charts on M, then the composition, the "transition map"


 
  (a self-map of 
 
 
 
 ) is smooth. We must check this for our transported charts on X. We have


 
 , and therefore


 
 , and


 
 . Therefore the transition map for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the same as that for U and V, hence smooth. Therefore X is a smooth manifold via transport of structure.
Although the second example involved considerably more checking, the principle was the same, and any experienced mathematician would have no difficulty performing the necessary verifications. Therefore when such an operation is indicated, it is invoked merely as "transport of structure" and the details left to the reader, if desired.
The second example also illustrates why "transport of structure" is not always desirable. Namely, we can take M to be the plane, and we can take X to be an infinite one-sided cone. By "flattening" the cone we achieve a homeomorphism of X and M, and therefore the structure of a smooth manifold on X, but the cone is not "naturally" a smooth manifold. That is, we can consider X as a subspace of 3-space, in which context it is not smooth at the cone point. A more surprising example is that of exotic spheres, discovered by Milnor, which states that there are exactly 28 smooth manifolds which are homeomorphic (but by definition not diffeomorphic) to 
 
 
 
 , the 7-dimensional sphere in 8-space. Thus, transport of structure is most productive when there exists a canonical isomorphism between the two objects.
"
Category:Mathematical terminology


