


Complex Hadamard matrix




Complex Hadamard matrix

A complex Hadamard matrix is any complex

matrix

 
  satisfying two conditions:

unimodularity (the modulus of each entry is unity)
 
 



orthogonality

 
 ,

where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Hermitian transpose of H and 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix. The concept is a generalization of the Hadamard matrix. Note that any complex Hadamard matrix 
 
 
 
  can be made into a unitary matrix by multiplying it by 
 
 
 
 ; conversely, any unitary matrix whose entries all have modulus 
 
 
 
  becomes a complex Hadamard upon multiplication by 
 
 
 
 .
Complex Hadamard matrices arise in the study of operator algebras and the theory of quantum computation. Real Hadamard matrices and Butson-type Hadamard matrices form particular cases of complex Hadamard matrices.
Complex Hadamard matrices exist for any natural N (compare the real case, in which existence is not known for every N). For instance the Fourier matrices



belong to this class.
Equivalency
Two complex Hadamard matrices are called equivalent, written 
 
 
 
 
 , if there exist diagonal unitary matrices

 
  and permutation matrices

 
  such that



Any complex Hadamard matrix is equivalent to a dephased Hadamard matrix, in which all elements in the first row and first column are equal to unity.
For 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  all complex Hadamard matrices are equivalent to the Fourier matrix 
 
 
 
 . For 
 
 
 
  there exists a continuous, one-parameter family of inequivalent complex Hadamard matrices,



For 
 
 
 
  the following families of complex Hadamard matrices are known:

a single two-parameter family which includes 
 
 
 
 ,
a single one-parameter family 
 
 
 
 ,
a one-parameter orbit 
 
 
 
 , including the circulant Hadamard matrix 
 
 
 
 ,
a two-parameter orbit including the previous two examples 
 
 
 
 ,
a one-parameter orbit 
 
 
 
  of symmetric matrices,
a two-parameter orbit including the previous example 
 
 
 
 ,
a three-parameter orbit including all the previous examples 
 
 
 
 ,
a further construction with four degrees of freedom, 
 
 
 
 , yielding other examples than 
 
 
 
 ,
a single point - one of the Butson-type Hadamard matrices, 
 
 
 
 .

It is not known, however, if this list is complete, but it is conjectured that 
 
 
 
  is an exhaustive (but not necessarily irredundant) list of all complex Hadamard matrices of order 6.
References

U. Haagerup, Orthogonal maximal abelian *-subalgebras of the n×n matrices and cyclic n-roots, Operator Algebras and Quantum Field Theory (Rome), 1996 (Cambridge, MA: International Press) pp 296-322.
P. Dita, Some results on the parametrization of complex Hadamard matrices, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 37, 5355-5374 (2004).
F. Szollosi, A two-parametric family of complex Hadamard matrices of order 6 induced by hypocycloids, preprint, arXiv:0811.3930v2 [math.OA]
W. Tadej and K. Życzkowski, A concise guide to complex Hadamard matrices Open Systems & Infor. Dyn. 13 133-177 (2006)

External links

For an explicit list of known 
 
 
 
  complex Hadamard matrices and several examples of Hadamard matrices of size 7-16 see Catalogue of Complex Hadamard Matrices

"
Category:Matrices


