


Benaloh cryptosystem




Benaloh cryptosystem

The Benaloh Cryptosystem is an extension of the Goldwasser-Micali cryptosystem (GM) created in 1994 by Josh (Cohen) Benaloh. The main improvement of the Benaloh Cryptosystem over GM is that longer blocks of data can be encrypted at once, whereas in GM each bit is encrypted individually.1
Scheme Definition
Like many public key cryptosystems, this scheme works in the group 
 
 
 
  where n is a product of two large primes. This scheme is homomorphic and hence malleable.
Key Generation
Given block size r, a public/private key pair is generated as follows:

Choose large primes p and q such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Set 
 
 

Choose 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .



Note: If r is composite, it was pointed out by Fousse et al. in 20112 that the above conditions (i.e., those stated in the original paper) are insufficient to guarantee correct decryption, i.e., to guarantee that 
 
 
 
  in all cases (as should be the case). To address this, the authors propose the following check: let 
 
 
 
  be the prime factorization of r. Choose 
 
 
 
 
  such that for each factor 
 
 
 
 , it is the case that 
 
 
 
 .
 




Set 
 
 


The public key is then 
 
 
 
 , and the private key is 
 
 
 
 
 .
Message Encryption
To encrypt message 
 
 
 
 :

Choose a random 
 
 

Set 
 
 


Message Decryption
To decrypt a ciphertext 
 
 
 
 :

Compute 
 
 

Output 
 
 
 
 , i.e., find m such that 
 
 


To understand decryption, first notice that for any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  we have:



To recover m from a, we take the discrete log of a base x. If r is small, we can recover m by an exhaustive search, i.e. checking if 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 . For larger values of r, the Baby-step giant-step algorithm can be used to recover m in 
 
 
 
  time and space.
Security
The security of this scheme rests on the Higher residuosity problem, specifically, given z,r and n where the factorization of n is unknown, it is computationally infeasible to determine whether z is an rth residue mod n, i.e. if there exists an x such that 
 
 
 
 .
References
"
Category:Public-key encryption schemes









