


Modal μ-calculus




Modal μ-calculus

In theoretical computer science, the modal μ-calculus (Lμ, Lμ, sometimes just μ-calculus, although this can have a more general meaning) is an extension of propositional modal logic (with many modalities) by adding a least fixpoint operator μ and a greatest fixpoint operator 
 
 
 
 , thus a fixed-point logic.
The (propositional, modal) μ-calculus originates with Dana Scott and Jaco de Bakker,1 and was further developed by Dexter Kozen into the version most used nowadays. It is used to describe properties of labelled transition systems and for verifying these properties. Many temporal logics can be encoded in the μ-calculus, including CTL* and its widely used fragments—linear temporal logic and computational tree logic.2
An algebraic view is to see it as an algebra of monotonic functions over a complete lattice, with operators consisting of functional composition plus the least and greatest fixed point operators; from this viewpoint, the modal μ-calculus is over the lattice of a power set algebra.3 The game semantics of μ-calculus is related to two-player games with perfect information, particularly infinite parity games.4
Syntax
Let P (propositions) and A (actions) be two finite sets of symbols, and let V be a countably infinite set of variables. The set of formulas of (propositional, modal) μ-calculus is defined as follows:

each proposition and each variable is a formula;
if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are formulas, then 
 
 
 
  is a formula.
if 
 
 
 
  is a formula, then 
 
 
 
  is a formula;
if 
 
 
 
  is a formula and 
 
 
 
  is an action, then 
 
 
 
  is a formula;(pronounced either
 
 
 
  box 
 
 
 
  or after 
 
 
 
  necessarily 
 
 
 
 )
if 
 
 
 
  is a formula and 
 
 
 
  a variable, then 
 
 
 
  is a formula, provided that every free occurrence of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  occurs positively, i.e. within the scope of an even number of negations.

(The notions of free and bound variables are as usual, where 
 
 
 
  is the only binding operator.)
Given the above definitions, we can enrich the syntax with:



 
  meaning 
 
 



 
  (pronounced either
 
 
 
  diamond 
 
 
 
  or after 
 
 
 
  possibly 
 
 
 
 ) meaning 
 
 



 
  means 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  means substituting 
 
 
 
  for Z in all free occurrences of Z in 
 
 
 
 .

The first two formulas are the familiar ones from the classical propositional calculus and respectively the minimal multimodal logic K.
The notation 
 
 
 
  (and its dual) are inspired from the lambda calculus; the intent is to denote the least (and respectively greatest) fixed point of the expression 
 
 
 
  where the "minimization" (and respectively "maximization") are in the variable Z, much like in lambda calculus 
 
 
 
  is a function with formula 
 
 
 
  in bound variable Z;5 see the denotational semantics below for details.
Denotational semantics
Models of (propositional) μ-calculus are given as labelled transition systems

 
  where:



 
  is a set of states;


 
  maps to each label 
 
 
 
  a relation on 
 
 
 
 ;


 
 , maps to each proposition 
 
 
 
  the set of states where the proposition is true.

Given a labelled transition system 
 
 
 
  and an interpretation 
 
 
 
  of the formulas 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 -calculus, 
 
 
 
 , is the function defined by the following rules:



 
 ;


 
 ;


 
 ;


 
 ;


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  maps Z to T while preserving the mappings of 
 
 
 
  everywhere else.

By duality, the interpretation of the other basic formulas is:



 
 ;


 
 ;




Less formally, this means that, for a given transition system 
 
 
 
 :



 
  holds in the set of states 
 
 
 
 ;


 
  holds in every state where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  both hold;


 
  holds in every state where 
 
 
 
  does not hold.


 
  holds in a state 
 
 
 
  if every 
 
 
 
 -transition leading out of 
 
 
 
  leads to a state where 
 
 
 
  holds.


 
  holds in a state 
 
 
 
  if there exists 
 
 
 
 -transition leading out of 
 
 
 
  that leads to a state where 
 
 
 
  holds.


 
  holds in any state in any set 
 
 
 
  such that, when the variable 
 
 
 
  is set to 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  holds for all of 
 
 
 
 . (From the Knaster–Tarski theorem it follows that 
 
 
 
  is the greatest fixpoint of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  its least fixpoint.)

The interpretations of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are if fact the "classical" ones from dynamic logic. Additionally, the operator μ can be interpreted as liveness ("something good eventually happens") and ν as safety ("nothing bad ever happens") in Leslie Lamport's informal classification.6
Examples



 
  is interpreted as "
 
 
 
  is true along every a-path".7


 
  is interpreted as the existence of a path along a-transitions to a state where 
 
 
 
  holds.8
The property of a system of being deadlock-free, understood as having no states without outgoing transitions and furthermore there does not exists a path to such a state, is expressed by formula9




Satisfiability
Satisfiability of a modal μ-calculus formula is EXPTIME-complete.10
See also

Finite model theory
Alternation-free modal μ-calculus

Notes


References


, chapter 7, Model checking for the μ-calculus, pp. 97–108

, chapter 5, Modal μ-calculus, pp. 103–128

, chapter 6, The μ-calculus over powerset algebras, pp. 141–153 is about the modal μ-calculus
Yde Venema (2008) Lectures on the Modal μ-calculus; was presented at The 18th European Summer School in Logic, Language and Information




External links

Sophie Pinchinat, Logic, Automata & Games video recording of a lecture at ANU Logic Summer School '09

"
Category:Modal logic Category:Model checking



Kozen p. 333.
Clarke p.108, Theorem 6; Emerson p. 196
Arnold and Niwiński, pp. viii-x and chapter 6
Arnold and Niwiński, pp. viii-x and chapter 4
Arnold and Niwiński, p. 14
Bradfield and Stirling, p. 731








