


Sommerfeld radiation condition




Sommerfeld radiation condition

Arnold Sommerfeld defined the condition of radiation for a scalar field satisfying the Helmholtz equation as

"the sources must be sources, not sinks of energy. The energy which is radiated from the sources must scatter to infinity; no energy may be radiated from infinity into ... the field."1


Mathematically, consider the inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation



where 
 
 
 
  is the dimension of the space, 
 
 
 
  is a given function with compact support representing a bounded source of energy, and 
 
 
 
  is a constant, called the wavenumber. A solution 
 
 
 
  to this equation is called radiating if it satisfies the Sommerfeld radiation condition



uniformly in all directions



(above, 
 
 
 
  is the imaginary unit and 
 
 
 
  is the Euclidean norm). Here, it is assumed that the time-harmonic field is 
 
 
 
  If the time-harmonic field is instead 
 
 
 
  one should replace 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in the Sommerfeld radiation condition.
The Sommerfeld radiation condition is used to solve uniquely the Helmholtz equation. For example, consider the problem of radiation due to a point source 
 
 
 
  in three dimensions, so the function 
 
 
 
  in the Helmholtz equation is 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac delta function. This problem has an infinite number of solutions, for example, any function of the form



where 
 
 
 
  is a constant, and



Of all these solutions, only 
 
 
 
  satisfies the Sommerfeld radiation condition and corresponds to a field radiating from 
 
 
 
  The other solutions are unphysical. For example, 
 
 
 
  can be interpreted as energy coming from infinity and sinking at 
 
 

References




"Eighty years of Sommerfeld’s radiation condition", Steven H. Schot, Historia Mathematica 19, #4 (November 1992), pp. 385-401, .

External links



"
Category:Waves Category:Partial differential equations



A. Sommerfeld, Partial Differential Equations in Physics, Academic Press, New York, New York, 1949.↩




