


Landau quantization




Landau quantization

Landau quantization in quantum mechanics is the quantization of the cyclotron orbits of charged particles in magnetic fields. As a result, the charged particles can only occupy orbits with discrete energy values, called Landau levels. The Landau levels are degenerate, with the number of electrons per level directly proportional to the strength of the applied magnetic field. Landau quantization is directly responsible for oscillations in electronic properties of materials as a function of the applied magnetic field. It is named after the Soviet physicist Lev Landau.
Derivation
Consider a two-dimensional system of non-interacting particles with charge 
 
 
 
  and spin 
 
 
 
  confined to an area  LxLy}} in the 
 
 
 
  plane.
Apply a uniform magnetic field 
 
 
 
  along the 
 
 
 
 -axis. In CGS units, the Hamiltonian of this system is


 
  Here, p̂ is the canonical momentum operator and Â is the electromagnetic vector potential, which is related to the magnetic field by



There is some gauge freedom in the choice of vector potential for a given magnetic field. The Hamiltonian is gauge invariant, which means that adding the gradient of a scalar field to Â changes the overall phase of the wave function by an amount corresponding to the scalar field. But physical properties are not influenced by the specific choice of gauge. For simplicity in calculation, choose the Landau gauge, which is


 
  where 
 
 
 
 =|B| and x̂ is the 
 
 
 
  component of the position operator.
In this gauge, the Hamiltonian is


 
  The operator 
 
 
 
  commutes with this Hamiltonian, since the operator ŷ is absent by the choice of gauge. Thus the operator 
 
 
 
  can be replaced by its eigenvalue  .
The Hamiltonian can also be written more simply by noting that the cyclotron frequency is  qB/mc''}}, giving


 
  This is exactly the Hamiltonian for the quantum harmonic oscillator, except with the minimum of the potential shifted in coordinate space by  ħky/mωc}} .
To find the energies, note that translating the harmonic oscillator potential does not affect the energies. The energies of this system are thus identical to those of the standard quantum harmonic oscillator,


 
  The energy does not depend on the quantum number , so there will be degeneracies.
For the wave functions, recall that 
 
 
 
  commutes with the Hamiltonian. Then the wave function factors into a product of momentum eigenstates in the 
 
 
 
  direction and harmonic oscillator eigenstates 
 
 
 
  shifted by an amount 
 
 
0 in the 
 
 
 
  direction:



In sum, the state of the electron is characterized by two quantum numbers, 
 
 
 
  and  .
Landau levels
Each set of wave functions with the same value of 
 
 
 
  is called a Landau level. Effects of Landau levels are only observed when the mean thermal energy is smaller than the energy level separation, , meaning low temperatures and strong magnetic fields.
Each Landau level is degenerate due to the second quantum number . If periodic boundary conditions are assumed,  can take the values


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an integer. The allowed values of 
 
 
 
  are further restricted by the condition that the center of force of the oscillator, , must physically lie within the system, . This gives the following range for 
 
 
 
 ,



For particles with charge 
 
 
 
 , the upper bound on 
 
 
 
  can be simply written as a ratio of fluxes,


 
  where  h/2e''}} is the fundamental quantum of flux and 
 
 
 
  is the flux through the system (with area  LxLy}}).
Thus, for particles with spin 
 
 
 
 , the maximum number 
 
 
 
  of particles per Landau level is



The above gives only a rough idea of the effects of finite-size geometry. Strictly speaking, using the standard solution of the harmonic oscillator is only valid for systems unbounded in the 
 
 
 
 -direction (infinite strips). If the size  is finite, boundary conditions in that direction give rise to non-standard quantization conditions on the magnetic field, involving (in principle) both solutions to the Hermite equation. The filling of these levels with many electrons is still1 an active area of research.
In general, Landau levels are observed in electronic systems, where 
 
 
 
 =1 and 
 
 
 
 =1/2. As the magnetic field is increased, more and more electrons can fit into a given Landau level. The occupation of the highest Landau level ranges from completely full to entirely empty, leading to oscillations in various electronic properties (see de Haas–van Alphen effect and Shubnikov–de Haas effect).
If Zeeman splitting is included, each Landau level splits into a pair, one for spin up electrons and the other for spin down electrons. Then the occupation of each spin Landau level is just the ratio of fluxes 
 
 
 
  = . Zeeman splitting has a significant effect on the Landau levels because their energy scales are the same,  ħω }}. However, the Fermi energy and ground state energy stay roughly the same in a system with many filled levels, since pairs of split energy levels cancel each other out when summed.
Discussion
This derivation treats 
 
 
 
  and y as slightly asymmetric. However, by the symmetry of the system, there is no physical quantity which distinguishes these coordinates. The same result could have been obtained with an appropriate interchange of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Moreover, the above derivation assumed an electron confined in the 
 
 
 
 -direction, which is a relevant experimental situation — found in two-dimensional electron gases, for instance. Still, this assumption is not essential for the results. If electrons are free to move along the 
 
 
 
  direction, the wave function acquires an additional multiplicative term exp(); the energy corresponding to this free motion, , is added to the 
 
 
 
  discussed. This term then fills in the separation in energy of the different Landau levels, blurring the effect of the quantization. Nevertheless, the motion in the 
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -plane, perpendicular to the magnetic field, is still quantized.
Landau Levels in Symmetric Gauge
The symmetric gauge refers to the choice



In terms of dimensionless lengths and energies, the Hamiltonian can be expressed as



The correct units can be restored by introducing factors of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Consider operators












These operators follow certain commutation relations


 
 .
In terms of above operators the Hamiltonian can be written as



Landau Level index 
 
 
 
  is the eigenvalue of 
 
 

The z component of angular momentum is



Exploiting the property 
 
 
 
  we chose eigenfunctions which diagonalize 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , The eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
  is denoted by 
 
 
 
 , where it is clear that 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
 th Landau level. However, it may be arbitrarily large, which is necessary to obtain the infinite degeneracy (or finite degeneracy per unit area) exhibited by the system.
The application of 
 
 
 
  increases 
 
 
 
  by one unit while preserving 
 
 
 
 , whereas 
 
 
 
  application simultaneously increase 
 
 
 
  and decreases 
 
 
 
  by one unit. The analogy to quantum harmonic oscillator provides solutions









Each Landau level has degenerate orbitals labeled by the quantum numbers  and 
 
 
 
  in the Landau and symmetric gauges respectively. The degeneracy per unit area is the same in each Landau level.
One may verify that the above states correspond to choosing wavefunctions proportional to



where 
 
 
 
 .
In particular, the lowest Landau level 
 
 
 
  consists of arbitrary analytic functions multiplying a Gaussian, 
 
 
 
 .
Effects of Gauge Transformation



The definition for kinematical momenta is



where 
 
 
 
  is the canonical momenta. The Hamiltonian is a gauge invariant so 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  will remain invariant under gauge transformations but 
 
 
 
  will depend upon gauge. For observing the effect of gauge transformation on the quantum state of the particle, consider the state with A and A' as Vector Potential, with states 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
As 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is invariant under the gauge transformation we get









Consider an operator 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 

from above relation we deduce that









from this we conclude



See also

Barkhausen effect
de Haas–van Alphen effect
Shubnikov–de Haas effect
Quantum Hall effect
Laughlin wavefunction
Coulomb potential between two current loops embedded in a magnetic field

Further reading

Landau, L. D.; and Lifschitz, E. M.; (1977). Quantum Mechanics: Non-relativistic Theory. Course of Theoretical Physics. Vol. 3 (3rd ed. London: Pergamon Press). ISBN 0750635398 .

"
Category:Quantum mechanics



↩




