


Elliptic rational functions




Elliptic rational functions

(Figure)
Plot of elliptic rational functions for x between -1 and 1 for orders 1,2,3 and 4 with discrimination factor ξ=1.1. Note that all are bounded between -1 and 1 and all have the value 1 at x=1.

In mathematics the elliptic rational functions are a sequence of rational functions with real coefficients. Elliptic rational functions are extensively used in the design of elliptic electronic filters. (These functions are sometimes called Chebyshev rational functions, not to be confused with certain other functions of the same name).
Rational elliptic functions are identified by a positive integer order n and include a parameter ξ ≥ 1 called the selectivity factor. A rational elliptic function of degree n in x with selectivity factor ξ is generally defined as:




cd() is the Jacobi elliptic cosine function.
K() is a complete elliptic integral of the first kind.


 
  is the discrimination factor, equal to the minimum value of the magnitude of 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .

For many cases, in particular for orders of the form n = 2a3b where a and b are integers, the elliptic rational functions can be expressed using algebraic functions alone. Elliptic rational functions are closely related to the Chebyshev polynomials: Just as the circular trigonometric functions are special cases of the Jacobi elliptic functions, so the Chebyshev polynomials are special cases of the elliptic rational functions.
Expression as a ratio of polynomials
For even orders, the elliptic rational functions may be expressed as a ratio of two polynomials, both of order n.


 
       (for n even)
where 
 
 
 
  are the zeroes and 
 
 
 
  are the poles, and 
 
 
 
  is a normalizing constant chosen such that 
 
 
 
 . The above form would be true for even orders as well except that for odd orders, there will be a pole at x=∞ and a zero at x=0 so that the above form must be modified to read:


 
       (for n odd)
Properties
 
The canonical properties



 
  for 
 
 



 
  at 
 
 






 
  for 
 
 

The slope at x=1 is as large as possible
The slope at x=1 is larger than the corresponding slope of the Chebyshev polynomial of the same order.

The only rational function satisfying the above properties is the elliptic rational function . The following properties are derived:
Normalization
The elliptic rational function is normalized to unity at x=1:



Nesting property
The nesting property is written:



This is a very important property:

If 
 
 
 
  is known for all prime n, then nesting property gives 
 
 
 
  for all n. In particular, since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed in closed form without explicit use of the Jacobi elliptic functions, then all 
 
 
 
  for n of the form 
 
 
 
  can be so expressed.
It follows that if the zeroes of 
 
 
 
  for prime n are known, the zeros of all 
 
 
 
  can be found. Using the inversion relationship (see below), the poles can also be found.
The nesting property implies the nesting property of the discrimination factor:









Limiting values
The elliptic rational functions are related to the Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind 
 
 
 
  by:



Symmetry


 
  for n even


 
  for n odd
Equiripple


 
  has equal ripple of 
 
 
 
  in the interval 
 
 
 
 . By the inversion relationship (see below), it follows that 
 
 
 
  has equiripple in 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 .
Inversion relationship
The following inversion relationship holds:



This implies that poles and zeroes come in pairs such that



Odd order functions will have a zero at x=0 and a corresponding pole at infinity.
Poles and Zeroes
The zeroes of the elliptic rational function of order n will be written 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
  is implicitly known. The zeroes of the elliptic rational function will be the zeroes of the polynomial in the numerator of the function.
The following derivation of the zeroes of the elliptic rational function is analogous to that of determining the zeroes of the Chebyshev polynomials . Using the fact that for any z



the defining equation for the elliptic rational functions implies that



so that the zeroes are given by



Using the inversion relationship, the poles may then be calculated.
From the nesting property, if the zeroes of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be algebraically expressed (i.e. without the need for calculating the Jacobi ellipse functions) then the zeroes of 
 
 
 
  can be algebraically expressed. In particular, the zeroes of elliptic rational functions of order 
 
 
 
  may be algebraically expressed . For example, we can find the zeroes of 
 
 
 
  as follows: Define



Then, from the nesting property and knowing that



where 
 
 
 
  we have:






These last three equations may be inverted:



To calculate the zeroes of 
 
 
 
  we set 
 
 
 
  in the third equation, calculate the two values of 
 
 
 
 , then use these values of 
 
 
 
 
  in the second equation to calculate four values of 
 
 
 
  and finally, use these values in the first equation to calculate the eight zeroes of 
 
 
 
 . (The 
 
 
 
  are calculated by a similar recursion.) Again, using the inversion relationship, these zeroes can be used to calculate the poles.
Particular values
We may write the first few elliptic rational functions as:








where
 









where
 















{(1+t)(1+\sqrt{t})^2x^4-2(1+t)(1+\sqrt{t})x^2+1} {(1+t)(1-\sqrt{t})^2x^4-2(1+t)(1-\sqrt{t})x^2+1} 


 
  etc.
See  for further explicit expressions of order n=5 and 
 
 
 
 .
The corresponding discrimination factors are:














 
  etc.
The corresponding zeroes are 
 
 
 
  where n is the order and j is the number of the zero. There will be a total of n zeroes for each order.






























From the inversion relationship, the corresponding poles 
 
 
 
  may be found by 
 
 

References

MathWorld





"
Category:Rational functions Category:Elliptic functions


