


Square-lattice Ising model




Square-lattice Ising model

In statistical mechanics, the two-dimensional square-lattice Ising model is a simple model of interacting magnetic spins. The model is notable for having nontrivial interactions, yet having an analytical solution. The model was solved by  for the special case that the external magnetic field H = 0. An analytical solution for the general case for 
 
 
 
  has yet to be found.
Definition of the model
Consider the 2D Ising model on a square lattice 
 
 
 
  with N sites, with periodic boundary conditions in both the horizontal and vertical directions, which effectively reduces the geometry of the model to a torus. In a general case, the horizontal coupling J is not equal to the coupling in the vertical direction, J*. With an equal number of rows and columns in the lattice, there will be N of each. In terms of






where 
 
 
 
  where T is absolute temperature and k is Boltzmann's constant, the partition function

 
  is given by



Critical temperature
The critical temperature 
 
 
 
  can be obtained from the Kramers–Wannier duality relation. Denoting the free energy per site as 
 
 
 
 , one has:



where






Assuming there is only one critical line in the (K,L) plane, the duality relation implies that this is given by:



For the isotropic case 
 
 
 
 , one finds the famous relation for the critical temperature 
 
 



 
 .
Dual lattice
Consider a configuration of spins 
 
 
 
  on the square lattice 
 
 
 
 . Let r and s denote the number of unlike neighbours in the vertical and horizontal directions respectively. Then the summand in 
 
 
 
  corresponding to 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
   Construct a dual lattice 
 
 
 
  as depicted in the diagram. For every configuration 
 
 
 
 , a polygon is associated to the lattice by drawing a line on the edge of the dual lattice if the spins separated by the edge are unlike. Since by traversing a vertex of 
 
 
 
  the spins need to change an even number of times so that one arrives at the starting point with the same charge, every vertex of the dual lattice is connected to an even number of lines in the configuration, defining a polygon.  This reduces the partition function to



summing over all polygons in the dual lattice, where r and s are the number of horizontal and vertical lines in the polygon, with the factor of 2 arising from the inversion of spin configuration.
Low-temperature expansion
At low temperatures, K, L approach infinity, so that as 
 
 
 
 , so that



defines a low temperature expansion of 
 
 
 
 .
High-temperature expansion
Since 
 
 
 
  one has



Therefore



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Since there are N horizontal and vertical edges, there are a total of 
 
 
 
  terms in the expansion. Every term corresponds to a configuration of lines of the lattice, by associating a line connecting i and j if the term 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
  is chosen in the product. Summing over the configurations, using



shows that only configurations with an even number of lines at each vertex (polygons) will contribute to the partition function, giving



where the sum is over all polygons in the lattice. Since tanh K, tanh L

 
  as 
 
 
 
 , this gives the high temperature expansion of 
 
 
 
 .
The two expansions can be related using the Kramers-Wannier duality.
Exact solution
The free energy per site in the limit 
 
 
 
  is given as follows. Define the parameter k as:



The free energy per site F can be expressed as:



For the isotropic case 
 
 
 
 , from the above expression one finds for the internal energy per site:



and the spontaneous magnetization is, for 
 
 
 
 :



References



Stephen G. Brush (1967), History of the Lenz-Ising Model. Reviews of Modern Physics (American Physical Society) vol. 39, pp 883–893. 




Barry M. McCoy and Tai Tsun Wu (1973), The Two-Dimensional Ising Model. Harvard University Press, Cambridge Massachusetts, ISBN 0-674-91440-6



John Palmer (2007), Planar Ising Correlations. Birkhäuser, Boston, ISBN 978-0-8176-4248-8.


"
Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Exactly solvable models Category:Lattice models


