


ADHM construction




ADHM construction

In mathematical physics, the ADHM construction or monad construction is the construction of all instantons using methods of linear algebra by Michael Atiyah, Vladimir Drinfeld, Nigel Hitchin, Yuri I. Manin in their paper Construction of Instantons.
ADHM data
The ADHM construction uses the following data:

complex vector spaces V and W of dimension k and N,
k × k complex matrices B1, B2, a k × N complex matrix I and a N × k complex matrix J,
a real moment map


a complex moment map 
 
 


Then the ADHM construction claims that, given certain regularity conditions,

Given B1, B2, I, J such that 
 
 
 
 , an anti-self-dual instanton in a SU(N) gauge theory with instanton number k can be constructed,
All anti-self-dual instantons can be obtained in this way and are in one-to-one correspondence with solutions up to a U(k) rotation which acts on each B in the adjoint representation and on I and J via the fundamental and antifundamental representations
The metric on the moduli space of instantons is that inherited from the flat metric on B, I and J.

Generalizations
Noncommutative instantons
In a noncommutative gauge theory, the ADHM construction is identical but the moment map 
 
 
 
  is set equal to the self-dual projection of the noncommutativity matrix of the spacetime times the identity matrix. In this case instantons exist even when the gauge group is U(1). The noncommutative instantons were discovered by Nikita Nekrasov and Albert Schwarz in 1998.
Vortices
Setting B2 and J to zero, one obtains the classical moduli space of nonabelian vortices in a supersymmetric gauge theory with an equal number of colors and flavors, as was demonstrated in Vortices, instantons and branes. The generalization to greater numbers of flavors appeared in Solitons in the Higgs phase: The Moduli matrix approach. In both cases the Fayet-Iliopoulos term, which determines a squark condensate, plays the role of the noncommutativity parameter in the real moment map.
The construction formula
Let x be the 4-dimensional Euclidean spacetime coordinates written in quaternionic notation 
 
 

Consider the 2k × (N + 2k) matrix



Then the conditions 
 
 
 
  are equivalent to the factorization condition


 
  where f(x) is a k × k Hermitian matrix.
Then a hermitian projection operator P can be constructed as



The nullspace of Δ(x) is of dimension N for generic x. The basis vectors for this null-space can be assembled into an (N + 2k) × N matrix U(x) with orthonormalization condition U†U = 1.
A regularity condition on the rank of Δ guarantees the completeness condition



The anti-selfdual connection is then constructed from U by the formula



See also

Monad (linear algebra)

References



[http://projecteuclid.org/DPubS/Repository/1.0/Disseminate?view=body&id;;=pdf_1&handle;=euclid.cmp/1103922679 On the Construction of Monopoles]

"
Category:Quantum field theory Category:Differential geometry Category:Quantum chromodynamics


