


Triple product rule




Triple product rule

The triple product rule, known variously as the cyclic chain rule, cyclic relation, cyclical rule or Euler's chain rule, is a formula which relates partial derivatives of three interdependent variables. The rule finds application in thermodynamics, where frequently three variables can be related by a function of the form f(x, y, z) = 0, so each variable is given as an implicit function of the other two variables. For example, an equation of state for a fluid relates temperature, pressure, and volume in this manner. The triple product rule for such interrelated variables x, y, and z comes from using a reciprocity relation on the result of the implicit function theorem and is given by





Note: In each term the variable in the numerator is considered to be an implicit function of the other two. In each term the subscripted variable is being held constant.
 



Here the subscripts indicate which variables are held constant when the partial derivative is taken. That is, to explicitly compute the partial derivative of x with respect to y with z held constant, one would write x as a function of y and z and take the partial derivative of this function with respect to y only.
The advantage of the triple product rule is that by rearranging terms, one can derive a number of substitution identities which allow one to replace partial derivatives which are difficult to analytically evaluate, experimentally measure, or integrate with quotients of partial derivatives which are easier to work with. For example,



Various other forms of the rule are present in the literature; these can be derived by permuting the variables {x, y, z}.
Derivation
An informal derivation follows. Suppose that f(x, y, z) = 0. Write z as a function of x and y. Thus the total differential dz is



Suppose that we move along a curve with dz = 0, where the curve is parameterized by x. Thus y can be written in terms of x, so on this curve



Therefore the equation for dz = 0 becomes



Since this must be true for all dx, rearranging terms gives



Dividing by the derivatives on the right hand side gives the triple product rule



Note that this proof makes many implicit assumptions regarding the existence of partial derivatives, the existence of the exact differential dz, the ability to construct a curve in some neighborhood with dz = 0, and the nonzero value of partial derivatives and their reciprocals. A formal proof based on mathematical analysis would eliminate these potential ambiguities.
Alternative Derivation
Suppose a function f(x,y,z)=0, where x,y and z are functions of each other. Write the total differentials of the variables








 
  Substitute dy into dx


 
  Now substitute for dz


 
  The coefficients of dx must be equal


 
  By using the chain rule one can show that the other two terms are equal to one, thus



See also

Exact differential (has another derivation of the triple product rule)
Total derivative
Triple product for vectors and scalars.

References

Elliott, JR, and Lira, CT. Introductory Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, 1st Ed., Prentice Hall PTR, 1999. p. 184.
Carter, Ashley H. Classical and Statistical Thermodynamics, Prentice Hall, 2001, p. 392.

"
Category:Laws of thermodynamics Category:Multivariable calculus


