


Heap (mathematics)




Heap (mathematics)

In abstract algebra, a heap (sometimes also called a groud1) is a mathematical generalization of a group. Informally speaking, a heap is obtained from a group by "forgetting" which element is the unit, in the same way that an affine space can be viewed as a vector space in which the 0 element has been "forgotten". A heap is essentially the same thing as a torsor, and the category of heaps is equivalent to the category of torsors, with morphisms given by transport of structure under group homomorphisms, but the theory of heaps emphasizes the intrinsic composition law, rather than global structures such as the geometry of bundles.
Formally, a heap is an algebraic structure consisting of a non-empty set H with a ternary operation denoted 
 
 
 
  that satisfies

the para-associative law










the identity law









A group can be regarded as a heap under the operation 
 
 
 
 . Conversely, let H be a heap, and choose an element . The binary operation

 
  makes H into a group with identity e and inverse 
 
 
 
 . A heap can thus be regarded as a group in which the identity has yet to be decided.
Whereas the automorphisms of a single object form a group, the set of isomorphisms between two isomorphic objects naturally forms a heap, with the operation 
 
 
 
  (here juxtaposition denotes composition of functions). This heap becomes a group once a particular isomorphism by which the two objects are to be identified is chosen.
Examples
Two element heap
If 
 
 
 
  then the following structure is a heap:






Heap of a group
As noted above, any group becomes a heap under the operation



One important special case:
Heap of integers
If 
 
 
 
  are integers, we can set 
 
 
 
  to produce a heap. We can then choose any integer 
 
 
 
  to be the identity of a new group on the set of integers, with the operation 
 
 



 
  and inverse


 
 .
Generalizations and related concepts

A pseudoheap or pseudogroud satisfies the partial para-associative condition2





A semiheap or semigroud is required to satisfy only the para-associative law but need not obey the identity law.3



An example of a semigroud that is not in general a groud is given by M a ring of matrices of fixed size with
 
 



where • denotes matrix multiplication and T denotes matrix transpose.4





An idempotent semiheap is a semiheap where 
 
 
 
  for all a.
A generalised heap or generalised groud is an idempotent semiheap where





 
  and 
 
 
 
  for all a and b.
 



A semigroud is a generalised groud if the relation → defined by



is reflexive (idempotence) and anti-symmetric. In a generalised groud, → is an order relation.5

A torsor is an equivalent notion to a heap that places more emphasis on the associated group. Any 
 
 
 
 -torsor 
 
 
 
  is a heap under the operation 
 
 
 
 . Conversely, if 
 
 
 
  is a heap, any 
 
 
 
  define a permutation

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . If we let 
 
 
 
  be the set of all such permutations 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  is a group and 
 
 
 
  is a 
 
 
 
 -torsor under the natural action.

Notes
References




"
Category:Algebraic structures



Schein (1979) pp.101–102: footnote (o)
Vagner (1968)


Schein (1979) p.104




