


Weyl scalar




Weyl scalar

In the Newman–Penrose (NP) formalism of general relativity, Weyl scalars refer to a set of five complex scalars

 
  which encode the ten independent components of the Weyl tensors of a four-dimensional spacetime.
Definitions
Given a complex null tetrad 
 
 
 
  and with the convention 
 
 
 
 , the Weyl-NP scalars are defined by123















Note: If one adopts the convention 
 
 
 
 , the definitions of 
 
 
 
  should take the opposite values;4567 that is to say, 
 
 
 
  after the signature transition.
Alternative derivations
According to the definitions above, one should find out the Weyl tensors before calculating the Weyl-NP scalars via contractions with relevant tetrad vectors. This method, however, does not fully reflect the spirit of Newman–Penrose formalism. As an alternative, one could firstly compute the spin coefficients and then derive the five Weyl-NP scalars via the following NP field equations,















where 
 
 
 
  (used for 
 
 
 
 ) refers to the NP curvature scalar 
 
 
 
  which could be calculated directly from the spacetime metric 
 
 
 
 .
Physical interpretation
Szekeres (1965)8 gave an interpretation of the different Weyl scalars at large distances:


 
  is a "Coulomb" term, representing the gravitational monopole of the source;


 
  & 
 
 
 
  are ingoing and outgoing "longitudinal" radiation terms;


 
  & 
 
 
 
  are ingoing and outgoing "transverse" radiation terms.
For a general asymptotically flat spacetime containing radiation (Petrov Type I), 
 
 
 
  & 
 
 
 
  can be transformed to zero by an appropriate choice of null tetrad. Thus these can be viewed as gauge quantities.
A particularly important case is the Weyl scalar 
 
 
 
 . It can be shown to describe outgoing gravitational radiation (in an asymptotically flat spacetime) as


 
  Here, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are the "plus" and "cross" polarizations of gravitational radiation, and the double dots represent double time-differentiation.
There are, however, certain examples in which the interpretation listed above fails.9 These are exact vacuum solutions of the Einstein field equations with cylindrical symmetry. For instance, a static (infinitely long) cylinder can produce a gravitational field which has not only the expected "Coulomb"-like Weyl component 
 
 
 
 , but also non-vanishing "transverse wave"-components 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, purely outgoing Einstein-Rosen waves have a non-zero "incoming transverse wave"-component 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Weyl-NP and Ricci-NP scalars

References


"
Category:General relativity



Jeremy Bransom Griffiths, Jiri Podolsky. Exact Space-Times in Einstein's General Relativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009. Chapter 2.↩
Valeri P Frolov, Igor D Novikov. Black Hole Physics: Basic Concepts and New Developments. Berlin: Springer, 1998. Appendix E.↩
Abhay Ashtekar, Stephen Fairhurst, Badri Krishnan. Isolated horizons: Hamiltonian evolution and the first law. Physical Review D, 2000, 62(10): 104025. Appendix B. gr-qc/0005083↩
Ezra T Newman, Roger Penrose. An Approach to Gravitational Radiation by a Method of Spin Coefficients. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 1962, 3(3): 566-768.↩
Ezra T Newman, Roger Penrose. Errata: An Approach to Gravitational Radiation by a Method of Spin Coefficients. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 1963, 4(7): 998.↩
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. The Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Chicago: University of Chikago Press, 1983.↩
Peter O'Donnell. Introduction to 2-Spinors in General Relativity. Singapore: World Scientific, 2003.↩
.↩
↩




