


Choi's theorem on completely positive maps




Choi's theorem on completely positive maps

In mathematics, Choi's theorem on completely positive maps (after Man-Duen Choi) is a result that classifies completely positive maps between finite-dimensional (matrix) C*-algebras. An infinite-dimensional algebraic generalization of Choi's theorem is known as Belavkin's "Radon–Nikodym" theorem for completely positive maps.
Choi's result
Statement of theorem

Choi's Theorem. Let  be a positive map. The following are equivalent:
 
(i) 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -positive.
 
(ii) The matrix with operator entries
 
 



is positive, where  is the matrix with 1 in the 
 
 
 
 -th entry and 0s elsewhere. (The matrix CΦ is sometimes called the Choi matrix of 
 
 
 
 .)
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
  is completely positive.
 

Proof
(i) implies (ii)
We observe that if


 
  then E=E* and E2=nE, so E=n−1EE* which is positive. Therefore CΦ =(In ⊗ Φ)(E) is positive by the n-positivity of Φ.
(iii) implies (i)
This holds trivially.
(ii) implies (iii)
This mainly involves chasing the different ways of looking at Cnm×nm:



Let the eigenvector decomposition of CΦ be



where the vectors 
 
 
 
  lie in Cnm . By assumption, each eigenvalue 
 
 
 
  is non-negative so we can absorb the eigenvalues in the eigenvectors and redefine 
 
 
 
  so that



The vector space Cnm can be viewed as the direct sum 
 
 
 
  compatibly with the above identification 
 
 
 
  and the standard basis of Cn.
If Pk ∈ Cm × nm is projection onto the k-th copy of Cm, then Pk* ∈ Cnm×m is the inclusion of Cm as the k-th summand of the direct sum and



Now if the operators Vi ∈ Cm×n are defined on the k-th standard basis vector ek of Cn by



then



Extending by linearity gives us


 
  for any A ∈ Cn×n. Since any map of this form is manifestly completely positive, we have the desired result.
The above is essentially Choi's original proof. Alternative proofs have also been known.
Consequences
Kraus operators
In the context of quantum information theory, the operators {Vi} are called the Kraus operators (after Karl Kraus) of Φ. Notice, given a completely positive Φ, its Kraus operators need not be unique. For example, any "square root" factorization of the Choi matrix  B∗B}} gives a set of Kraus operators. (Notice B need not be the unique positive square root of the Choi matrix.)
Let



where bi*'s are the row vectors of B, then



The corresponding Kraus operators can be obtained by exactly the same argument from the proof.
When the Kraus operators are obtained from the eigenvector decomposition of the Choi matrix, because the eigenvectors form an orthogonal set, the corresponding Kraus operators are also orthogonal in the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product. This is not true in general for Kraus operators obtained from square root factorizations. (Positive semidefinite matrices do not generally have a unique square-root factorizations.)
If two sets of Kraus operators {Ai}1nm and {Bi}1nm represent the same completely positive map Φ, then there exists a unitary operator matrix



This can be viewed as a special case of the result relating two minimal Stinespring representations.
Alternatively, there is an isometry scalar matrix {uij}ij ∈ Cnm × nm such that



This follows from the fact that for two square matrices M and N, M M* = N N* if and only if M = N U for some unitary U.
Completely copositive maps
It follows immediately from Choi's theorem that Φ is completely copositive if and only if it is of the form



Hermitian-preserving maps
Choi's technique can be used to obtain a similar result for a more general class of maps. Φ is said to be Hermitian-preserving if A is Hermitian implies Φ(A) is also Hermitian. One can show Φ is Hermitian-preserving if and only if it is of the form



where λi are real numbers, the eigenvalues of CΦ, and each Vi corresponds to an eigenvector of CΦ. Unlike the completely positive case, CΦ may fail to be positive. Since Hermitian matrices do not admit factorizations of the form B*B in general, the Kraus representation is no longer possible for a given Φ.
See also

Stinespring factorization theorem
Quantum operation
Holevo's theorem

References

M. Choi, Completely Positive Linear Maps on Complex matrices, Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 285–290, 1975


V. P. Belavkin, P. Staszewski, Radon-Nikodym Theorem for Completely Positive Maps, Reports on Mathematical Physics, v.24, No 1, 49–55, 1986.


J. de Pillis, Linear Transformations Which Preserve Hermitian and Positive Semidefinite Operators, Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 129–137, 1967.

"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Operator theory Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in functional analysis


