


Borel–Moore homology




Borel–Moore homology

In topology, Borel−Moore homology or homology with closed support is a homology theory for locally compact spaces, introduced by .
For reasonable compact spaces, Borel−Moore homology coincides with the usual singular homology. For non-compact spaces, each theory has its own advantages. In particular, a closed submanifold defines a class in Borel–Moore homology, but not in ordinary homology unless the submanifold is compact.
Note: The equivariant cohomology theory for spaces with an action of a group G is sometimes called Borel cohomology; it is defined as H*G(X) = H*((EG × X)/G). That is not related to the subject of this article.
Definition
There are several ways to define Borel−Moore homology. They all coincide for reasonable spaces such as manifolds and CW complexes.
Definition via sheaf cohomology
For any locally compact space X, Borel-Moore homology with integral coefficients is defined as the cohomology of the dual of the chain complex which computes sheaf cohomology with compact support.1 As a result, there is a short exact sequence analogous to the universal coefficient theorem: 
 
 

In what follows, the coefficients Z are not written.
Definition via locally finite chains
The singular homology of a topological space X is defined as the homology of the chain complex of singular chains, that is, finite linear combinations of continuous maps from the simplex to X. The Borel−Moore homology of a reasonable locally compact space X, on the other hand, is isomorphic to the homology of the chain complex of locally finite singular chains. "Reasonable" means here that X is locally contractible, σ-compact, and of finite dimension.2
In more detail, let CiBM(X) be the abelian group of formal (infinite) sums


 
  where σ runs over the set of all continuous maps from the standard i-simplex Δi to X and each aσ is an integer, such that for each compact subset S of X, only finitely many maps σ whose image meets S have nonzero coefficient in u. Then the usual definition of the boundary ∂ of a singular chain makes these abelian groups into a chain complex:


 
  The Borel−Moore homology groups HiBM(X) are the homology groups of this chain complex. That is,



If X is compact, then every locally finite chain is in fact finite. So, given that X is "reasonable" in the sense above, Borel−Moore homology HiBM(X) coincides with the usual singular homology Hi(X) for X compact.
Definition via compactifications
Suppose that X is homeomorphic to the complement of a closed subcomplex S in a finite CW complex Y. Then Borel–Moore homology HiBM(X) is isomorphic to the relative homology Hi(Y, S). Under the same assumption on X, the one-point compactification of X is homeomorphic to a finite CW complex. As a result, Borel–Moore homology can be viewed as the relative homology of the one-point compactification with respect to the added point.
Definition via Poincaré duality
Let X be any locally compact space with a closed embedding into an oriented manifold M of dimension m. Then



where in the right hand side, the usual relative cohomology is meant.3
Definition via the dualizing complex
For any locally compact space X of finite dimension, let  be the dualizing complex of 
 
 
 
 . Then



where in the right hand side, hypercohomology is meant.4
Example
Let X = R2 − 0, the plane minus the origin. The usual homology of X is Z in degrees 0 and 1 (and zero otherwise), while the Borel−Moore homology of X is Z in degrees 1 and 2 (and zero otherwise). In this example, the natural homomorphism Hi(X) → HiBM(X) is zero for all integers i. For example, the usual homology H1(X) is generated by a circle around the origin, but this maps to zero in Borel–Moore homology, because a finite 1-chain representing the circle is the boundary of a locally finite 2-chain whose image is the region inside the circle. The Borel–Moore homology H1BM(X) is generated by a locally finite 1-chain whose image is (for example) the ray from 0 to ∞ in the real line R inside R2.
Properties

Borel−Moore homology is a covariant functor with respect to proper maps. That is, a proper map f: X → Y induces a pushforward homomorphism HiBM(X) → HiBM(Y) for all integers i. In contrast to ordinary homology, there is no pushforward on Borel−Moore homology for an arbitrary continuous map f. As a counterexample, one can consider the non-proper inclusion R2 − 0 → R2.


Borel−Moore homology is a contravariant functor with respect to inclusions of open subsets. That is, for U open in X, there is a natural pullback or restriction homomorphism HiBM(X) → HiBM(U).


For any locally compact space X and any closed subset F, with U = X − F the complement, there is a long exact localization sequence:5





Borel−Moore homology is homotopy invariant in the sense that for any space X, there is an isomorphism HiBM(X) → Hi+1BM(X × R). The shift in dimension means that Borel−Moore homology is not homotopy invariant in the naive sense. For example, the Borel−Moore homology of Euclidean space Rn is isomorphic to Z in degree n and is otherwise zero.


Poincaré duality extends to non-compact manifolds using Borel–Moore homology. Namely, for an oriented n-manifold X, Poincaré duality is an isomorphism









for all integers i. A different version of Poincaré duality for non-compact manifolds is the isomorphism from cohomology with compact support to usual homology:









A key advantage of Borel−Moore homology is that every oriented manifold M of dimension n (in particular, every smooth complex algebraic variety), not necessarily compact, has a fundamental class [M] ∈ HnBM(M). This is just the sum of all top dimensional simplices in a specific triangulation. In fact, in Borel−Moore homology, one can define a fundamental class for arbitrary (possibly singular) complex varieties. In this case the set of smooth points  has complement of (real) codimension at least 2, and by the long exact sequence above the top dimensional homologies of 
 
 
 
  and  are canonically isomorphic. The fundamental class of 
 
 
 
  is then defined to be the fundamental class of .6

Notes
References






"
Category:Homology theory Category:Sheaf theory



B. Iversen. Cohomology of sheaves. Section IX.1.
G. Bredon. Sheaf theory. Corollary V.12.21.
B. Iversen. Cohomology of sheaves. Theorem IX.4.7.
B. Iversen. Cohomology of sheaves. Equation IX.4.1.
B. Iversen. Cohomology of sheaves. Equation IX.2.1.
W. Fulton. Intersection theory. Lemma 19.1.1.




