


N-connected




N-connected

In the mathematical branch of algebraic topology, specifically homotopy theory, n-connectedness is a way to say that a space vanishes or that a map is an isomorphism "up to dimension n, in homotopy".
n-connected space
A topological space X is said to be n-connected when it is non-empty, path-connected, and its first n homotopy groups vanish identically, that is



where the left-hand side denotes the i-th homotopy group.
The requirements of being non-empty and path-connected can be interpreted as (−1)-connected and 0-connected, respectively, which is useful in defining 0-connected and 1-connected maps, as below. The 0-th homotopy set can be defined as:


 
  This is only a pointed set, not a group, unless X is itself a topological group; the distinguished point is the class of the trivial map, sending S0 to the base point of X. Using this set, a space is 0-connected if and only if the 0th homotopy set is the one-point set. The definition of homotopy groups and this homotopy set require that X be pointed (have a chosen base point), which cannot be done if X is empty.
A topological space X is path-connected if and only if its 0-th homotopy group vanishes identically, as path-connectedness implies that any two points x1 and x2 in X can be connected with a continuous path which starts in x1 and ends in x2, which is equivalent to the assertion that every mapping from S0 (a discrete set of two points) to X can be deformed continuously to a constant map. With this definition, we can define X to be n-connected if and only if



Examples

A space X is (−1)-connected if and only if it is non-empty.
A space X is 0-connected if and only if it is non-empty and path-connected.
A space is 1-connected if and only if it is simply connected.
An n-sphere is (n-1)-connected.

n-connected map
The corresponding relative notion to the absolute notion of an n-connected space is an n-connected map, which is defined as a map whose homotopy fiber Ff is an (n − 1)-connected space. In terms of homotopy groups, it means that a map 
 
 
 
  is n-connected if and only if:



 
  is an isomorphism for 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  is a surjection.

The last condition is frequently confusing; it is because the vanishing of the (n − 1)-st homotopy group of the homotopy fiber Ff corresponds to a surjection on the nth homotopy groups, in the exact sequence:


 
  If the group on the right 
 
 
 
  vanishes, then the map on the left is a surjection.
Low-dimensional examples:

A connected map (0-connected map) is one that is onto path components (0th homotopy group); this corresponds to the homotopy fiber being non-empty.
A simply connected map (1-connected map) is one that is an isomorphism on path components (0th homotopy group) and onto the fundamental group (1st homotopy group).

n-connectivity for spaces can in turn be defined in terms of n-connectivity of maps: a space X with basepoint x0 is an n-connected space if and only if the inclusion of the basepoint 
 
 
 
  is an n-connected map. The single point set is contractible, so all its homotopy groups vanish, and thus "isomorphism below n and onto at n" corresponds to the first n homotopy groups of X vanishing.
Interpretation
This is instructive for a subset: an n-connected inclusion 
 
 
 
  is one such that, up to dimension n−1, homotopies in the larger space X can be homotoped into homotopies in the subset A.
For example, for an inclusion map 
 
 
 
  to be 1-connected, it must be:

onto 
 
 

one-to-one on 
 
 
 
  and
onto 
 
 


One-to-one on 
 
 
 
  means that if there is a path connecting two points 
 
 
 
  by passing through X, there is a path in A connecting them, while onto 
 
 
 
  means that in fact a path in X is homotopic to a path in A.
In other words, a function which is an isomorphism on 
 
 
 
  only implies that any element of 
 
 
 
  that are homotopic in X are abstractly homotopic in A – the homotopy in A may be unrelated to the homotopy in X – while being n-connected (so also onto 
 
 
 
 ) means that (up to dimension n−1) homotopies in X can be pushed into homotopies in A.
This gives a more concrete explanation for the utility of the definition of n-connectedness: for example, a space such that the inclusion of the k-skeleton in n-connected (for n>k) – such as the inclusion of a point in the n-sphere – means that any cells in dimension between k and n are not affecting the homotopy type from the point of view of low dimensions.
Applications
The concept of n-connectedness is used in the Hurewicz theorem which describes the relation between singular homology and the higher homotopy groups.
In geometric topology, cases when the inclusion of a geometrically-defined space, such as the space of immersions 
 
 
 
  into a more general topological space, such as the space of all continuous maps between two associated spaces 
 
 
 
  are n-connected are said to satisfy a homotopy principle or "h-principle". There are a number of powerful general techniques for proving h-principles.
See also

connected space
simply connected
path-connected
connective spectrum

"
Category:Connection (mathematics) Category:General topology Category:Properties of topological spaces Category:Homotopy theory


