


Bessel polynomials




Bessel polynomials

In mathematics, the Bessel polynomials are an orthogonal sequence of polynomials. There are a number of different but closely related definitions. The definition favored by mathematicians is given by the series (Krall & Frink, 1948)



Another definition, favored by electrical engineers, is sometimes known as the reverse Bessel polynomials (See Grosswald 1978, Berg 2000).



The coefficients of the second definition are the same as the first but in reverse order. For example, the third-degree Bessel polynomial is



while the third-degree reverse Bessel polynomial is



The reverse Bessel polynomial is used in the design of Bessel electronic filters.
Properties
Definition in terms of Bessel functions
The Bessel polynomial may also be defined using Bessel functions from which the polynomial draws its name.









where Kn(x) is a modified Bessel function of the second kind and yn(x) is the reverse polynomial (pag 7 and 34 Grosswald 1978).
Definition as a hypergeometric function
The Bessel polynomial may also be defined as a confluent hypergeometric function (Dita, 2006)



The reverse Bessel polynomial may be defined as a generalized Laguerre polynomial:



from which it follows that it may also be defined as a hypergeometric function:



where (−2n)n is the Pochhammer symbol (falling factorial).
The inversion for monomials is given by



Generating function
The Bessel polynomials have the generating function



Recursion
The Bessel polynomial may also be defined by a recursion formula:









and









Differential equation
The Bessel polynomial obeys the following differential equation:



and



Generalization
Explicit Form
A generalization of the Bessel polynomials have been suggested in literature (Krall, Fink), as following:


 
  the corresponding reverse polynomials are



For the weighting function


 
  they are orthogonal, for the relation


 
  holds for m ≠ n and c a curve surrounding the 0 point.
They specialize to the Bessel polynomials for α = β = 2, in which situation ρ(x) = exp(−2 / x).
Rodrigues formula for Bessel polynomials
The Rodrigues formula for the Bessel polynomials as particular solutions of the above differential equation is :



where a are normalization coefficients.
Associated Bessel polynomials
According to this generalization we have the following generalized differential equation for associated Bessel polynomials:



where 
 
 
 
 . The solutions are,



Particular values


 
 
  none of which factor. Filaseta and Trifonov (Journal for Pure and Applied Mathematics, 550:125-140, 2002) proved that all Bessel polynomials are irreducible.
References




(See sequences , , and )






External links





"
Category:Orthogonal polynomials Category:Special hypergeometric functions


