


Cerf theory




Cerf theory

In mathematics, at the junction of singularity theory and differential topology, Cerf theory is the study of families of smooth real-valued functions



on a smooth manifold M, their generic singularities and the topology of the subspaces these singularities define, as subspaces of the function space.
An example
Marston Morse proved that, provided 
 
 
 
  is compact, any smooth function



could be approximated by a Morse function. So for many purposes, one can replace arbitrary functions on 
 
 
 
  by Morse functions.
As a next step, one could ask, 'if you have a 1-parameter family of functions which start and end at Morse functions, can you assume the whole family is Morse?' In general the answer is no. Consider, for example, the family:



as a 1-parameter family of functions on 
 
 
 
 . At time



it has no critical points, but at time



it is a Morse function with two critical points



Jean Cerf1 showed that a 1-parameter family of functions between two Morse functions could be approximated by one that is Morse at all but finitely many degenerate times. The degeneracies involve a birth/death transition of critical points, as in the above example when 
 
 
 
  an index 0 and index 1 critical point are created (as 
 
 
 
  increases).
A stratification of an infinite-dimensional space
Let's return to the general case that 
 
 
 
  is a compact manifold. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the space of Morse functions



and 
 
 
 
  the space of smooth functions



Morse proved that



is an open and dense subset in the 
 
 
 
  topology.
For the purposes of intuition, here is an analogy. Think of the Morse functions as the top-dimensional open stratum in a stratification of 
 
 
 
  (we make no claim that such a stratification exists, but suppose one does). Notice that in stratified spaces, the co-dimension 0 open stratum is open and dense. For notational purposes, reverse the conventions for indexing the stratifications in a stratified space, and index the open strata not by their dimension, but by their co-dimension. This is convenient since 
 
 
 
  is infinite-dimensional if 
 
 
 
  is not a finite set. By assumption, the open co-dimension 0 stratum of 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 , i.e.
 
 
 
 . In a stratified space 
 
 
 
 , frequently 
 
 
 
  is disconnected. The essential property of the co-dimension 1 stratum 
 
 
 
  is that any path in 
 
 
 
  which starts and ends in 
 
 
 
  can be approximated by a path that intersects 
 
 
 
  transversely in finitely many points, and does not intersect 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
 .
Thus Cerf theory is the study of the positive co-dimensional strata of 
 
 
 
 , i.e.
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 . In the case of



only for 
 
 
 
  is the function not Morse, and



has a cubic degenerate critical point corresponding to the birth/death transition.
A single time parameter, statement of theorem
The Morse Theorem asserts that if 
 
 
 
  is a Morse function, then near a critical point 
 
 
 
  it is conjugate to a function 
 
 
 
  of the form



where 
 
 
 
 .
Cerf's 1-parameter theorem asserts the essential property of the co-dimension one stratum.
Precisely, if 
 
 
 
  is a 1-parameter family of smooth functions on 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  Morse, then there exists a smooth 1-parameter family 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is uniformly close to 
 
 
 
  in the 
 
 
 
 -topology on functions 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, 
 
 
 
  is Morse at all but finitely many times. At a non-Morse time the function has only one degenerate critical point 
 
 
 
 , and near that point the family 
 
 
 
  is conjugate to the family



where 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
  this is a 1-parameter family of functions where two critical points are created (as 
 
 
 
  increases), and for 
 
 
 
  it is a 1-parameter family of functions where two critical points are destroyed.
Origins
The PL-Schoenflies problem for 
 
 
 
  was solved by Alexander in 1924. His proof was adapted to the smooth case by Morse and Baiada. The essential property was used by Cerf in order to prove that every orientation-preserving diffeomorphism of 

 is isotopic to the identity,2 seen as a 1-parameter extension of the Schoenflies theorem for 
 
 
 
 . The corollary 

 at the time had wide implications in differential topology. The essential property was later used by Cerf to prove the pseudo-isotopy theorem3 for high-dimensional simply-connected manifolds. The proof is a 1-parameter extension of Smale's proof of the h-cobordism theorem (the rewriting of Smale's proof into the functional framework was done by Morse, also Milnor,4 and also by Cerf-Gramain-Morin 5 following a suggestion of Thom).
Cerf's proof is built on the work of Thom and Mather.6 A useful modern summary of Thom and Mather's work from the period is the book of Golubitsky and Guillemin.7
Applications
Beside the above-mentioned applications, Robion Kirby used Cerf Theory as a key step in justifying the Kirby calculus.
Generalization
A stratification of the complement of an infinite co-dimension subspace of the space of smooth maps 
 
 
 
  was eventually developed by Sergeraert.8
During the seventies, the classification problem for pseudo-isotopies of non-simply connected manifolds was solved by Hatcher and Wagoner,9 discovering algebraic 
 
 
-obstructions on 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) and 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ) and by Igusa, discovering obstructions of a similar nature on 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
 ).10
References


"
Category:Differential topology Category:Singularity theory



French mathematician, born 1928↩
J.Cerf, Sur les difféomorphismes de la sphère de dimension trois (Γ4=0), Lecture Notes in Mathematics, No. 53. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York 1968.↩
J.Cerf, La stratification naturelle des espaces de fonctions différentiables réelles et le théorème de la pseudo-isotopie, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. No. 39 (1970) 5--173.↩
J. Milnor, Lectures on the h-cobordism theorem, Notes by L.Siebenmann and J.Sondow, Princeton Math. Notes 1965↩
Le theoreme du h-cobordisme (Smale) Notes by Jean Cerf and Andre Gramain (Ecole Normale Superieure, 1968).↩
J. Mather, Classification of stable germs by R-algebras, Publ. Math. IHES (1969)↩
M. Golubitsky, V.Guillemin. Stable Mappings and Their Singularities. Springer-Verlag Graduate Texts in Mathematics 14 (1973)↩
F. Sergeraert "Un theoreme de fonctions implicites sur certains espaces de Fréchet et quelques applications," Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. (4) 5 (1972), 599-660.↩
Allen Hatcher and John Wagoner, Pseudo-isotopies of compact manifolds. Astérisque, No. 6. Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 1973. 275 pp.↩
K.Igusa, Stability theorem for smooth pseudoisotopies. K-Theory 2 (1988), no. 1-2, vi+355.↩




