


Yetter–Drinfeld category




Yetter–Drinfeld category

In mathematics a Yetter–Drinfeld category is a special type of braided monoidal category. It consists of modules over a Hopf algebra which satisfy some additional axioms.
Definition
Let H be a Hopf algebra over a field k. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the coproduct and S the antipode of H. Let V be a vector space over k. Then V is called a (left left) Yetter–Drinfeld module over H if



 
  is a left H-module, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the left action of H on V and ⊗ denotes a tensor product,


 
  is a left H-comodule, where 
 
 
 
  denotes the left coaction of H on V,
the maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  satisfy the compatibility condition







\otimes h_{(2)}\boldsymbol{.}v_{(0)} for all 
 
 
 
 ,

where, using Sweedler notation, 

\otimes h_{(3)} \in H\otimes H\otimes H denotes the twofold coproduct of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
Examples

Any left H-module over a cocommutative Hopf algebra H is a Yetter–Drinfeld module with the trivial left coaction 
 
 
 
 .
The trivial module 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , is a Yetter–Drinfeld module for all Hopf algebras H.
If H is the group algebra kG of an abelian group G, then Yetter–Drinfeld modules over H are precisely the G-graded G-modules. This means that





 
 ,
 


where each 
 
 
 
  is a G-submodule of V.
 


More generally, if the group G is not abelian, then Yetter–Drinfeld modules over H=kG are G-modules with a G-gradation





 
 , such that 
 
 
 
 .
 




Over the base field 
 
 
all finite-dimensional, irreducible/simple Yetter–Drinfeld modules over a (nonabelian) group H=kG are uniquely given1 through a conjugacy class

 
  together with 
 
 
 
  (character of) an irreducible group representation of the centralizer

 
  of some representing 
 
 
 
 :
 
 



As G-module take 
 
 
 
  to be the induced module of 
 
 
 
 :








(this can be proven easily not to depend on the choice of g)
 


To define the G-graduation (comodule) assign any element 
 
 
 
  to the graduation layer:










It is very custom to directly construct

 
  as direct sum of X´s and write down the G-action by choice of a specific set of representatives 
 
 
 
  for the 
 
 
 
 -cosets. From this approach, one often writes








(this notation emphasizes the graduation
 
 
 
 , rather than the module structure)
 


Braiding
Let H be a Hopf algebra with invertible antipode S, and let V, W be Yetter–Drinfeld modules over H. Then the map 
 
 
 
 ,







is invertible with inverse
 
 



Further, for any three Yetter–Drinfeld modules U, V, W the map c satisfies the braid relation
 
 




A monoidal category

 
  consisting of Yetter–Drinfeld modules over a Hopf algebra H with bijective antipode is called a Yetter–Drinfeld category. It is a braided monoidal category with the braiding c above. The category of Yetter–Drinfeld modules over a Hopf algebra H with bijective antipode is denoted by 
 
 
 
 .
References



"
Category:Hopf algebras Category:Quantum groups Category:Monoidal categories



N. Andruskiewitsch and M.Grana: Braided Hopf algebras over non abelian groups, Bol. Acad. Ciencias (Cordoba) 63(1999), 658-691




