


Classification of Fatou components




Classification of Fatou components

In mathematics, Fatou components are components of the Fatou set.
Rational case
If f is a rational function



defined in the extended complex plane, and if it is a nonlinear function ( degree > 1 )



then for a periodic component

 
  of the Fatou set, exactly one of the following holds:



 
  contains an attracting periodic point


 
 
  is parabolic1


 
  is a Siegel disc


 
  is a Herman ring.

A Siegel disk is a simply connected Fatou component on which f(z) is analytically conjugate to a Euclidean rotation of the unit disc onto itself by an irrational rotation angle. A Herman ring is a double connected Fatou component (an annulus) on which f(z) is analytically conjugate to a Euclidean rotation of a round annulus, again by an irrational rotation angle.
Examples
File:Julia-set_N_z3-1.png|Julia set (white) and Fatou set (dark red/green/blue) for 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in the complex plane. File:Fatou componenets 3.png|Julia set with attracting cycle File:Parabolic Julia set for internal angle 1 over 15.png|Parabolic Julia set File:Quadratic Golden Mean Siegel Disc Average Velocity - Gray.png|Julia set with Siegel disc File:Herman Standard.png|Julia set with Herman ring
Attracting periodic point
The components of the map 
 
 
 
 
  contain the attracting points that are the solutions to 
 
 
 
 . This is because the map is the one to use for finding solutions to the equation 
 
 
 
  by Newton-Raphson formula. The solutions must naturally be attracting fixed points.
Herman ring
The map


 
  and t = 0.6151732... will produce a Herman ring.2 It is shown by Shishikura that the degree of such map must be at least 3, as in this example.
Transcendental case
In case of transcendental functions there is another type of periodic Fatou components, called Baker domain: these are "domains on which the iterates tend to an essential singularity (not possible for polynomials and rational functions)"34 Example function :5


Finally, transcendental maps also may have wandering domains: these are Fatou components that are not eventually periodic.
See also

No wandering domain theorem

References

Lennart Carleson and Theodore W. Gamelin, Complex Dynamics, Springer 1993.
Alan F. Beardon Iteration of Rational Functions, Springer 1991.



"
Category:Fractals Category:Limit sets Category:Theorems in complex analysis Category:Complex dynamics Category:Theorems in dynamical systems



wikibooks : parabolic Julia sets↩
↩
An Introduction to Holomorphic Dynamics (with particular focus on transcendental functions)by L. Rempe↩
Siegel Discs in Complex Dynamics by Tarakanta Nayak↩
A transcendental family with Baker domains by Aimo Hinkkanen , Hartje Kriete and Bernd Krauskopf↩




