   Virtually      Virtually    For the definitions of this word, see the Wiktionary definition of virtually .    In mathematics , especially in the area of abstract algebra which studies infinite groups , the adverb virtually is used to modify a property so that it need only hold for a subgroup of finite index. Given a property P, the group G is said to be virtually P if there is a finite index subgroup H ≤ G such that H has property P.  Common uses for this would be when P is abelian , nilpotent , solvable or free . For example, virtually solvable groups are one of the two alternatives in the Tits alternative , while Gromov's theorem states that the finitely generated groups with polynomial growth are precisely the finitely generated virtually nilpotent groups.  This terminology is also used when P is just another group. That is, if G and H are groups then G is virtually  H if G has a subgroup K of finite index in G such that K is isomorphic to H .  A consequence of this is that a finite group is virtually trivial.  Examples  Virtually abelian  The following groups are virtually abelian.   Any abelian group.  Any semidirect product     N  ⋊  H     right-normal-factor-semidirect-product  N  H    N\rtimes H   where N is abelian and H is finite. (For example, any generalized dihedral group .)  Any semidirect product    N  ⋊  H     right-normal-factor-semidirect-product  N  H    N\rtimes H   where N is finite and H is abelian.  Any finite group (since the trivial subgroup is abelian).   Virtually nilpotent   Any group that is virtually abelian.  Any nilpotent group.  Any semidirect product    N  ⋊  H     right-normal-factor-semidirect-product  N  H    N\rtimes H   where N is nilpotent and H is finite.  Any semidirect product    N  ⋊  H     right-normal-factor-semidirect-product  N  H    N\rtimes H   where N is finite and H is nilpotent.   Virtually polycyclic  Virtually free   Any free group .  Any virtually cyclic group.  Any semidirect product    N  ⋊  H     right-normal-factor-semidirect-product  N  H    N\rtimes H   where N is free and H is finite.  Any semidirect product    N  ⋊  H     right-normal-factor-semidirect-product  N  H    N\rtimes H   where N is finite and H is free.  Any free product  H * K , where H and K are both finite. (For example, the modular group PSL(2, Z ).)   It follows from Stalling's theorem that any torsion-free virtually free group is free.  Others  The free group F 2 on 2 generators is virtually F n for any n ≥ 2 as a consequence of the Nielsen–Schreier theorem and the Schreier index formula .  References     External links   Schreier index formula at PlanetMath.   "  Category:Group theory   