


Braided Hopf algebra




Braided Hopf algebra

In mathematics, a braided Hopf algebra is a Hopf algebra in a braided monoidal category. The most common braided Hopf algebras are objects in a Yetter–Drinfeld category of a Hopf algebra H, particurlarly the Nichols algebra of a braided vectorspace in that category.
The notion should not be confused with quasitriangular Hopf algebra.
Definition
Let H be a Hopf algebra over a field k, and assume that the antipode of H is bijective. A Yetter–Drinfeld module R over H is called a braided bialgebra in the Yetter–Drinfeld category 
 
 
 
  if



 
  is a unital associative algebra, where the multiplication map 
 
 
 
  and the unit 
 
 
 
 
  are maps of Yetter–Drinfeld modules,


 
  is a coassociative coalgebra with counit 
 
 
 
 , and both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are maps of Yetter–Drinfeld modules,
the maps 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are algebra maps in the category 
 
 
 
 , where the algebra structure of 
 
 
 
  is determined by the unit 
 
 
 
  and the multiplication map








Here c is the canonical braiding in the Yetter–Drinfeld category 
 
 
 
 .
 

A braided bialgebra in 
 
 
 
  is called a braided Hopf algebra, if there is a morphism 
 
 
 
  of Yetter–Drinfeld modules such that




 
  for all 
 
 




where 
 
 
 
  in slightly modified Sweedler notation – a change of notation is performed in order to avoid confusion in Radford's biproduct below.
Examples

Any Hopf algebra is also a braided Hopf algebra over 
 
 

A super Hopf algebra is nothing but a braided Hopf algebra over the group algebra

 
 .
The tensor algebra

 
  of a Yetter–Drinfeld module 
 
 
 
 
  is always a braided Hopf algebra. The coproduct 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  is defined in such a way that the elements of V are primitive, that is








The counit 
 
 
 
  then satisfies the equation 
 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 



The universal quotient of 
 
 
 
 , that is still a braided Hopf algebra containing 
 
 
 
  as primitive elements is called the Nichols algebra. They take the role of quantum Borel algebras in the classification of pointed Hopf algebras, analogously to the classical Lie algebra case.

Radford's biproduct
For any braided Hopf algebra R in 
 
 
 
  there exists a natural Hopf algebra 
 
 
 
 
  which contains R as a subalgebra and H as a Hopf subalgebra. It is called Radford's biproduct, named after its discoverer, the Hopf algebraist David Radford. It was rediscovered by Shahn Majid, who called it bosonization.
As a vector space, 
 
 
 
  is just 
 
 
 
 . The algebra structure of 
 
 
 
  is given by








where 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  (Sweedler notation) is the coproduct of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the left action of H on R. Further, the coproduct of 
 
 
 
  is determined by the formula








Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the coproduct of r in R, and 
 
 
 
  is the left coaction of H on 
 
 

References

Andruskiewitsch, Nicolás and Schneider, Hans-Jürgen, Pointed Hopf algebras, New directions in Hopf algebras, 1–68, Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., 43, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2002.

"
Category:Hopf algebras


