   Hyperhomology      Hyperhomology   In homological algebra , the hyperhomology or hypercohomology of a complex of objects of an abelian category is an extension of the usual homology of an object to complexes. It is a sort of cross between the derived functor cohomology of an object and the homology of a chain complex.  Hyperhomology is no longer used much: since about 1970 it has been largely replaced by the roughly equivalent concept of a derived functor between derived categories .  Definition  We give the definition for hypercohomology as this is more common. As usual, hypercohomology and hyperhomology are essentially the same: one converts from one to the other by dualizing, i.e. by changing the direction of all arrows, replacing injective objects with projective ones, and so on.  Suppose that A is an abelian category with enough injectives and F a left exact functor to another abelian category B . If C is a complex of objects of A bounded on the left, the hypercohomology   H i ( C )   of C (for an integer i ) is calculated as follows:   Take a quasi-isomorphism  Φ : C → I , here I is a complex of injective elements of A .  The hypercohomology H i ( C ) of C is then the cohomology H i ( F ( I )) of the complex F ( I ).   The hypercohomology of C is independent of the choice of the quasi-isomorphism , up to unique isomorphisms.  The hypercohomology can also be defined using derived categories : the hypercohomology of C is just the cohomology of F ( C ) considered as an element of the derived category of B .  The hypercohomology spectral sequences  There are two hypercohomology spectral sequences ; one with E 2 term   H i ( R j F ( C ))   and the other with E 1 term   R j F ( C i )   and E 2 term   R j F ( H i ( C ))   both converging to the hypercohomology   H i + j ( C ),   where R j F is a right derived functor of F .  Examples  See also   Cartan–Eilenberg resolution   References   H. Cartan, S. Eilenberg, Homological algebra ISBN 0-691-04991-2   A. Grothendieck, Sur quelques points d'algèbre homologique Tohoku Math. J. 9 (1957) pp. 119-221   "  Category:Homological algebra   