


Hochschild homology




Hochschild homology

In mathematics, Hochschild homology (and cohomology) is a homology theory for associative algebras over rings. There is also a theory for Hochschild homology of certain functors. Hochschild cohomology was introduced by  for algebras over a field, and extended to algebras over more general rings by .
Definition of Hochschild homology of algebras
Let k be a ring, A an associative k-algebra, and M an A-bimodule. The enveloping algebra of A is the tensor product Ae=A⊗Ao of A with its opposite algebra. Bimodules over A are essentially the same as modules over the enveloping algebra of A, so in particular A and M can be considered as Ae-modules.  defined the Hochschild homology and cohomology group of A with coefficients in M in terms of the Tor functor and Ext functor by






Hochschild complex
Let k be a ring, A an associative k-algebra that is a projective k-module, and M an A-bimodule. We will write A⊗n for the n-fold tensor product of A over k. The chain complex that gives rise to Hochschild homology is given by



with boundary operator di defined by









Here ai is in A for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n and m ∈ M. If we let



then b ° b = 0, so (Cn(A,M), b) is a chain complex called the Hochschild complex, and its homology is the Hochschild homology of A with coefficients in M.
Remark
The maps di are face maps making the family of modules Cn(A,M) a simplicial object in the category of k-modules, i.e. a functor Δo → k-mod, where Δ is the simplicial category and k-mod is the category of k-modules. Here Δo is the opposite category of Δ. The degeneracy maps are defined by si(a0 ⊗ ··· ⊗ an) = a0 ⊗ ··· ai ⊗ 1 ⊗ ai+1 ⊗ ··· ⊗ an. Hochschild homology is the homology of this simplicial module.
Hochschild homology of functors
The simplicial circle S1 is a simplicial object in the category Fin* of finite pointed sets, i.e. a functor Δo → Fin*. Thus, if F is a functor F: Fin → k-mod, we get a simplicial module by composing F with S1


 
  The homology of this simplicial module is the Hochschild homology of the functor F. The above definition of Hochschild homology of commutative algebras is the special case where F is the Loday functor.
Loday functor
A skeleton for the category of finite pointed sets is given by the objects



where 0 is the basepoint, and the morphisms are the basepoint preserving set maps. Let A be a commutative k-algebra and M be a symmetric A-bimodule. The Loday functor L(A,M) is given on objects in Fin* by



A morphism



is sent to the morphism f* given by



where



and bj = 1 if f −1(j) = ∅.
Another description of Hochschild homology of algebras
The Hochschild homology of a commutative algebra A with coefficients in a symmetric A-bimodule M is the homology associated to the composition



and this definition agrees with the one above.
See also

Cyclic homology

References




Jean-Louis Loday, Cyclic Homology, Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften Vol. 301, Springer (1998) ISBN 3-540-63074-0
Richard S. Pierce, Associative Algebras, Graduate Texts in Mathematics (88), Springer, 1982.
Teimuraz Pirashvili, Hodge decomposition for higher order Hochschild homology

External links

Dylan G.L. Allegretti, Differential Forms on Noncommutative Spaces. An elementary introduction to noncommutative geometry which uses Hochschild homology to generalize differential forms).


"
Category:Ring theory Category:Homological algebra


