


Tangential and normal components




Tangential and normal components

 In mathematics, given a vector at a point on a curve, that vector can be decomposed uniquely as a sum of two vectors, one tangent to the curve, called the tangential component of the vector, and another one perpendicular to the curve, called the normal component of the vector. Similarly a vector at a point on a surface can be broken down the same way.
More generally, given a submanifold N of a manifold M, and a vector in the tangent space to M at a point of N, it can be decomposed into the component tangent to N and the component normal to N.
Formal definition
Surface
More formally, let 
 
 
 
  be a surface, and 
 
 
 
  be a point on the surface. Let 
 
 
 
  be a vector at 
 
 
 
  Then one can write uniquely 
 
 
 
  as a sum



where the first vector in the sum is the tangential component and the second one is the normal component. It follows immediately that these two vectors are perpendicular to each other.
To calculate the tangential and normal components, consider a unit normal to the surface, that is, a unit vector

 
  perpendicular to 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  Then,



and thus



where "
 
 
 
 " denotes the dot product. Another formula for the tangential component is



where "
 
 
 
 " denotes the cross product.
Note that these formulas do not depend on the particular unit normal 
 
 
 
  used (there exist two unit normals to any surface at a given point, pointing in opposite directions, so one of the unit normals is the negative of the other one).
Submanifold
More generally, given a submanifold N of a manifold M and a point 
 
 
 
 , we get a short exact sequence involving the tangent spaces:


 
  The quotient space

 
  is a generalized space of normal vectors.
If M is a Riemannian manifold, the above sequence splits, and the tangent space of M at p decomposes as a direct sum of the component tangent to N and the component normal to N:


 
  Thus every tangent vector

 
  splits as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Computations
Suppose N is given by non-degenerate equations.
If N is given explicitly, via parametric equations (such as a parametric curve), then the derivative gives a spanning set for the tangent bundle (it's a basis if and only if the parametrization is an immersion).
If N is given implicitly (as in the above description of a surface, or more generally as a hypersurface) as a level set or intersection of level surfaces for 
 
 
 
 , then the gradients of 
 
 
 
  span the normal space.
In both cases, we can again compute using the dot product; the cross product is special to 3 dimensions though.
Applications

Lagrange multipliers : constrained critical points are where the tangential component of the total derivative vanish.
Surface normal

References




Benjamin Crowell (2003) Newtonian physics. (online version) ISBN 0-9704670-1-X.

"
Category:Differential geometry


