   Section (category theory)      Section (category theory)   In category theory , a branch of mathematics , a section is a right inverse of some morphism . Dually , a retraction is a left inverse of some morphism . In other words, if f : X → Y and g : Y → X are morphisms whose composition f  o  g : Y → Y is the identity morphism on Y , then g is a section of f , and f is a retraction of g .  Every section is a monomorphism , and every retraction is an epimorphism .  In algebra the sections are also called split monomorphisms and the retractions split epimorphisms . In an abelian category , if f : X → Y is a split epimorphism with split monomorphism g : Y → X , then X is isomorphic to the direct sum of Y and the kernel of f .  Examples  In the category of sets , every monomorphism ( injective function ) with a non-empty domain is a section and every epimorphism ( surjective function ) is a retraction; the latter statement is equivalent to the axiom of choice .  In the category of vector spaces over a field K , every monomorphism and every epimorphism splits; this follows from the fact that linear maps can be uniquely defined by specifying their values on a basis .  In the category of abelian groups , the epimorphism Z → Z /2 Z which sends every integer to its image modulo 2 does not split; in fact the only morphism Z /2 Z → Z is the 0 map. Similarly, the natural monomorphism Z /2 Z → Z /4 Z doesn't split even though there is a non-trivial homomorphism Z /4 Z → Z /2 Z .  The categorical concept of a section is important in homological algebra , and is also closely related to the notion of a section of a fiber bundle in topology: in the latter case, a section of a fiber bundle is a section of the bundle projection map of the fiber bundle.  Given a quotient space     X  ¯     normal-¯  X    \bar{X}   with quotient map    π  :   X  →   X  ¯       normal-:  π   normal-→  X   normal-¯  X      \pi\colon X\to\bar{X}   , a section of   π   π   \pi   is called a transversal .  See also   Splitting lemma  Inverse function#Left and right inverses  Transversal (combinatorics)   de:Retraktion und Koretraktion  fr:Section (théorie des catégories)  pl:Retrakcja (teoria kategorii) "  Category:Category theory  Category:Homological algebra   