


Holm–Bonferroni method




Holm–Bonferroni method

In statistics, the Holm–Bonferroni method 1 is a method used to counteract the problem of multiple comparisons. It is intended to control the Familywise error rate and offers a simple test uniformly more powerful than the Bonferroni correction. It is one of the earliest usages of stepwise algorithms in simultaneous inference.
It is named after Sture Holm, who invented the method in 1978, and Carlo Emilio Bonferroni.
Introduction
When considering several hypotheses in the same test the problem of multiplicity arises. Intuitively, the more hypotheses we check, the higher the probability to witness a rare result. With 10 different hypotheses and significance level of 0.05, the probability of committing one or more type I errors is greater than 1-.95^10=0.4 if the nulls are in fact true. The Holm–Bonferroni method is one of many approaches that control the overall probability of witnessing one or more type I errors (aka family-wise error rate) by adjusting the rejection criteria of each of the individual hypotheses or comparisons.
Formulation
The method is as follows:

Let 
 
 
 
  be a family of hypotheses and 
 
 
 
  the corresponding P-values.
Start by ordering the p-values (from lowest to highest) 
 
 
 
  and let the associated hypotheses be 
 
 

For a given significance level

 
 , let 
 
 
 
  be the minimal index such that 
 
 

Reject the null hypotheses 
 
 
 
  and do not reject 
 
 

If 
 
 
 
  then do not reject any of the null hypotheses and if no such 
 
 
 
  exist then reject all of the null hypotheses.

The Holm–Bonferroni method ensures that this method will control the 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the Familywise error rate
Proof that Holm-Bonferroni controls the FWER
Let 
 
 
 
  be a family of hypotheses, and 
 
 
 
  be the sorted p-values. Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of indices corresponding to the (unknown) true null hypotheses, having 
 
 
 
  members.
Let us assume that we wrongly reject a true hypothesis. We have to prove that the probability of this event is at most 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the first rejected true hypothesis (first in the ordering given by the Bonferroni–Holm test). So 
 
 
 
  is the last false hypothesis rejected and 
 
 
 
 . From there, we get 
 
 
 
  (1). Since 
 
 
 
  is rejected we have 
 
 
 
  by definition of the test. Using (1), the right hand side is at most 
 
 
 
 . Thus, if we wrongly reject a true hypothesis, there has to be a true hypothesis with P-value at most 
 
 
 
 .
So let us define 
 
 
 
 . Whatever the (unknown) set of true hypotheses 
 
 
 
  is, we have 
 
 
 
  (by the Bonferroni inequalities). Therefore, the probability to reject a true hypothesis is at most 
 
 
 
 .
Proof that Holm-Bonferroni controls the FWER using the closure principle
The Holm–Bonferroni method can be viewed as closed testing procedure,2 with Bonferroni method applied locally on each of the intersections of null hypotheses.
It is a shortcut procedure since practically the number of comparisons to be made equal to 
 
 
 
  or less, while the number of all intersections of null hypotheses to be tested is of order 
 
 
 
 .
The closure principle states that a hypothesis 
 
 
 
  in a family of hypotheses 
 
 
 
  is rejected - while controlling the family-wise error rate of 
 
 
 
  - if and only if all the sub-families of the intersections with 
 
 
 
  are controlled at level of family-wise error rate of 
 
 
 
 .
In Holm-Bonferroni procedure, we first test 
 
 
 
 . If it is not rejected then the intersection of all null hypotheses 
 
 
 
  is not rejected too, such that there exist at least one intersection hypothesis for each of elementary hypotheses 
 
 
 
  that is not rejected, thus we reject none of the elementary hypotheses.
If 
 
 
 
  is rejected at level 
 
 
 
  then all the intersection sub-families that contain it are rejected too, thus 
 
 
 
  is rejected. This is because 
 
 
 
  is the smallest in each one of the intersection sub-families and the size of the sub-families is the most 
 
 
 
 , such that the Bonferroni threshold larger than 
 
 
 
 .
The same rationale applies for 
 
 
 
 . However, since 
 
 
 
  already rejected, it sufficient to reject all the intersection sub-families of 
 
 
 
  without 
 
 
 
 . Once 
 
 
 
  holds all the intersections that contains 
 
 
 
  are rejected.
The same applies for each 
 
 
 
 .
Example
Consider four null hypotheses 
 
 
 
  with unadjusted p-values 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , to be tested at significance level 
 
 
 
 . Since the procedure is step-down, we first test 
 
 
 
 , which has the smallest p-value 
 
 
 
 . The p-value is compared to 
 
 
 
 , the null hypothesis is rejected and we continue to the next one. Since 
 
 
 
  we reject 
 
 
 
  as well and continue. The next hypothesis 
 
 
 
  is not rejected since 
 
 
 
 . We stop testing and conclude that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are rejected and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not rejected while controlling the Family Wise Error Rate at level 
 
 
 
 . Note that even though 
 
 
 
  applies, 
 
 
 
  is not rejected. This is because the testing procedure stops once there is no rejection.
Extensions
The Holm–Bonferroni method is an example of a closed test procedure.3 As such, it controls the familywise error rate for all the k hypotheses at level α in the strong sense. Each intersection is tested using the simple Bonferroni test.
Adjusted P-value
The adjusted P-values for Holm–Bonferroni method are:


 
 , where 
 
 
 
 .
In the earlier example , the adjusted p-values are 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Only hypotheses 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are rejected at level 
 
 
 
 .
Šidák version
When hypotheses have non-negative dependence, it is possible to replace 
 
 
 
  with:


 
  resulting in a slightly more powerful test.
Weighted version
Let 
 
 
 
  be the ordered unadjusted p-values. Let 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  correspond to 
 
 
 
 . Reject 
 
 
 
  as long as



adjusted p-values: The adjusted weighted p-value are : 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 .
A hypothesis is rejected at level α if and only if its adjusted p-value is less than α. In the earlier example using equal weights, the adjusted p-values are 0.03, 0.06, 0.06, and 0.02. This is another way to see that using α = 0.05, only hypotheses one and four are rejected by this procedure.
Alternatives and usage
Holm–Bonferroni method is uniformly more powerful than the classic Bonferroni correction. Since no assumptions required, it can always substitute the Bonferroni correction. However, it is not the best simultaneous inference controlling procedure available. There are many other methods that intend to control the family-wise error rate, many of them are more powerful than Holm-Bonferroni. Among those there is the Hochberg procedure (1988) and Hommel procedure 4 .
In Hochberg procedure rejection of 
 
 
 
  is made after finding the maximal index 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . Thus, The Hochberg procedure is more powerful by construction. However, the Hochberg procedure require the hypotheses to be independent (or under some forms of positive dependence), while Holm-Bonferroni can be applied with no further assumptions on the data.
Bonferroni contribution
Carlo Emilio Bonferroni did not take part in inventing the method described here. Holm originally called the method the "sequentially rejective Bonferroni test", and it became known as Holm-Bonferroni only after some time. Holm's motives for naming his method after Bonferroni are explained in the original paper: "The use of the Boole inequality within multiple inference theory is usually called the Bonferroni technique, and for this reason we will call our test the sequentially rejective Bonferroni test."
See also

Multiple comparisons
Bonferroni correction
Familywise error rate
Closed testing procedure

References


de:Alphafehler-Kumulierung sv:Bonferroni-Holms metod"
Category:Hypothesis testing Category:Statistical tests Category:Multiple comparisons



↩
↩
↩
↩




