


Abel–Jacobi map




Abel–Jacobi map

In mathematics, the Abel–Jacobi map is a construction of algebraic geometry which relates an algebraic curve to its Jacobian variety. In Riemannian geometry, it is a more general construction mapping a manifold to its Jacobi torus. The name derives from the theorem of Abel and Jacobi that two effective divisors are linearly equivalent if and only if they are indistinguishable under the Abel–Jacobi map.
Construction of the map
In complex algebraic geometry, the Jacobian of a curve C is constructed using path integration. Namely, suppose C has genus g, which means topologically that


 
  Geometrically, this homology group consists of (homology classes of) cycles in C, or in other words, closed loops. Therefore we can choose 2g loops 
 
 
 
  generating it. On the other hand, another, more algebro-geometric way of saying that the genus of C is g, is that


 
  where K is the canonical bundle on C. By definition, this is the space of globally defined holomorphic differential forms on C, so we can choose g linearly independent forms 
 
 
 
 . Given forms and closed loops we can integrate, and we define 2g vectors


 
  It follows from the Riemann bilinear relations that the 
 
 
 
  generate a nondegenerate lattice

 
  (that is, they are a real basis for 
 
 
 
 ), and the Jacobian is defined by



The Abel–Jacobi map is then defined as follows. We pick some base point 
 
 
 
  and, nearly mimicking the definition of 
 
 
 
 , define the map


 
  Although this is seemingly dependent on a path from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  any two such paths define a closed loop in 
 
 
 
  and, therefore, an element of 
 
 
 
  so integration over it gives an element of 
 
 
 
  Thus the difference is erased in the passage to the quotient by 
 
 
 
 . Changing base-point 
 
 
 
  does change the map, but only by a translation of the torus.
The Abel–Jacobi map of a Riemannian manifold
Let 
 
 
 
  be a smooth compact manifold. Let 
 
 
 
  be its fundamental group. Let 
 
 
 
  be its abelianisation map. Let 
 
 
 
  be the torsion subgroup of 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be the quotient by torsion. If 
 
 
 
  is a surface, 
 
 
 
  is non-canonically isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the genus; more generally, 
 
 
 
  is non-canonically isomorphic to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the first Betti number. Let 
 
 
 
  be the composite homomorphism.
Definition. The cover 
 
 
 
  of the manifold 
 
 
 
  corresponding the subgroup 
 
 
 
  is called the universal (or maximal) free abelian cover.
Now assume M has a Riemannian metric. Let 
 
 
 
  be the space of harmonic 
 
 
 
 -forms on 
 
 
 
 , with dual 
 
 
 
  canonically identified with 
 
 
 
 . By integrating an integral harmonic 
 
 
 
 -form along paths from a basepoint 
 
 
 
 , we obtain a map to the circle 
 
 
 
 .
Similarly, in order to define a map 
 
 
 
  without choosing a basis for cohomology, we argue as follows. Let 
 
 
 
  be a point in the universal cover

 
  of 
 
 
 
 . Thus 
 
 
 
  is represented by a point of 
 
 
 
  together with a path 
 
 
 
  from 
 
 
 
  to it. By integrating along the path 
 
 
 
 , we obtain a linear form, 
 
 
 
 , on 
 
 
 
 . We thus obtain a map 
 
 
 
 , which, furthermore, descends to a map



where 
 
 
 
  is the universal free abelian cover.
Definition. The Jacobi variety (Jacobi torus) of 
 
 
 
  is the torus



Definition. The Abel–Jacobi map



is obtained from the map above by passing to quotients.
The Abel–Jacobi map is unique up to translations of the Jacobi torus. The map has applications in Systolic geometry. Interestingly, the Abel-Jacobi map of a Riemannian manifold show up in a large time asymptotic of the heat kernel on a periodic manifold ( and ).
In much the same way, one can define a graph-theoretic analogue of Abel-Jacobi map as a P-L map from a finite graph into a flat torus (or a Cayley graph associated with a finite abelian group), which is closely related to asymptotic behaviors of random walks on crystal lattices, and can be used for design of crystal structures.
Abel–Jacobi theorem
The following theorem was proved by Abel: Suppose that


 
  is a divisor (meaning a formal integer-linear combination of points of C). We can define


 
  and therefore speak of the value of the Abel–Jacobi map on divisors. The theorem is then that if D and E are two effective divisors, meaning that the 
 
 
 
  are all positive integers, then


 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  is linearly equivalent to 
 
 
 
  This implies that the Abel–Jacobi map induces an injective map (of abelian groups) from the space of divisor classes of degree zero to the Jacobian. Jacobi proved that this map is also surjective, so the two groups are naturally isomorphic.
The Abel–Jacobi theorem implies that the Albanese variety of a compact complex curve (dual of holomorphic 1-forms modulo periods) is isomorphic to its Jacobian variety (divisors of degree 0 modulo equivalence). For higher-dimensional compact projective varieties the Albanese variety and the Picard variety are dual but need not be isomorphic.
References









"
Category:Algebraic curves Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Niels Henrik Abel


