


Real structure




Real structure

In mathematics, a real structure on a complex vector space is a way to decompose the complex vector space in the direct sum of two real vector spaces. The prototype of such a structure is the field of complex numbers itself, considered as a complex vector space over itself and with the conjugation map

 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , giving the "canonical" real structure on 
 
 
 
 , that is 
 
 
 
 .
The conjugation map is antilinear

 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Vector space
A real structure on a complex vector space V is an antilinear involution

 
 . A real structure defines a real subspace 
 
 
 
 , its fixed locus, and the natural map



is an isomorphism. Conversely any vector space that is the complexification of a real vector space has a natural real structure.
One first notes that every complex space V has a real form obtained by taking the same vectors as in the original set and restricting the scalars to be real. If 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  then the vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are linearly independent in the real form of V. Hence:


 
  Naturally, one would wish to represent V as the direct sum of two real vector spaces, the "real and imaginary parts of V". There is no canonical way of doing this: such a splitting is an additional real structure in V. It may be introduced as follows.1 Let 
 
 
 
  be an antilinear map such that 
 
 
 
 , that is an antilinear involution of the complex space V. Any vector 
 
 
 
  can be written 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Therefore, one gets a direct sum of vector spaces 
 
 
 
  where:


 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Both sets 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are real vector spaces. The linear map 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , is an isomorphism of real vector spaces, whence:


 
 .
The first factor 
 
 
 
  is also denoted by 
 
 
 
  and is left invariant by 
 
 
 
 , that is 
 
 
 
 . The second factor 
 
 
 
  is usually denoted by 
 
 
 
 . The direct sum 
 
 
 
  reads now as:


 
 ,
i.e. as the direct sum of the "real" 
 
 
 
  and "imaginary" 
 
 
 
  parts of V. This construction strongly depends on the choice of an antilinear involution of the complex vector space V. The complexification of the real vector space 
 
 
 
 , i.e., 
 
 
 
  admits a natural real structure and hence is canonically isomorphic to the direct sum of two copies of 
 
 
 
 :


 
 .
It follows a natural linear isomorphism 
 
 
 
  between complex vector spaces with a given real structure.
A real structure on a complex vector space V, that is an antilinear involution 
 
 
 
 , may be equivalently described in terms of the linear map

 
  from the vector space 
 
 
 
  to the complex conjugate vector space

 
  defined by


 
 .2
Algebraic variety
For an algebraic variety defined over a subfield of the real numbers, the real structure is the complex conjugation acting on the points of the variety in complex projective or affine space. Its fixed locus is the space of real points of the variety (which may be empty).
Scheme
For a scheme defined over a subfield of the real numbers, complex conjugation is in a natural way a member of the Galois group of the algebraic closure of the basefield. The real structure is the Galois action of this conjugation on the extension of the scheme over the algebraic closure of the base field. The real points are the points whose residue field is fixed (which may be empty).
See also

Antilinear map
Linear map
Canonical complex conjugation map
Complex conjugate
Complex conjugation
Complex conjugate vector space
Conjugate linear maps
Complexification
Linear complex structure
Sesquilinear form
Spinor calculus

Notes
References

Horn and Johnson, Matrix Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1985. ISBN 0-521-38632-2. (antilinear maps are discussed in section 4.6).
Budinich, P. and Trautman, A. The Spinorial Chessboard. Spinger-Verlag, 1988. ISBN 0-387-19078-3. (antilinear maps are discussed in section 3.3).

"
Category:Structures on manifolds



Budinich, P. and Trautman, A. The Spinorial Chessboard. Spinger-Verlag, 1988, p. 29.↩
Budinich, P. and Trautman, A. The Spinorial Chessboard. Spinger-Verlag, 1988, p. 29.↩




