


Weitzenböck's inequality




Weitzenböck's inequality

 In mathematics, Weitzenböck's inequality, named after Roland Weitzenböck, states that for a triangle of side lengths 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and area 
 
 
 
 , the following inequality holds:



Equality occurs if and only if the triangle is equilateral. Pedoe's inequality is a generalization of Weitzenböck's inequality. The Hadwiger-Finsler inequality is a strengthened version of Weitzenböck's inequality.
Proofs
The proof of this inequality was set as a question in the International Mathematical Olympiad of 1961. Even so, the result is not too difficult to derive using Heron's formula for the area of a triangle:



First method
This method assumes no knowledge of inequalities except that all squares are nonnegative.



and the result follows immediately by taking the positive square root of both sides. From the first inequality we can also see that equality occurs only when 
 
 
 
  and the triangle is equilateral.
Second method
This proof assumes knowledge of the rearrangement inequality and the arithmetic-geometric mean inequality.



As we have used the rearrangement inequality and the arithmetic-geometric mean inequality, equality only occurs when 
 
 
 
  and the triangle is equilateral.
Third method
It can be shown that the area of the inner Napoleon's triangle, which must be nonnegative, is1



so the expression in parentheses must be greater than or equal to 0.
See also

List of triangle inequalities

References & further reading

Claudi Alsina, Roger B. Nelsen: Charming Proofs: A Journey Into Elegant Mathematics. MAA 2010, ISBN 9780883853481, pp. 96–98 ()
D. M. Batinetu-Giurgiu, Nicusor Minculete, Nevulai Stanciu: Some geometric inequalities of Ionescu-Weitzebböck type. International Journal of Geometry, Vol. 2 (2013), No. 1, April
Claudi Alsina, Roger B. Nelsen: Geometric Proofs of the Weitzenböck and Hadwiger-Finsler Inequalities. Mathematics Magazine, Vol. 81, No. 3 (Jun., 2008), pp. 216–219 (JSTOR)

References
External links


"Weitzenböck's Inequality," an interactive demonstration by Jay Warendorff - Wolfram Demonstrations Project.

"
Category:Elementary geometry Category:Geometric inequalities Category:Triangle geometry Category:Articles containing proofs



Coxeter, H.S.M., and Greitzer, Samuel L. Geometry Revisited, page 64.↩




