


Fatou's theorem




Fatou's theorem

In complex analysis, Fatou's theorem, named after Pierre Fatou, is a statement concerning holomorphic functions on the unit disk and their pointwise extension to the boundary of the disk.
Motivation and statement of theorem
If we have a holomorphic function 
 
 
 
  defined on the open unit disk 
 
 
 
 , it is reasonable to ask under what conditions we can extend this function to the boundary of the unit disk. To do this, we can look at what the function looks like on each circle inside the disk centered at 0, each with some radius 
 
 
 
 . This defines a new function on the circle 
 
 
 
 , defined by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 . Then it would be expected that the values of the extension of 
 
 
 
  onto the circle should be the limit of these functions, and so the question reduces to determining when 
 
 
 
  converges, and in what sense, as 
 
 
 
 , and how well defined is this limit. In particular, if the 

 
  norms of these 
 
 
 
  are well behaved, we have an answer:

Theorem: Let 
 
 
 
  be a holomorphic function such that
 







Then 
 
 
 
  converges to some function 
 
 
pointwise almost everywhere and in 
 
 
 
 . That is,









and
 








for almost every 
 
 
 
 .
 

Now, notice that this pointwise limit is a radial limit. That is, the limit being taken is along a straight line from the center of the disk to the boundary of the circle, and the statement above hence says that


 
  for almost every 
 
 
 
 . The natural question is, now with this boundary function defined, will we converge pointwise to this function by taking a limit in any other way? That is, suppose instead of following a straight line to the boundary, we follow an arbitrary curve 
 
 
 
  converging to some point 
 
 
 
  on the boundary. Will 
 
 
 
  converge to 
 
 
 
 ? (Note that the above theorem is just the special case of 
 
 
 
 ). It turns out that the curve 
 
 
 
  needs to be nontangential, meaning that the curve does not approach its target on the boundary in a way that makes it tangent to the boundary of the circle. In other words, the range of 
 
 
 
  must be contained in a wedge emanating from the limit point. We summarize as follows:

Definition: Let 
 
 
 
  be a continuous path such that 
 
 
 
 . Define
 










and
 










That is, 
 
 
 
  is the wedge inside the disk with angle 
 
 
 
  : whose axis passes between 
 
 
 
  and zero. We say that 
 
 

converges nontangentially to 
 
 
 
 , or that it is a nontangential limit, : if there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is contained in 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
 


Fatou's theorem: Let 
 
 
 
 . Then for almost all 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 

for every nontangential limit 
 
 
 
  converging to 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is defined as above.
 

Discussion

The proof utilizes the symmetry of the Poisson kernel using the Hardy–Littlewood maximal function for the circle.
The analogous theorem is frequently defined for the Hardy space over the upper-half plane and is proved in much the same way.

See also

Hardy space

References

John B. Garnett, Bounded Analytic Functions, (2006) Springer-Verlag, New York
Walter Rudin. Real and Complex Analysis (1987), 3rd Ed., McGraw Hill, New York.
Elias Stein, Singular integrals and differentiability properties of functions (1970), Princeton University Press, Princeton.

"
Category:Theorems in complex analysis


