


Positive form




Positive form

In complex geometry, the term positive form refers to several classes of real differential forms of Hodge type (p, p).
(1,1)-forms
Real (p,p)-forms on a complex manifold M are forms which are of type (p,p) and real, that is, lie in the intersection 
 
 
 
  A real (1,1)-form 
 
 
 
  is called positive if any of the following equivalent conditions hold



 
  is an imaginary part of a positive (not necessarily positive definite) Hermitian form.
For some basis 
 
 
 
  in the space 
 
 
 
  of (1,0)-forms, 
 
 
 
  can be written diagonally, as 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  real and non-negative.
For any (1,0)-tangent vector 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 

For any real tangent vector 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the complex structure operator.

Positive line bundles
In algebraic geometry, positive (1,1)-forms arise as curvature forms of ample line bundles (also known as positive line bundles). Let L be a holomorphic Hermitian line bundle on a complex manifold,



its complex structure operator. Then L is equipped with a unique connection preserving the Hermitian structure and satisfying


 
 .
This connection is called the Chern connection.
The curvature 
 
 
 
  of a Chern connection is always a purely imaginary (1,1)-form. A line bundle L is called positive if



is a positive definite (1,1)-form. The Kodaira embedding theorem claims that a positive line bundle is ample, and conversely, any ample line bundle admits a Hermitian metric with 
 
 
 
  positive.
Positivity for (p, p)-forms
Positive (1,1)-forms on M form a convex cone. When M is a compact complex surface, 
 
 
 
 , this cone is self-dual, with respect to the Poincaré pairing 
 
 

For (p, p)-forms, where 
 
 
 
 , there are two different notions of positivity. A form is called strongly positive if it is a linear combination of products of positive forms, with positive real coefficients. A real (p, p)-form 
 
 
 
  on an n-dimensional complex manifold M is called weakly positive if for all strongly positive (n-p, n-p)-forms ζ with compact support, we have 
 
 
 
 .
Weakly positive and strongly positive forms form convex cones. On compact manifolds these cones are dual with respect to the Poincaré pairing.
References

Phillip Griffiths and Joseph Harris (1978), Principles of Algebraic Geometry, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-32792-1


J.-P. Demailly, L2 vanishing theorems for positive line bundles and adjunction theory, Lecture Notes of a CIME course on "Transcendental Methods of Algebraic Geometry" (Cetraro, Italy, July 1994).

"
Category:Complex manifolds Category:Algebraic geometry Category:Differential forms


