


Minimal volume




Minimal volume

In mathematics, in particular in differential geometry, the minimal volume is a number that describes one aspect of a Riemannian manifold's topology. This topological invariant was introduced by Mikhail Gromov.
Definition
Consider a closed orientable connected smooth manifold

 
  with a smooth Riemannian metric

 
 , and define 
 
 
 
  to be the volume of a manifold 
 
 
 
  with the metric 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  represent the sectional curvature.
The minimal volume of 
 
 
 
  is a smooth invariant defined as



that is, the infimum of the volume of 
 
 
 
  over all metrics with bounded sectional curvature.
Clearly, any manifold 
 
 
 
  may be given an arbitrarily small volume by selecting a Riemannian metric 
 
 
 
  and scaling it down to 
 
 
 
 , as 
 
 
 
 . For a meaningful definition of minimal volume, it is thus necessary to prevent such scaling. The inclusion of bounds on sectional curvature suffices, as 
 
 
 
 . If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  can be "collapsed" to a manifold of lower dimension (and thus one with 
 
 
 
 -dimensional volume zero) by a series of appropriate metrics; this manifold may be considered the Hausdorff limit of the related sequence, and the bounds on sectional curvature ensure that this convergence takes place in a topologically meaningful fashion.
Related topological invariants
The minimal volume invariant is connected to other topological invariants in a fundamental way; via Chern–Weil theory, there are many topological invariants which can be described by integrating polynomials in the curvature over 
 
 
 
 . In particular, the Chern classes and Pontryagin classes are bounded above by the minimal volume.
Properties
Gromov has conjectured that every closed simply connected odd-dimensional manifold has zero minimal volume. This conjecture clearly does not hold for even-dimensional manifolds.
References

Gromov, M. Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces, Birkhäuser (1999) ISBN 0-8176-3898-9.


Gromov, M. Volume and bounded cohomology, Publ. Math. IHES 56 (1982) 1—99.

"
Category:Riemannian geometry


