


Quaternion-Kähler symmetric space




Quaternion-Kähler symmetric space

In differential geometry, a quaternion-Kähler symmetric space or Wolf space is a quaternion-Kähler manifold which, as a Riemannian manifold, is a Riemannian symmetric space. Any quaternion-Kähler symmetric space with positive Ricci curvature is compact and simply connected, and is a Riemannian product of quaternion-Kähler symmetric spaces associated to compact simple Lie groups.
For any compact simple Lie group G, there is a unique G/H obtained as a quotient of G by a subgroup



Here, Sp(1) is the compact form of the SL(2)-triple associated with the highest root of G, and K its centralizer in G. These are classified as follows.




G

H

quaternionic dimension

geometric interpretation













p

Grassmannian of complex 2-dimensional subspaces of 
 
 












p

Grassmannian of oriented real 4-dimensional subspaces of 
 
 












p

Grassmannian of quaternionic 1-dimensional subspaces of 
 
 












10

Space of symmetric subspaces of 
 
 
 
  isometric to 
 
 












16

Rosenfeld projective plane

 
  over 
 
 












28

Space of symmetric subspaces of 
 
 
 
  isomorphic to 
 
 












7

Space of the symmetric subspaces of 
 
 
 
  which are isomorphic to 
 
 












2

Space of the subalgebras of the octonion algebra

 
 
  which are isomorphic to the quaternion algebra





The twistor spaces of quaternion-Kähler symmetric spaces are the homogeneous holomorphic contact manifolds, classified by Boothby: they are the adjoint varieties of the complex semisimple Lie groups.
These spaces can be obtained by taking a projectivization of a minimal nilpotent orbit of the respective complex Lie group. The holomorphic contact structure is apparent, because the nilpotent orbits of semisimple Lie groups are equipped with the Kirillov-Kostant holomorphic symplectic form. This argument also explains how one can associate a unique Wolf space to each of the simple complex Lie groups.
See also

Quaternionic discrete series representation

References


. Reprint of the 1987 edition.

.

"
Category:Differential geometry Category:Structures on manifolds Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Homogeneous spaces Category:Lie groups


