


Danskin's theorem




Danskin's theorem

In convex analysis, Danskin's theorem is a theorem which provides information about the derivatives of a function of the form



The theorem has applications in optimization, where it sometimes is used to solve minimax problems. The original theorem by J. M. Danskin, given in his 1967, monograph "The Theory of Max-Min and its Applications to Weapons Allocation Problems," Springer, NY, provides a formula for the directional derivative of the maximum of a (not necessarily convex) directionally differentiable function. When adapted to the case of a convex function, this formula yields the following theorem given in somewhat more general form as Proposition A.22 in the 1971 Ph.D. Thesis by D. P. Bertsekas, "Control of Uncertain Systems with a Set-Membership Description of the Uncertainty". A proof of the following version can be found in the 1999 book "Nonlinear Programming" by Bertsekas (Section B.5).
Statement
The theorem applies to the following situation. Suppose 
 
 
 
  is a continuous function of two arguments,


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a compact set. Further assume that 
 
 
 
  is convex in 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 .
Under these conditions, Danskin's theorem provides conclusions regarding the differentiability of the function


 
  To state these results, we define the set of maximizing points 
 
 
 
  as



Danskin's theorem then provides the following results.

Convexity


 
  is convex.
 
Directional derivatives
The directional derivative of 
 
 
 
  in the direction 
 
 
 
 , denoted 
 
 
 
 , is given by
 
 



where 
 
 
 
  is the directional derivative of the function 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  in the direction 
 
 
 
 .
 
Derivative


 
  is differentiable at 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  consists of a single element 
 
 
 
 . In this case, the derivative of 
 
 
 
  (or the gradient of 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  is a vector) is given by
 
 



Subdifferential
If 
 
 
 
  is differentiable with respect to 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , and if 
 
 
 
  is continuous with respect to 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , then the subdifferential of 
 
 
 
  is given by
 
 



where 
 
 
 
  indicates the convex hull operation.
 
Extension

The 1971 Ph.D. Thesis by Bertsekas 1 (Proposition A.22) proves a more general result, which does not require that 
 
 
 
  is differentiable. Instead it assumes that 
 
 
 
  is an extended real-valued closed proper convex function for each 
 
 
 
  in the compact set 
 
 
 
 , that 
 
 
 
 , the interior of the effective domain of 
 
 
 
 , is nonempty, and that 
 
 
 
  is continuous on the set 
 
 
 
 . Then for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 , the subdifferential of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  is given by








where 
 
 
 
  is the subdifferential of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 
 
  for any 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Maximum theorem
Envelope theorem
Hotellings Lemma

References





"
Category:Convex analysis Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Convex optimization



Ph.D. Thesis by D. P. Bertsekas




