   Methylmalonyl CoA epimerase      Methylmalonyl CoA epimerase   Methylmalonyl CoA epimerase (, methylmalonyl-CoA racemase , methylmalonyl coenzyme A racemase , DL-methylmalonyl-CoA racemase , 2-methyl-3-oxopropanoyl-CoA 2-epimerase [incorrect] ) is an enzyme that converts ( S )- methylmalonyl-CoA to the ( R ) form. 1 2 This enzyme catalyses the following chemical reaction   (R)-methylmalonyl-CoA   ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons   (S)-methylmalonyl-CoA   Role in Fatty Acid Catabolism  Methylmalonyl CoA epimerase plays an important role in the catabolism of fatty acids with odd-length carbon chains. In the catabolism of even-chain saturated fatty acids, the β-oxidation pathway breaks down fatty acyl-CoA molecules in repeated sequences of four reactions to yield one acetyl CoA per repeated sequence. This means that, for each round of β-oxidation, the fatty acyl-Co-A is shortened by two carbons. If the fatty acid began with an even number of carbons, this process could break down an entire saturated fatty acid into acetyl-CoA units. If the fatty acid began with an odd number of carbons, however, β-oxidation would break the fatty acyl-CoA down until the three carbon propionyl-CoA is formed. In order to convert this to the metabolically useful succinyl-CoA , three reactions are needed. The propionyl-CoA is first carboxylated to ( S )-methylmalonyl-CoA by the enzyme Propionyl-CoA carboxylase . Methylmalonyl CoA epimerase then catalyzes the rearrangement of ( S )-methylmalonyl-CoA to the ( R ) form in a reaction that uses a vitamin B12  cofactor and a resonance-stabilized carbanion  intermediate . The ( R )-methylmalonyl-CoA is then converted to succinyl-CoA in a reaction catalyzed by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase .  Reaction Mechanism  Acting as a general base , the enzyme abstracts a proton from the β-carbon of ( R )-methylmalonyl-CoA. This results in the formation of a carbanion intermediate in which the α-carbon is stabilized by resonance. The enzyme then acts as a general acid to protonate the β-carbon, resulting in the formation of ( S )-methylmalonyl-CoA.  References  External links     "  Category:EC 5.1.99     ↩  ↩     