   Portal:Physics/Selected article/Week 17, 2007      Portal:Physics/Selected article/Week 17, 2007    Nikola Tesla (10 July 1856 - 7 January 1943) was a world-renowned inventor , physicist , mechanical engineer and electrical engineer . He was born an ethnic Serb citizen of the Austrian Empire and later became an American citizen . Tesla is best known for his revolutionary work in, and numerous contributions to, the discipline of electricity and magnetism in the late 19th and early 20th century . Tesla's patents and theoretical work formed the basis of modern alternating current  electric power (AC) systems, including the polyphase  power distribution systems and the AC motor , with which he helped usher in the Second Industrial Revolution .  After his demonstration of wireless communication in 1893 and after being the victor in the " War of Currents ", he was widely respected as America's greatest electrical engineer. Much of his early work pioneered modern electrical engineering and many of his discoveries were of groundbreaking importance. In the United States, Tesla's fame rivaled that of any other inventor or scientist in history or popular culture , but due to his eccentric personality and, at the time, unbelievable and sometimes bizarre claims about possible scientific and technological developments, Tesla was ultimately ostracized and regarded as a mad scientist . Never putting much focus on his finances, Tesla died impoverished at the age of 86.  The SI unit measuring magnetic flux density or magnetic induction (commonly known as the magnetic field     B    B   B\,   ), the tesla , was named in his honour (at the Conférence Générale des Poids et Mesures , Paris , 1960).  Aside from his work on electromagnetism and engineering, Tesla is said to have contributed in varying degrees to the establishment of robotics , remote control , radar and computer science and to the expansion of ballistics , nuclear physics and theoretical physics . In 1943, the Supreme Court of the United States credited him as being the inventor of the radio . Many of his achievements have been used, with some controversy , to support various pseudosciences , UFO theories and new age  occultism . Contemporary researchers of Tesla have deemed him "the man who invented the twentieth century" and "the patron saint of modern electricity.""   