   Secrets of the Alchemist Dar/Unsolved Puzzles      Secrets of the Alchemist Dar/Unsolved Puzzles   Unsolved Puzzles  This section describes puzzles which have been identified on the Official Trovers Forum .  Caution: There is technically no way of knowing if these are the puzzles, because they have not been solved yet, but it seems likely that they are.  Page numbering Acorns  Most acorns point south. 12 of the 73 point in odd directions.  Page 10,11 Mushrooms  Surrounding the book's preface (pages 10 & 11) there are 59 trees. Between the trees are clumps of mushrooms which always number from 1-5. As almost all of the gaps between the trees can also fit into 5 different measurements, it has been speculated that a Polybius Square , (a throwback to ATT), may be somehow involved. Oddly several of the trees and mushroom images are copy and pasted two or three times around the border further adding to the confusion.  Page 80 Gems  The leaves have been used for a Morse message above, which leaves the gem encrusted medallions unused. Some of the medallions, if you look closely, have green spots on them instead of red. If you turn the page upside down, one with a green spot is at the head of the page. There are 16 of them and several clues on this page and in the trailer pointed to the idea of reflecting this page by 180 degrees and overlaying it on itself so that Zac and Ana co-mingle, but there the trail has run cold.  Page 92 Vine border  The background of the border on this page is tiled and 41 are picked out in magenta. The vines are symmetrical left to right and there are 42 pairs of leaves where either the left or the right (but never both) leaves are discoloured. On top of the vines are 15 blue flowers which break the symmetry.  Page 94 Berry Border  There are 17 sprigs of berries on each side. They are symmetrical except for the way that they are colored; each sprig has at most one coloured berry.  Page 108 Border  The border is again tiled and 17 tiles are picked out in a darker green.  Ladybug rings  Throughout the Book of Spells there are 41 rings, 36 are ladybugs and 5 are red diamonds. The colors of the ladybugs fit into three groups: RED, YELLOW and BLUE. Not considering rotation or size variations, there are 11 different types. It has been speculated that page 19 should be flipped horizontally so that there are only 9 distinct types. Interestingly, the Red ladybug rings depicted in the Book of Spells do not appear to have any spots.  Filled in Letters  Throughout the first few pages of the Book of Spells certain letters are filled in. There are 52 on page 1 and 104 all together. There are 10 different filled in letters: a b d e g o O p q R .  Droplet Symbols  Pages 2 & 5 of the Book of Spells contain strips of geometric symbols. 38 + 30 + 35 = 103 in total. The number of sides on the symbols neatly goes from 1 to 6 and there are 11 different types. It has been speculated that one of the pages should be turned upside down so that there are only 10 distinct types.  Celtic Borders  Pages 3,4 & 5 of the BOS are surrounded by multicoloured celtic braids. There are at least 7 different colors used to fill in the braids and also many white parts. This looks to be the least popular puzzle.  Huge Code Blocks  Pages 16, 17, 18, 19 of the Book of Spells include huge blocks of code which have been dubbed HCB (Huge Code Blocks) on the [ http://www.alchemistdar.com/fusetalk/forum/messageview.cfm?catid=59&threadid; ;=710&enterthread;=y Official Hunt Forum]. These blocks include similar symbols to the Quinary page numbers, but are much more complex. Players on the Official Hunt Site speculate that the HCB are keys to understanding the treasure hunt.  Taken in its simplest form the HCB can be completely constructed from 4 shapes:   Crescent (moon)  Circle (sun)  Line  Bar   These 4 can face in various directions, can be large or small, and can be white or black.  Taken in its most complex form the HCB consists of over 8000 symbols of which over 700 are unique. The larger symbols can be made up of as many as 9 smaller components. The most common symbol is also one of the simplest; a small white sun, which appears approximately 670 times alone and over 5000 times in all.   Further, small snippets of the HCB symbols appear on page 6 of the Book of Spells. These 4 snippets can be combined (through rotating and overlaying) to form 13 characters that may be a key to de-coding the HCB. [ http://www.alchemistdar.com/fusetalk/forum/messageview.cfm?catid=55&threadid; ;=687&enterthread;=y Source: Official Hunt Site]  Page 16 has 77 small black dots in five sets. When these dots are 'shifted' across the HCB on that page they pick out certain symbols. [ http://www.alchemistdar.com/fusetalk/forum/messageview.cfm?catid=54&threadid; ;=918& Source: Official Hunt Site] Some trovers speculate that the highlighted symbols should then be removed from the HCB facilitating further constructions.  Further snippets of the HCB have been released in the Trailer , where oddly the sequences are directly taken from the HCB but have been colored in (blackened) differently.  Michael Stadther released yet further HCB code in the New Clue on Christmas Day whilst appearing on Fox TV. This time the HCB symbols encircled an ambigram of the word Reflection.   Digitizer101 has re-created the HCB for easier printing and cracking, however these recreations do not include the small black dots mentioned above. The digitized versions of the HCB are available at: Page 16 - Page 17 - Page 18 - Page 19  Others  Other pages have been discussed as possible puzzles (or parts of puzzles) including:   Book's front cover and its oddly tiled trees.  Page 31 where the sun at the top is upside down.  Page 41 workshop with 25 fairies and a variety of wood shavings and carpenter's tools.  Page 48 contains one hidden message (see above) but has room for another?  Compass page in BOS.   on the blocks, on the top, coded in with the bugs, there as words, such as nothing, private, property, where to go, and others  "  Category:Puzzles   