


Modified Richardson iteration




Modified Richardson iteration

Modified Richardson iteration is an iterative method for solving a system of linear equations. Richardson iteration was proposed by Lewis Richardson in his work dated 1910. It is similar to the Jacobi and Gauss–Seidel method.
We seek the solution to a set of linear equations, expressed in matrix terms as



The Richardson iteration is



where 
 
 
 
  is a scalar parameter that has to be chosen such that the sequence 
 
 
 
  converges.
It is easy to see that the method has the correct fixed points, because if it converges, then 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  has to approximate a solution of 
 
 
 
 .
Convergence
Subtracting the exact solution 
 
 
 
 , and introducing the notation for the error 
 
 
 
 , we get the equality for the errors



Thus,



for any vector norm and the corresponding induced matrix norm. Thus, if 
 
 
 
 , the method converges.
Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is diagonalizable and that 
 
 
 
  are the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of 
 
 
 
 . The error converges to 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  for all eigenvalues 
 
 
 
 . If, e.g., all eigenvalues are positive, this can be guaranteed if 
 
 
 
  is chosen such that 
 
 
 
 . The optimal choice, minimizing all 
 
 
 
 , is 
 
 
 
 , which gives the simplest Chebyshev iteration.
If there are both positive and negative eigenvalues, the method will diverge for any 
 
 
 
  if the initial error 
 
 
 
  has nonzero components in the corresponding eigenvectors.
Equivalence to gradient descent
Consider minimizing the function 
 
 
 
 . Since this is a convex function, a sufficient condition for optimality is that the gradient is zero (
 
 
 
 ) which gives rise to the equation



Define 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Because of the form of A, it is a positive semi-definite matrix, so it has no negative eigenvalues.
A step of gradient descent is


 
  which is equivalent to the Richardson iteration by making 
 
 
 
 .


See also

Richardson extrapolation

References



Appeared in Encyclopaedia of Mathematics (2002), Ed. by Michiel Hazewinkel, Kluwer - ISBN 1-4020-0609-8

"
Category:Numerical linear algebra


