


Kelvin functions




Kelvin functions

In applied mathematics, the Kelvin functions berν(x) and beiν(x) are the real and imaginary parts, respectively, of



where x is real, and , is the νth order Bessel function of the first kind. Similarly, the functions Kerν(x) and Keiν(x) are the real and imaginary parts, respectively, of



where  is the νth order modified Bessel function of the second kind.
These functions are named after William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin.
While the Kelvin functions are defined as the real and imaginary parts of Bessel functions with x taken to be real, the functions can be analytically continued for complex arguments  With the exception of Bern(x) and Bein(x) for integral n, the Kelvin functions have a branch point at x = 0.
Below, 
 
 
 
  is the Gamma function and 
 
 
 
  is the Digamma function.
ber(x)
 
For integers n, bern(x) has the series expansion



where 
 
 
 
  is the Gamma function. The special case ber0(x), commonly denoted as just ber(x), has the series expansion



and asymptotic series


 
 ,
where









bei(x)
 
For integers n, bein(x) has the series expansion



The special case bei0(x), commonly denoted as just bei(x), has the series expansion



and asymptotic series



where α, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are defined as for ber(x).


ker(x)
 
For integers n, kern(x) has the (complicated) series expansion



The special case ker0(x), commonly denoted as just ker(x), has the series expansion



and the asymptotic series



where










kei(x)
 
For n an integer kein(x) has the (complicated) series expansion



The special case kei0(x), commonly denoted as just kei(x), has the series expansion



and the asymptotic series



where β, 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  are defined as for ker(x).


See also

Bessel function

References




External links

Weisstein, Eric W. "Kelvin Functions." From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource. 1
GPL-licensed C/C++ source code for calculating Kelvin functions at codecogs.com: 2

"
Category:Special hypergeometric functions Category:William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin


