


Trace operator




Trace operator

 In mathematics, the concept of trace operator plays an important role in studying the existence and uniqueness of solutions to boundary value problems, that is, to partial differential equations with prescribed boundary conditions. The trace operator makes it possible to extend the notion of restriction of a function to the boundary of its domain to "generalized" functions in a Sobolev space.
Informal discussion
Let 
 
 
 
  be a bounded open set in the Euclidean space

 
  with C1 boundary

 
  If 
 
 
 
 
  is a function that is 
 
 
 
  (or even just continuous) on the closure

 
  of 
 
 
 
  its function restriction is well-defined and continuous on 
 
 
 
  If however, 
 
 
 
 
  is the solution to some partial differential equation, it is in general a weak solution, so it belongs to some Sobolev space. Such functions are defined only up to a set of measure zero, and since the boundary 
 
 
 
  does have measure zero, any function in a Sobolev space can be completely redefined on the boundary without changing the function as an element in that space. It follows that simple function restriction cannot be used to meaningfully define what it means for a general solution to a partial differential equation to behave in a prescribed way on the boundary of 
 
 

The way out of this difficulty is the observation that while an element 
 
 
 
  in a Sobolev space may be ill-defined as a function, 
 
 
 
  can be nevertheless approximated by a sequence 
 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  functions defined on the closure of 
 
 
 
  Then, the restriction 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
  is defined as the limit of the sequence of restrictions 
 
 
 
 .
Construction of the trace operator
To rigorously define the notion of restriction to a function in a Sobolev space, let 
 
 
 
  be a real number. Consider the linear operator



defined on the set of all 
 
 
 
  functions on the closure of 
 
 
 
 
  with values in the Lp space

 
  given by the formula



The domain of 
 
 
 
  is a subset of the Sobolev space 
 
 
 
  It can be proved that there exists a constant 
 
 
 
 
  depending only on 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 

Then, since the 
 
 
 
  functions on 
 
 
 
  are dense in 
 
 
 
 , the operator 
 
 
 
  admits a continuous extension



defined on the entire space 
 
 

 
  is called the trace operator. The restriction (or trace) 
 
 
 
  of a function 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  is then defined as 
 
 

This argument can be made more concrete as follows. Given a function 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  consider a sequence of functions 
 
 
 
  that are 
 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  converging to 
 
 
 
  in the norm of 
 
 
 
  Then, by the above inequality, the sequence 
 
 
 
 
  will be convergent in 
 
 
 
  Define



It can be shown that this definition is independent of the sequence 
 
 
 
  approximating 
 
 

Application
Consider the problem of solving Poisson's equation with zero boundary conditions:



Here, 
 
 
 
  is a given continuous function on 
 
 

With the help of the concept of trace, define the subspace 
 
 
 
  to be all functions in the Sobolev space 
 
 
 
  (this space is also denoted 
 
 
 
 ) whose trace is zero. Then, the equation above can be given the weak formulation

Find 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  such that
 


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 


Using the Lax–Milgram theorem one can then prove that this equation has precisely one solution, which implies that the original equation has precisely one weak solution.
One can employ similar ideas to prove the existence and uniqueness of solutions for more complicated partial differential equations and with other boundary conditions (such as Neumann and Robin), with the notion of trace playing an important role in all such problems.
References



de:Sobolev-Raum#Spuroperator"
Category:Sobolev spaces


