


Self-avoiding walk




Self-avoiding walk

(Figure)
Self avoiding walk.svg

In mathematics, a self-avoiding walk (SAW) is a sequence of moves on a lattice (a lattice path) that does not visit the same point more than once. This is a special case of the graph theoretical notion of a path. A self-avoiding polygon (SAP) is a closed self-avoiding walk on a lattice. SAWs were first introduced by the chemist Paul Flory1 in order to model the real-life behavior of chain-like entities such as solvents and polymers, whose physical volume prohibits multiple occupation of the same spatial point. Very little is known rigorously about the self-avoiding walk from a mathematical perspective, although physicists have provided numerous conjectures that are believed to be true and are strongly supported by numerical simulations.
In computational physics a self-avoiding walk is a chain-like path in  or  with a certain number of nodes, typically a fixed step length and has the imperative property that it doesn't cross itself or another walk. A system of self-avoiding walks satisfies the so-called excluded volume condition. In higher dimensions, the self-avoiding walk is believed to behave much like the ordinary random walk. SAWs and SAPs play a central role in the modelling of the topological and knot-theoretic behaviour of thread- and loop-like molecules such as proteins. SAW is a fractal.23 For example, in 
 
 
 
  the fractal dimension is 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
  it is close to 
 
 
 
  while for 
 
 
 
  the fractal dimension is 
 
 
 
 . The dimension is called the upper critical dimension above which excluded volume is negligible. A SAW that does not satisfy the excluded volume condition was recently studied to model explicit surface geometry resulting from expansion of a SAW.4
The properties of SAWs cannot be calculated analytically, so numerical simulations are employed. The pivot algorithm is a common method for Markov chain Monte Carlo simulations for the uniform measure on 
 
 
 
 -step self-avoiding walks. The pivot algorithm works by taking a self-avoiding walk and randomly choosing a point on this walk, and then applying a symmetry operation (rotations and reflections) on the walk after the nth step to create a new walk. Calculating the number of self-avoiding walks in any given lattice is a common computational problem. There is currently no known formula for determining the number of self-avoiding walks, although there are rigorous methods for approximating them.56 Finding the number of such paths is conjectured to be an NP-hard problem. For self-avoiding walks from one end of a diagonal to the other, with only moves in the positive direction, there are exactly



paths for an 
 
 
 
  rectangular lattice.
Universality
One of the phenomena associated with self-avoiding walks and 
 
 
 
 -dimensional statistical physics models in general is the notion of universality, that is, independence of macroscopic observables from microscopic details, such as the choice of the lattice. One important quantity that appears in conjectures for universal laws is the connective constant, defined as follows. Let  denote the number of 
 
 
 
 -step self-avoiding walks. Since every 
 
 
 
 -step self avoiding walk can be decomposed into an 
 
 
 
 -step self-avoiding walk and an 
 
 
 
 -step self-avoiding walk, it follows that . Therefore the sequence  is subadditive and we can apply Fekete's lemma to show that the following limit exists:



 
  is called the connective constant, since  depends on the particular lattice chosen for the walk so does 
 
 
 
 . The exact value of 
 
 
 
  is only known for the hexagonal lattice, where it is equal to:7



For other lattices, 
 
 
 
  has only been approximated numerically, and is believed to not even be an algebraic number. It is conjectured that



as 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  depends on the lattice, but the power law correction 
 
 
 
  does not; in other words, this law is believed to be universal.
Limits
Consider the uniform measure on 
 
 
 
 -step self-avoiding walks in the full plane. It is currently unknown whether the limit of the uniform measure as 
 
 
 
  induces a measure on infinite full-plane walks. However, Harry Kesten has shown that such a measure exists for self-avoiding walks in the half-plane. One important question involving self-avoiding walks is the existence and conformal invariance of the scaling limit, that is, the limit as the length of the walk goes to infinity and the mesh of the lattice goes to zero. The scaling limit of the self-avoiding walk is conjectured to be described by Schramm–Loewner evolution with parameter 
 
 

Self-avoiding walks in popular culture
The computer video game Snake is an example of a self-avoiding walk.
References
Further reading






External links



the number of self-avoiding paths joining opposite corners of an N × N grid, for N from 0 to 12. Also includes an extended list up to N = 21.
 


Java applet of a 2D self-avoiding walk
Generic python implementation to simulate SAWs and expanding FiberWalks on a square lattices in n-dimensions.
Norris software to generate SAWs on the Diamond cubic.

"
Category:Polygons Category:Discrete geometry Category:Computational physics Category:Computational chemistry









This is a recent result from Duminil-Copin and Smirnov: 




