


Conway base 13 function




Conway base 13 function

The Conway base 13 function is a function created by British mathematician John H. Conway as a counterexample to the converse of the intermediate value theorem. In other words, even though Conway's function f is not continuous, if f(a) f:\mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}  defined as follows.

If 
 
 
 
 , write 
 
 
 
  as a tridecimal (a "decimal" in base 13) using the 13 underlined "digit" symbols 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , ..., 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 ; there should be no trailing 
 
 
 
  recurring. There may be a leading sign, and somewhere there will be a tridecimal point to distinguish the integer part from the fractional part; these should both be ignored in the sequel. (These "digits" can be thought of as having the values 0 to 12, respectively.)
 
If from some point onwards, the tridecimal expansion of 
 
 
 
  consists of an underlined signed ordinary decimal number, 
 
 
 
  say, then define 
 
 
 
 , otherwise define 
 
 
 
 . For example,
 
 




Note that the tridecimal point and earlier occurrences of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are ignored, as there are later occurrences of non-decimal digits. (More precisely, to have the 
 
 
 
  case, the trailing part must consist of either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 , followed by some finite number (possibly zero) of underlined decimal digits, followed by 
 
 
 
 , followed by some number (possibly infinitely many) of underlined decimal digits. Other possible cases can be permitted, but it makes no difference to the crucial properties of the function.)
Properties
The function 
 
 
 
  defined in this way satisfies the conclusion of the intermediate value theorem but is continuous nowhere. That is, on any closed interval 
 
 
 
  of the real line, 
 
 
 
  takes on every value between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . More strongly, 
 
 
 
  takes as its value every real number somewhere within every open interval 
 
 
 
 .
To prove this, let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be any real number. Then 
 
 
 
  can have the tail end of its tridecimal representation modified to be 
 
 
 
  (that is, 
 
 
 
  underlined, with 
 
 
 
  being written as a signed decimal), giving a new number 
 
 
 
 . By introducing this modification sufficiently far along the tridecimal representation of 
 
 
 
 , the new number 
 
 
 
  will still lie in the interval 
 
 
 
  and will satisfy 
 
 
 
 .
Thus 
 
 
 
  satisfies a property stronger than the conclusion of the intermediate value theorem. Moreover, if 
 
 
 
  were continuous at some point, 
 
 
 
  would be locally bounded at this point, which is not the case. Thus 
 
 
 
  is a spectacular counterexample to the converse of the intermediate value theorem.
References

Agboola, Adebisi. Lecture. Math CS 120. University of California, Santa Barbara, 17 December 2005.

See also

Darboux function

"
Category:Functions and mappings


