


Epistemic closure




Epistemic closure

Epistemic closure1 is a property of some belief systems. It is the principle that if a subject 
 
 
 
  knows 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  knows that 
 
 
entails

 
 , then 
 
 
 
  can thereby come to know 
 
 
 
 . Most epistemological theories involve a closure principle and many skeptical arguments assume a closure principle.
On the other hand, some epistemologists, including Robert Nozick, have denied closure principles on the basis of reliabilist accounts of knowledge. Nozick, in Philosophical Explanations, advocated that, when considering the Gettier problem, the least counter-intuitive assumption we give up should be epistemic closure. Nozick suggested a "truth tracking" theory of knowledge, in which the x was said to know P if x's belief in P tracked the truth of P through the relevant modal scenarios.2
A subject may not actually believe q, for example, regardless of whether he or she is justified or warranted. Thus, one might instead say that knowledge is closed under known deduction: if, while knowing p, S believes q because S knows that p entails q, then S knows q.3 An even stronger formulation would be as such: If, while knowing various propositions, S believes p because S knows that they entail p, then S knows p.4 While the principle of epistemic closure is generally regarded as intuitive,5 philosophers such as Robert Nozick and Fred Dretske have argued against it.
Justificatory closure
In the seminal 1963 paper, “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?”, Edmunde Gettier gave an assumption (later called the “principle of deducibility for justification” by Irving Thalberg, Jr.)6 that would serve as a basis for the rest of his piece: “for any proposition P, if S is justified in believing P and P entails Q, and S deduces Q from P and accepts Q as a result of this deduction, then S is justified in believing Q.”7 This was seized upon by Thalberg, who rejected the principle in order to demonstrate that one of Gettier's examples fails to support Gettier's main thesis that justified true belief is not knowledge (in the following quotation, (1) refers to “Jones will get the job”, (2) refers to “Jones has ten coins”, and (3) is the logical conjunction of (1) and (2)):

Why doesn't Gettier's principle (PDJ) hold in the evidential situation he has described? You multiply your risks of being wrong when you believe a conjunction. [… T]he most elementary theory of probability indicates that Smith's prospects of being right on both (1) and (2), namely, of being right on (3), are bound to be less favorable than his prospects of being right on either (1) or (2). In fact, Smith's chances of being right on (3) might not come up to the minimum standard of justification which (1) and (2) barely satisfy, and Smith would be unjustified in accepting (3). 

Epistemic closure in U.S. political discussion
The term "epistemic closure" has been used in U.S. political debate to refer to the claim that political belief systems can be closed systems of deduction, unaffected by empirical evidence.8 This use of the term was popularized by libertarian blogger and commentator Julian Sanchez in 2010 as an extreme form of confirmation bias.910
See also

False-consensus effect
Confirmation bias
Truthiness
Echo chamber (media)
Closure: A Short History of Everything by Hilary Lawson, Routledge 2001

References
External links






"
Category:Concepts in epistemology Category:Belief Category:Modal logic Category:Philosophy of Robert Nozick



↩
Philosophical explanations, By Robert Nozick (Harvard 1981), page 204↩


↩
↩
↩
↩

↩




