


Monotonically normal space




Monotonically normal space

In mathematics, a monotonically normal space is a particular kind of normal space, with some special characteristics, and is such that it is hereditarily normal, and any two separated subsets are strongly separated. They are defined in terms of a monotone normality operator.
A 
 
 
topological space

 
  is said to be monotonically normal if the following condition holds:
For every 
 
 
 
 , where G is open, there is an open set 
 
 
 
  such that




if 
 
 
 
  then either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 .

There are some equivalent criteria of monotone normality.
Equivalent definitions
Definition 2
A space X is called monotonically normal if it is 
 
 
 
  and for each pair of disjoint closed subsets 
 
 
 
  there is an open set 
 
 
 
  with the properties



 
  and


 
 , whenever 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .

This operator 
 
 
 
  is called monotone normality operator.
Note that if G is a monotone normality operator, then 
 
 
 
  defined by 
 
 
 
  is also a monotone normality operator; and 
 
 
 
  satisfies



For this reason we some time take the monotone normality operator so as to satisfy the above requirement; and that facilitates the proof of some theorems and of the equivalence of the definitions as well.
Definition 3
A space X is called monotonically normal if it is 
 
 
 
 ,and to each pair (A, B) of subsets of X, with 
 
 
 
 , one can assign an open subset G(A, B) of X such that






 
 .

Definition 4
A space X is called monotonically normal if it is 
 
 
 
  and there is a function H that assigns to each ordered pair (p,C) where C is closed and p is without C, an open set H(p,C) satisfying:




if D is closed and 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 

if 
 
 
 
  are points in X, then 
 
 
 
 .

Properties
An important example of these spaces would be, assuming Axiom of Choice, the linearly ordered spaces; however, it really needs axiom of choice for an arbitrary linear order to be normal (see van Douwen's paper). Any generalised metric is monotonically normal even without choice. An important property of monotonically normal spaces is that any two separated subsets are strongly separated there. Monotone normality is hereditary property and a monotonically normal space is always normal by the first condition of the second equivalent definition.
We list up some of the properties :

A closed map preserves monotone normality.
A monotonically normal space is hereditarily collectionwise normal.
Elastic spaces are monotonically normal.

Some discussion links





Henno Brandsma's discussion about Monotone Normality in Topology Atlas can be viewed here

"
Category:Topology Category:Separation axioms Category:Properties of topological spaces


