


Clutching construction




Clutching construction

In topology, a branch of mathematics, the clutching construction is a way of constructing fiber bundles, particularly vector bundles on spheres.
Definition
Consider the sphere 
 
 
 
  as the union of the upper and lower hemispheres 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  along their intersection, the equator, an 
 
 
 
 .
Given trivialized fiber bundles with fiber 
 
 
 
  and structure group 
 
 
 
  over the two disks, then given a map 
 
 
 
  (called the clutching map), glue the two trivial bundles together via f.
Formally, it is the coequalizer of the inclusions 
 
 
 
  via 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 : glue the two bundles together on the boundary, with a twist.
Thus we have a map 
 
 
 
 : clutching information on the equator yields a fiber bundle on the total space.
In the case of vector bundles, this yields 
 
 
 
 , and indeed this map is an isomorphism (under connect sum of spheres on the right).
Generalization
The above can be generalized by replacing the disks and sphere with any closed triad 
 
 
 
 , that is, a space X, together with two closed subsets A and B whose union is X. Then a clutching map on 
 
 
 
  gives a vector bundle on X.
Classifying map construction
Let 
 
 
 
  be a fibre bundle with fibre 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be a collection of pairs 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  is a local trivialization of 
 
 
 
  over 
 
 
 
 . Moreover, we demand that the union of all the sets 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
  (i.e. the collection is an atlas of trivializations 
 
 
 
 ).
Consider the space 
 
 
 
  modulo the equivalence relation 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . By design, the local trivializations 
 
 
 
  give a fibrewise equivalence between this quotient space and the fibre bundle 
 
 
 
 .
Consider the space 
 
 
 
  modulo the equivalence relation 
 
 
 
  is equivalent to 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  and consider 
 
 
 
  to be a map 
 
 
 
  then we demand that 
 
 
 
 . Ie: in our re-construction of 
 
 
 
  we are replacing the fibre 
 
 
 
  by the topological group of homeomorphisms of the fibre, 
 
 
 
 . If the structure group of the bundle is known to reduce, you could replace 
 
 
 
  with the reduced structure group. This is a bundle over 
 
 
 
  with fibre 
 
 
 
  and is a principal bundle. Denote it by 
 
 
 
 . The relation to the previous bundle is induced from the principal bundle
 
 
 
 .
So we have a principal bundle 
 
 
 
 . The theory of classifying spaces gives us an induced push-forward fibration 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the classifying space of 
 
 
 
 . Here is an outline:
Given a 
 
 
 
 -principal bundle 
 
 
 
 , consider the space 
 
 
 
 . This space is a fibration in two different ways:
1) Project onto the first factor
 
 
 
 . The fibre in this case is 
 
 
 
 , which is a contractible space by the definition of a classifying space.
2) Project onto the second factor
 
 
 
 . The fibre in this case is 
 
 
 
 .
Thus we have a fibration 
 
 
 
 . This map is called the classifying map of the fibre bundle 
 
 
 
  since 1) the principal bundle 
 
 
 
  is the pull-back of the bundle 
 
 
 
  along the classifying map and 2) The bundle 
 
 
 
  is induced from the principal bundle as above.
Contrast with twisted spheres
Twisted spheres are sometimes referred to as a "clutching-type" construction, but this is misleading: the clutching construction is properly about fiber bundles.

In twisted spheres, you glue two disks along their boundary. The disks are a priori identified (with the standard disk), and points on the boundary sphere do not in general go to their corresponding points on the other boundary sphere. This is a map 
 
 
 
 : the gluing is non-trivial in the base.
In the clutching construction, you glue two bundles together over the boundary of their base disks. The boundary spheres are glued together via the standard identification: each point goes to the corresponding one, but each fiber has a twist. This is a map 
 
 
 
 : the gluing is trivial in the base, but not in the fibers.

References

Allen Hatcher's book-in-progress Vector Bundles & K-Theory version 2.0, p. 22.

"
Category:Topology Category:Geometric topology Category:Differential topology Category:Differential structures


