


Centering matrix




Centering matrix

In mathematics and multivariate statistics, the centering matrix1 is a symmetric and idempotent matrix, which when multiplied with a vector has the same effect as subtracting the mean of the components of the vector from every component.
Definition
The centering matrix of size n is defined as the n-by-n matrix


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix of size n and 
 
 
 
  is an n-by-n matrix of all 1's. This can also be written as:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the column-vector of n ones and where 
 
 
 
  denotes matrix transpose.
For example


 
 ,


 
  ,



Properties
Given a column-vector, 
 
 
 
  of size n, the centering property of 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the mean of the components of 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is symmetric positive semi-definite.


 
  is idempotent, so that 
 
 
 
 , for 
 
 
 
 . Once the mean has been removed, it is zero and removing it again has no effect.


 
  is  singular. The effects of applying the transformation 
 
 
 
  cannot be reversed.


 
  has the eigenvalue 1 of multiplicity n − 1 and eigenvalue 0 of multiplicity 1.


 
  has a nullspace of dimension 1, along the vector 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is a projection matrix. That is, 
 
 
 
  is a projection of 
 
 
 
  onto the (n − 1)-dimensional subspace that is orthogonal to the nullspace 
 
 
 
 . (This is the subspace of all n-vectors whose components sum to zero.)
Application
Although multiplication by the centering matrix is not a computationally efficient way of removing the mean from a vector, it forms an analytical tool that conveniently and succinctly expresses mean removal. It can be used not only to remove the mean of a single vector, but also of multiple vectors stored in the rows or columns of a matrix. For an m-by-n matrix 
 
 
 
 , the multiplication 
 
 
 
  removes the means from each of the n columns, while 
 
 
 
  removes the means from each of the m rows.
The centering matrix provides in particular a succinct way to express the scatter matrix, 
 
 
 
  of a data sample 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is the sample mean. The centering matrix allows us to express the scatter matrix more compactly as



 
  is the covariance matrix of the multinomial distribution, in the special case where the parameters of that distribution are 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 .
References


"
Category:Multivariate statistics Category:Matrices Category:Statistical terminology



John I. Marden, Analyzing and Modeling Rank Data, Chapman & Hall, 1995, ISBN 0-412-99521-2, page 59.↩




