


Baumslag–Solitar group




Baumslag–Solitar group

(Figure)
One sheet of the Cayley graph of the Baumslag–Solitar group 
 
 
 
 . Red edges correspond to 
 
 
 
  and blue edges correspond to 
 
 
 
 .

(Figure)
The sheets of the Cayley graph of the Baumslag-Solitar group 
 
 
 
  fit together into an infinite binary tree.

In the mathematical field of group theory, the Baumslag–Solitar groups are examples of two-generator one-relator groups that play an important role in combinatorial group theory and geometric group theory as (counter)examples and test-cases. They are given by the group presentation



For each integer 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the Baumslag–Solitar group is denoted 
 
 
 
 . The relation in the presentation is called the Baumslag–Solitar relation.
Some of the various 
 
 
 
  are well-known groups. 
 
 
 
  is the free abelian group on two generators, and 
 
 
 
  is the fundamental group of the Klein bottle.
The groups were defined by Gilbert Baumslag and Donald Solitar in 1962 to provide examples of non-Hopfian groups. The groups contain residually finite groups, Hopfian groups that are not residually finite, and non-Hopfian groups.
Linear representation
Define



The matrix group 
 
 
 
  generated by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is a homomorphic image of 
 
 
 
 , via the homomorphism induced by



It is worth noting that this will not, in general, be an isomorphism. For instance if 
 
 
 
  is not residually finite (i.e. if it is not the case that 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
1) it cannot be isomorphic to a finitely generated linear group, which is known to be residually finite by a theorem of Mal'cev.2
Notes


References


Gilbert Baumslag and Donald Solitar, Some two-generator one-relator non-Hopfian groups, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 68 (1962), 199–201. 

"
Category:Combinatorial group theory



See Nonresidually Finite One-Relator Groups by Stephen Meskin for a proof of the residual finiteness condition↩
Anatoliĭ Ivanovich Mal'cev, "On the faithful representation of infinite groups by matrices" Transl. Amer. Math. Soc. (2), 45 (1965), pp. 1–18↩




