


Schur functor




Schur functor

In mathematics, especially in the field of representation theory, a Schur functor is a functor from the category of modules over a fixed commutative ring to itself. Schur functors are indexed by partitions and are described as follows. Let R be a commutative ring, E an R-module and λ a partition of a positive integer n. Let T be a Young tableau of shape λ, thus indexing the factors of the n-fold direct product, E × E × ... × E, with the boxes of T. Consider those maps of R-modules 
 
 
 
  satisfying the following conditions
(1) 
 
 
 
  is multilinear,
(2) 
 
 
 
  is alternating in the entries indexed by each column of T,
(3) 
 
 
 
  satisfies an exchange condition stating that if 
 
 
 
  are numbers from column i of T then



where the sum is over n-tuples ''x' '' obtained from x by exchanging the elements indexed by I with any 
 
 
 
  elements indexed by the numbers in column 
 
 
 
  (in order).
The universal R-module 
 
 
 
  that extends 
 
 
 
  to a mapping of R-modules 
 
 
 
 
  is the image of E under the Schur functor indexed by λ.
For an example of the condition (3) placed on 
 
 
 
  suppose that λ is the partition 
 
 
 
  and the tableau T is numbered such that its entries are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 when read top-to-bottom, left-to-right). Taking 
 
 
 
  (i.e., the numbers in the second column of T) we have



while if 
 
 
 
  then



Applications
If V is a complex vector space of dimension k then either 
 
 
 
  is zero, if the length of λ is longer than k, or it is an irreducible 
 
 
 
  representation of highest weight λ.
In this context Schur-Weyl duality states that as a 
 
 
 
 -module



where 
 
 
 
  is the number of standard young tableaux of shape λ. More generally, we have the decomposition of the tensor product as 
 
 
 
 -bimodule



where 
 
 
 
  is the Specht module indexed by λ. Schur functors can also be used to describe the coordinate ring of certain flag varieties.
See also

Young symmetrizer

References

J. Towber, Two new functors from modules to algebras, J. Algebra 47 (1977), 80-104. doi:10.1016/0021-8693(77)90211-3
W. Fulton, Young Tableaux, with Applications to Representation Theory and Geometry. Cambridge University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-521-56724-6.

External links

Schur Functors | The n-Category Café

"
Category:Representation theory


