


Probabilistic automaton




Probabilistic automaton

In mathematics and computer science, the probabilistic automaton (PA) is a generalization of the non-deterministic finite automaton; it includes the probability of a given transition into the transition function, turning it into a transition matrix or stochastic matrix. Thus, the probabilistic automaton generalizes the concept of a Markov chain or subshift of finite type. The languages recognized by probabilistic automata are called stochastic languages; these include the regular languages as a subset. The number of stochastic languages is uncountable.
The concept was introduced by Michael O. Rabin in 1963;1 a certain special case is sometimes known as the Rabin automaton. In recent years, a variant has been formulated in terms of quantum probabilities, the quantum finite automaton.
Definition
The probabilistic automaton may be defined as an extension of a non-deterministic finite automaton

 
 , together with two probabilities: the probability 
 
 
 
  of a particular state transition taking place, and with the initial state 
 
 
 
  replaced by a stochastic vector giving the probability of the automaton being in a given initial state.
For the ordinary non-deterministic finite automaton, one has

a finite set of states 
 
 

a finite set of input symbols


a transition function 
 
 

a set of states 
 
 
 
  distinguished as accepting (or final) states

 
 .

Here, 
 
 
 
  denotes the power set of 
 
 
 
 .
By use of currying, the transition function 
 
 
 
  of a non-deterministic finite automaton can be written as a membership function



so that 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
 . The curried transition function can be understood to be a matrix with matrix entries



The matrix 
 
 
 
  is then a square matrix, whose entries are zero or one, indicating whether a transition 
 
 
 
  is allowed by the NFA. Such a transition matrix is always defined for a non-deterministic finite automaton.
The probabilistic automaton replaces this matrix by a stochastic matrix

 
 , so that the probability of a transition is given by



A state change from some state to any state must occur with probability one, of course, and so one must have



for all input letters 
 
 
 
  and internal states 
 
 
 
 . The initial state of a probabilistic automaton is given by a row vector

 
 , whose components add to unity:



The transition matrix acts on the right, so that the state of the probabilistic automaton, after consuming the input string 
 
 
 
 , would be



In particular, the state of a probabilistic automaton is always a stochastic vector, since the product of any two stochastic matrices is a stochastic matrix, and the product of a stochastic vector and a stochastic matrix is again a stochastic vector. This vector is sometimes called the distribution of states, emphasizing that it is a discrete probability distribution.
Formally, the definition of a probabilistic automaton does not require the mechanics of the non-deterministic automaton, which may be dispensed with. Formally, a probabilistic automaton PA is defined as the tuple 
 
 
 
 . A Rabin automaton is one for which the initial distribution 
 
 
 
  is a coordinate vector; that is, has zero for all but one entries, and the remaining entry being one.
Stochastic languages
The set of languages recognized by probabilistic automata are called stochastic languages. They include the regular languages as a subset.
Let 
 
 
 
  be the set of "accepting" or "final" states of the automaton. By abuse of notation, 
 
 
 
  can also be understood to be the column vector that is the membership function for 
 
 
 
 ; that is, it has a 1 at the places corresponding to elements in 
 
 
 
 , and a zero otherwise. This vector may be contracted with the internal state probability, to form a scalar. The language recognized by a specific automaton is then defined as



where 
 
 
 
  is the set of all strings in the alphabet

 
  (so that * is the Kleene star). The language depends on the value of the cut-point

 
 , normally taken to be in the range 
 
 
 
 .
A language is called η-stochastic if and only if there exists some PA that recognizes the language, for fixed 
 
 
 
 . A language is called stochastic if and only if there is some 
 
 
 
  for which 
 
 
 
  is η-stochastic.
A cut-point is said to be an isolated cut-point if and only if there exists a 
 
 
 
  such that



for all 
 
 

Properties
Every regular language is stochastic, and more strongly, every regular language is η-stochastic. A weak converse is that every 0-stochastic language is regular; however, the general converse does not hold: there are stochastic languages that are not regular.
Every η-stochastic language is stochastic, for some 
 
 
 
 .
Every stochastic language is representable by a Rabin automaton.
If 
 
 
 
  is an isolated cut-point, then 
 
 
 
  is a regular language.
p-adic languages
The p-adic languages provide an example of a stochastic language that is not regular, and also show that the number of stochastic languages is uncountable. A p-adic language is defined as the set of strings in the letters 
 
 
 
  such that



That is, a p-adic language is merely the set of real numbers, written in base-p, such that they are greater than 
 
 
 
 . It is straightforward to show that all p-adic languages are stochastic. However, a p-adic language is regular if and only if $\eta$ is rational. In particular, this implies that the number of stochastic languages is uncountable.
Generalizations
The probabilistic automaton has a geometric interpretation: the state vector can be understood to be a point that lives on the face of the standard simplex, opposite to the orthogonal corner. The transition matrices form a monoid, acting on the point. This may be generalized by having the point be from some general topological space, while the transition matrices are chosen from a collection of operators acting on the topological space, thus forming a semiautomaton. When the cut-point is suitably generalized, one has a topological automaton.
An example of such a generalization is the quantum finite automaton; here, the automaton state is represented by a point in complex projective space, while the transition matrices are a fixed set chosen from the unitary group. The cut-point is understood as a limit on the maximum value of the quantum angle.
References



Arto Salomaa, Theory of Automata (1969) Pergamon Press, Oxford (See chapter 2).

"
Category:Automata theory Category:Probabilistic models



↩




