


Appell's equation of motion




Appell's equation of motion

In classical mechanics, Appell's equation of motion is an alternative general formulation of classical mechanics described by Paul Émile Appell in 19001



Here, 
 
 
 
  is an arbitrary generalized acceleration, the second time derivative of the generalized coordinates qr and Qr is its corresponding generalized force; that is, the work done is given by



where the index r runs over the D generalized coordinates qr, which usually correspond to the degrees of freedom of the system. The function S is defined as the mass-weighted sum of the particle accelerations squared,



where the index k runs over the N particles, and



is the acceleration of the kth particle, the second time derivative of its position vector rk. Each rk is expressed in terms of generalized coordinates, and ak is expressed in terms of the generalized accelerations.
Appells formulation does not introduce any new physics to classical mechanics. It is fully equivalent to the other formulations of classical mechanics such as Newton's second law, Lagrangian mechanics, Hamiltonian mechanics, and the principle of least action. Appell's equation of motion may be more convenient in some cases, particularly when nonholonomic constraints are involved. Appell’s formulation is an application of Gauss' principle of least constraint.
Derivation
The change in the particle positions rk for an infinitesimal change in the D generalized coordinates is



Taking two derivatives with respect to time yields an equivalent equation for the accelerations



The work done by an infinitesimal change dqr in the generalized coordinates is



where Newton's second law for the kth particle



has been used. Substituting the formula for drk and swapping the order of the two summations yields the formulae



Therefore, the generalized forces are



This equals the derivative of S with respect to the generalized accelerations



yielding Appell’s equation of motion



Examples
Euler's equations
Euler's equations provide an excellent illustration of Appell's formulation.
Consider a rigid body of N particles joined by rigid rods. The rotation of the body may be described by an angular velocity vector

 
 , and the corresponding angular acceleration vector



The generalized force for a rotation is the torque N, since the work done for an infinitesimal rotation 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 . The velocity of the kth particle is given by



where rk is the particle's position in Cartesian coordinates; its corresponding acceleration is



Therefore, the function S may be written as



Setting the derivative of S with respect to 
 
 
 
  equal to the torque yields Euler's equations









See also

Gauss' principle of least constraint
Analytical mechanics

References
Further reading








Connection of Appell's formulation with the principle of least action.
PDF copy of Appell's article at Goettingen University
PDF copy of a second article on Appell's equations and Gauss's principle

"
Category:Classical mechanics








