


List of representations of e




List of representations of e

The mathematical constant 

 can be represented in a variety of ways as a real number. Since 
 
 
 
  is an irrational number (see proof that e is irrational), it cannot be represented as a fraction, but it can be represented as a continued fraction. Using calculus, 
 
 
 
  may also be represented as an infinite series, infinite product, or other sort of limit of a sequence.
As a continued fraction
Euler proved that the number 
 
 
 
 
  is represented as the infinite simple continued fraction1 :



Its convergence can be tripled by allowing just one fractional number:



Here are some infinite generalized continued fraction expansions of 
 
 
 
 . The second is generated from the first by a simple equivalence transformation.






This last, equivalent to [1; 0.5, 12, 5, 28, 9, ...], is a special case of a general formula for the exponential function:



As an infinite series
The number 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as the sum of the following infinite series:


 
  for any real number x.
In the special case where x = 1, or −1, we have:


 
 ,2 and



Other series include the following:


3




















 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
Bell number. Some few examples: (for n=1,2,3)





















As an infinite product
The number 
 
 
 
  is also given by several infinite product forms including Pippenger's product



and Guillera's product 45


 
  where the nth factor is the nth root of the product



as well as the infinite product



As the limit of a sequence
The number 
 
 
 
  is equal to the limit of several infinite sequences:


 
  and


 
  (both by Stirling's formula).
The symmetric limit,67



may be obtained by manipulation of the basic limit definition of 
 
 
 
 .
The next two definitions are direct corollaries of the prime number theorem8



where 
 
 
 
  is the nth prime and 
 
 
 
  is the primorial of the nth prime.



where 
 
 
 
  is the prime counting function.
Also:



In the special case that 
 
 
 
 , the result is the famous statement:



In trigonometry
Trigonometrically, 
 
 
 
  can be written as the sum of two hyperbolic functions:



Notes
"
Category:Transcendental numbers Category:Mathematical constants Category:Exponentials Category:Logarithms Category:E (mathematical constant) Category:Real transcendental numbers



↩
↩
Formulas 2–7: H. J. Brothers, Improving the convergence of Newton's series approximation for e, The College Mathematics Journal, Vol. 35, No. 1, (2004), pp. 34–39.↩
J. Sondow, A faster product for pi and a new integral for ln pi/2, Amer. Math. Monthly 112 (2005) 729–734.↩
J. Guillera and J. Sondow, Double integrals and infinite products for some classical constants via analytic continuations of Lerch's transcendent,Ramanujan Journal 16 (2008), 247–270.↩
H. J. Brothers and J. A. Knox, New closed-form approximations to the Logarithmic Constant e, The Mathematical Intelligencer, Vol. 20, No. 4, (1998), pp. 25–29.↩
↩
S. M. Ruiz 1997↩




