


Truncated normal distribution




Truncated normal distribution

In probability and statistics, the truncated normal distribution is the probability distribution of a normally distributed random variable whose value is either bounded below or above (or both). The truncated normal distribution has wide applications in statistics and econometrics. For example, it is used to model the probabilities of the binary outcomes in the probit model and to model censored data in the Tobit model.
Definition
Suppose 
 
 
 
  has a normal distribution and lies within the interval 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  conditional on 
 
 
 
  has a truncated normal distribution.
Its probability density function, ƒ, for 
 
 
 
 , is given by



and by ƒ=0 otherwise.
Here, 
 
 
 
  is the probability density function of the standard normal distribution and 
 
 
 
  is its cumulative distribution function. There is an understanding that if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 , and similarly, if 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 .
Moments
Two sided truncation:1





 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
One sided truncation (lower tail):



Barr and Sherrill (1999) give a simpler expression for the variance of one sided truncations. Their formula is in terms of the chi-square CDF, which is implemented in standard software libraries. Bebu and Mathew (2009) provide formulas for (generalized) confidence intervals around the truncated moments.

Differential equation





A recursive formula

As for the non-truncated case, there is a neat recursive formula for the truncated moments. See.2
Simulating
A random variate x defined as 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  the cumulative distribution function and 
 
 
 
  its inverse, 
 
 
 
  a uniform random number on 
 
 
 
 , follows the distribution truncated to the range 
 
 
 
 . This method is theoretically the best, however the simulation of random variables from $\Phi$ and $\Phi^{-1}$ may imply numerical errors; thus practically one has to find other implementations.
For more on simulating a draw from the truncated normal distribution, see Robert (1995), Lynch (2007) Section 8.1.3 (pages 200–206), Devroye (1986). The MSM package in R has a function, rtnorm, that calculates draws from a truncated normal. The truncnorm package in R also has functions to draw from a truncated normal.
Chopin proposed an algorithm inspired from the Ziggurat algorithm of Marsaglia and Tsang (1984, 2000), which is usually considered as the fastest Gaussian sampler, and is also very close to Ahrens’s algorithm (1995). Implementations can be found in C, C++, Matlab and Python.
Sampling from the multivariate truncated normal distribution is considerably more difficult. Damien and Walker (2001) introduce a general methodology for sampling truncated densities within a Gibbs sampling framework. Their algorithm introduces one latent variable and is more computationally efficient than the algorithm of Robert (1995).
See also

Normal distribution
Truncated distribution

References




Norman L. Johnson and Samuel Kotz (1970). Continuous univariate distributions-1, chapter 13. John Wiley & Sons.





Nicolas Chopin, "Fast simulation of truncated Gaussian distributions". Statistics and Computing 21(2): 275-288.

fr:Loi tronquée#Loi normale tronquée"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Normal distribution Category:Probability distributions



Johnson, N.L., Kotz, S., Balakrishnan, N. (1994) Continuous Univariate Distributions, Volume 1, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-58495-9 (Section 10.1)
Document by Eric Orjebin, "http://www.smp.uq.edu.au/people/YoniNazarathy/teaching_projects/studentWork/EricOrjebin_TruncatedNormalMoments.pdf"




