


Hilbert's theorem (differential geometry)




Hilbert's theorem (differential geometry)

In differential geometry, Hilbert's theorem (1901) states that there exists no complete regular surface

 
  of constant negative gaussian curvature

immersed in 
 
 
 
 . This theorem answers the question for the negative case of which surfaces in 
 
 
 
 
  can be obtained by isometrically immersing complete manifolds with constant curvature.
Hilbert's theorem was first treated by David Hilbert in, "Über Flächen von konstanter Krümmung" (Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 2 (1901), 87-99). A different proof was given shortly after by E. Holmgren, "Sur les surfaces à courbure constante négative," (1902).
Proof
The proof of Hilbert's theorem is elaborate and requires several lemmas. The idea is to show the nonexistence of an isometric immersion



of a plane 
 
 
 
  to the real space 
 
 
 
 . This proof is basically the same as in Hilbert's paper, although based in the books of Do Carmo and Spivak.
Observations: In order to have a more manageable treatment, but without loss of generality, the curvature may be considered equal to minus one, 
 
 
 
 . There is no loss of generality, since it is being dealt with constant curvatures, and similarities of 
 
 
 
 
  multiply 
 
 
 
  by a constant. The exponential map

 
  is a local diffeomorphism (in fact a covering map, by Cartan-Hadamard theorem), therefore, it induces an inner product in the tangent space of 
 
 
 
  at 
 
 

 
 . Furthermore, 
 
 
 
  denotes the geometric surface 
 
 
 
  with this inner product. If 
 
 
 
  is an isometric immersion, the same holds for


 
 .
The first lemma is independent from the other ones, and will be used at the end as the counter statement to reject the results from the other lemmas.
Lemma 1: The area of 
 
 
 
 
  is infinite.
Proof's Sketch:
 The idea of the proof is to create a global isometry between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Then, since 
 
 
 
  has an infinite area, 
 
 
 
  will have it too.
 The fact that the hyperbolic plane

 
 
  has an infinite area comes by computing the surface integral with the corresponding coefficients of the First fundamental form. To obtain these ones, the hyperbolic plane can be defined as the plane with the following inner product around a point 
 
 
 
  with coordinates 
 
 



  Since the hyperbolic plane is unbounded, the limits of the integral are infinite, and the area can be calculated through



Next it is needed to create a map, which will show that the global information from the hyperbolic plane can be transfer to the surface 
 
 
 
 
 , i.e. a global isometry. 
 
 
 
  will be the map, whose domain is the hyperbolic plane and image the 2-dimensional manifold

 
 , which carries the inner product from the surface 
 
 
 
  with negative curvature. 
 
 
 
  will be defined via the exponential map, its inverse, and a linear isometry between their tangent spaces,


 
 .
That is


 
 ,
where 
 
 
 
 . That is to say, the starting point 
 
 
 
  goes to the tangent plane from 
 
 
 
  through the inverse of the exponential map. Then travels from one tangent plane to the other through the isometry 
 
 
 
 
 , and then down to the surface 
 
 
 
  with another exponential map.
The following step involves the use of polar coordinates, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , around 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  respectively. The requirement will be that the axis are mapped to each other, that is 
 
 
 
  goes to 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  preserves the first fundamental form.
 In a geodesic polar system, the Gaussian curvature

 
  can be expressed as


 
 .
In addition K is constant and fulfills the following differential equation



Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have the same constant Gaussian curvature, then they are locally isometric (Minding's Theorem). That means that 
 
 
 
  is a local isometry between 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Furthermore, from the Hadamard's theorem it follows that 
 
 
 
  is also a covering map.
 Since 
 
 
 
  is simply connected, 
 
 
 
  is a homeomorphism, and hence, a (global) isometry. Therefore, 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are globally isometric, and because 
 
 
 
  has an infinite area, then 
 
 
 
  has an infinite area, as well. 
 
 

Lemma 2: For each 
 
 
 
 
  exists a parametrization 
 
 
 
 , such that the coordinate curves of 
 
 
 
  are asymptotic curves of 
 
 
 
  and form a Tchebyshef net.
Lemma 3: Let 
 
 
 
  be a coordinate neighborhood of 
 
 
 
 
  such that the coordinate curves are asymptotic curves in 
 
 
 
 . Then the area A of any quadrilateral formed by the coordinate curves is smaller than 
 
 
 
 .
The next goal is to show that 
 
 
 
  is a parametrization of 
 
 
 
 .
Lemma 4: For a fixed 
 
 
 
 
 , the curve 
 
 
 
 , is an asymptotic curve with 
 
 
 
  as arc length.
The following 2 lemmas together with lemma 8 will demonstrate the existence of a parametrization


Lemma 5

 
  is a local diffeomorphism.
Lemma 6

 
  is surjective.
Lemma 7: On 
 
 
 
  there are two differentiable linearly independent vector fields which are tangent to the asymptotic curves of 
 
 
 
 .
Lemma 8

 
  is injective.
Proof of Hilbert's Theorem:
 First, it will be assumed that an isometric immersion from a complete surface with negative curvature
 
 
 
  exists
 
 

As stated in the observations, the tangent plane 
 
 
 
  is endowed with the metric induced by the exponential map 
 
 
 
  . Moreover, 
 
 
 
  is an isometric immersion and Lemmas 5,6, and 8 show the existence of a parametrization 
 
 
 
  of the whole 
 
 
 
 
 , such that the coordinate curves of 
 
 
 
  are the asymptotic curves of 
 
 
 
 . This result was provided by Lemma 4. Therefore, 
 
 
 
  can be covered by a union of "coordinate" quadrilaterals 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
 . By Lemma 3, the area of each quadrilateral is smaller than 
 
 
 
 . On the other hand, by Lemma 1, the area of 
 
 
 
  is infinite, therefore has no bounds. This is a contradiction and the proof is concluded. 
 
 

See also

Nash embedding theorem, states that every Riemannian manifold can be isometrically embedded into some Euclidean space.

References


, Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces, Prentice Hall, 1976.

, A Comprenhensive Introduction to Differential Geometry, Publish or Perish, 1999.

"
Category:Hyperbolic geometry Category:Theorems in differential geometry Category:Articles containing proofs


