


Clock angle problem




Clock angle problem

 Clock angle problems are a type of mathematical problem which involve finding the angles between the hands of an analog clock.
Math problem
Clock angle problems relate two different measurements: angles and time. The angle is typically measured in degrees from the mark of number 12 clockwise. The time is usually based on 12-hour clock.
A method to solve such problems is to consider the rate of change of the angle in degrees per minute. The hour hand of a normal 12-hour analogue clock turns 360° in 12 hours (720 minutes) or 0.5° per minute. The minute hand rotates through 360° in 60 minutes or 6° per minute.1
Equation for the angle of the hour hand



where:



 
  is the angle in degrees of the hand measured clockwise from the 12


 
  is the hour.


 
  is the minutes past the hour.


 
  is the minutes past 12 o'clock.

Equation for the angle of the minute hand



where:



 
  is the angle in degrees of the hand measured clockwise from the 12 o'clock position.


 
  is the minute.

Example
The time is 5:24. The angle in degrees of the hour hand is:



The angle in degrees of the minute hand is:



Equation for the angle between the hands
The angle between the hands can be found using the following formula:



where



 
  is the hour


 
  is the minute

Example
The time is 2:20.



When are the hour and minute hands of a clock superimposed?
The hour and minute hands are superimposed only when their angle is the same.



 
  is an integer in the range 0–11. This gives times of: 0:00, 1:05.
 
 
 
 , 2:10.
 
 
 
 , 3:16.
 
 
 
 
 , etc. (0.
 
 
 
  minutes are exactly 27.
 
 
 
  seconds.)
See also

Clock position

References
External links

http://www.delphiforfun.org/Programs/clock_angle.htm
http://www.ldlewis.com/hospital_clock/ - extensive clock angle analysis
http://www.jimloy.com/puzz/clock1.htm

"
Category:Mathematics education Category:Elementary mathematics Category:Elementary geometry Category:Mathematical problems Category:Clocks



↩




