


Complex quadratic polynomial




Complex quadratic polynomial

A complex quadratic polynomial is a quadratic polynomial whose coefficients are complex numbers.
Forms
When the quadratic polynomial has only one variable (univariate), one can distinguish its 4 main forms:

The general form
 
 
 
  where 
 
 

The factored form used for logistic map




 
  which has an indifferent fixed point with multiplier

 
  at the origin1
The monic and centered form, 
 
 


The monic and centered form has the following properties:

It is the simplest form of a nonlinear function with one coefficient (parameter),
It is an unicritical polynomial, i.e. it has one critical point,
It is a centered polynomial (the sum of its critical points is zero),2
It can be postcritically finite, i.e. If the orbit of the critical point is finite. It is when critical point is periodic or preperiodic.3
It is a unimodal function,
It is a rational function,
It is an entire function.

Conjugation
Between forms
Since 
 
 
 
  is affine conjugate to the general form of the quadratic polynomial it is often used to study complex dynamics and to create images of Mandelbrot, Julia and Fatou sets.
When one wants change from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 :4


 
 .
When one wants change from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 :5


 
 .
With doubling map
There is semi-conjugacy between the dyadic transformation (here named doubling map) and the quadratic polynomial.
Family
The family of quadratic polynomials 
 
 
 
  parametrised by 
 
 
 
  is called:

the Douady-Hubbard family of quadratic polynomials6
quadratic family

Map
The monic and centered form is typically used with variable

 
  and parameter

 
 :



When it is used as an evolution function of the discrete nonlinear dynamical system:



it is named quadratic map:7



This iteration leads to the Mandelbrot set.
Notation
Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the n-th iteration of the function 
 
 
 
  not exponentiation



so



Because of the possible confusion it is customary to write 
 
 
 
  for the nth iterate of the function 
 
 

Critical items
Critical point
A critical point of 
 
 
 
  is a point 
 
 
 
  in the dynamical plane such that the derivative vanishes:



Since



implies



we see that the only (finite) critical point of 
 
 
 
  is the point 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is an initial point for Mandelbrot set iteration.8
Critical value
A critical value

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is the image of a critical point:



Since



we have



So the parameter 
 
 
 
  is the critical value of 
 
 

Critical orbit
 Forward orbit of a critical point is called a critical orbit. Critical orbits are very important because every attracting periodic orbit attracts a critical point, so studying the critical orbits helps us understand the dynamics in the Fatou set.91011






This orbit falls into an attracting periodic cycle. 
Critical sector
The critical sector is a sector of the dynamical plane containing the critical point.
Critical polynomial



so






These polynomials are used for:

finding centers of these Mandelbrot set components of period n. Centers are roots of n-th critical polynomials





finding roots of Mandelbrot set components of period n (local minimum of 
 
 
 
 )
Misiurewicz points




Critical curves
Diagrams of critical polynomials are called critical curves.12
These curves create skeleton of bifurcation diagram.13 (the dark lines14)
Planes
 One can use the Julia-Mandelbrot 4-dimensional space for a global analysis of this dynamical system.15
In this space there are 2 basic types of 2-D planes:

the dynamical (dynamic) plane, 
 
 
 
 -plane or c-plane
the parameter plane or z-plane

There is also another plane used to analyze such dynamical systems w-plane:

the conjugation plane16
model plane17

Parameter plane
(Figure)
Gamma parameter plane for complex logistic map 
 
 


The phase space of a quadratic map is called its parameter plane. Here:


 
  is constant and 
 
 
 
  is variable.
There is no dynamics here. It is only a set of parameter values. There are no orbits on the parameter plane.
The parameter plane consists of:

The Mandelbrot set

The bifurcation locus = boundary of Mandelbrot set
Bounded hyperbolic components of the Mandelbrot set = interior of Mandelbrot set18


There are many different subtypes of the parameter plane.1920
Dynamical plane
On the dynamical plane one can find:

The Julia set
The Filled Julia set
The Fatou set
Orbits

The dynamical plane consists of:

Fatou set
Julia set

Here, 
 
 
 
  is a constant and 
 
 
 
  is a variable.
The two-dimensional dynamical plane can be treated as a Poincaré cross-section of three-dimensional space of continuous dynamical system.2122
Dynamical z-planes can be divided in two groups :



 
  plane for 
 
 



 
  planes ( all other planes for 
 
 
 
  )

Derivatives
Derivative with respect to c
On parameter plane:



 
  is a variable


 
  is constant

The first derivative of 
 
 
 
  with respect to c is



This derivative can be found by iteration starting with



and then replacing at every consecutive step



This can easily be verified by using the chain rule for the derivative.
This derivative is used in the distance estimation method for drawing a Mandelbrot set.
Derivative with respect to z
On dynamical plane:



 
  is a variable


 
  is a constant

at a fixed point





at a' periodic point' z0 of period p



It is used to check the stability of periodic (also fixed) points.
at nonperiodic point:



This derivative can be found by iteration starting with



and then :



This dervative is used for computing external distance to Julia set.
Schwarzian derivative
The Schwarzian derivative (SD for short) of f is:23


 
 .
See also

Misiurewicz point
Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings
Mandelbrot set
Julia set
Milnor–Thurston kneading theory

References
External links

M. Nevins and D. Rogers, "Quadratic maps as dynamical systems on the p-adic numbers"
Wolf Jung : Homeomorphisms on Edges of the Mandelbrot Set. Ph.D. thesis of 2002

"
Category:Complex dynamics Category:Fractals Category:Polynomials



Michael Yampolsky, Saeed Zakeri : Mating Siegel quadratic polynomials.
Bodil Branner: Holomorphic dynamical systems in the complex plane. Mat-Report No 1996-42. Technical University of Denmark
Alfredo Poirier : On Post Critically Finite Polynomials Part One: Critical Portraits
Michael Yampolsky, Saeed Zakeri : Mating Siegel quadratic polynomials.
stackexchange questions : Show that the familiar logistic map ...
Yunping Jing : Local connectivity of the Mandelbrot set at certain infinitely renormalizable points Complex Dynamics and Related Topics, New Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 2004, The International Press, 236-264
Weisstein, Eric W. "Quadratic Map." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resourc
[http://mathesim.degruyter.de/jws_en/show_simulation.php?id=1052&type;;=RoessMa〈=en Java program by Dieter Röß showing result of changing initial point of Mandelbrot iterations]
M. Romera, G. Pastor, and F. Montoya : Multifurcations in nonhyperbolic fixed points of the Mandelbrot map. Fractalia 6, No. 21, 10-12 (1997)
Burns A M : Plotting the Escape: An Animation of Parabolic Bifurcations in the Mandelbrot Set. Mathematics Magazine, Vol. 75, No. 2 (Apr., 2002), pp. 104-116
Khan Academy : Mandelbrot Spirals 2
The Road to Chaos is Filled with Polynomial Curves by Richard D. Neidinger and R. John Annen III. American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 103, No. 8, October 1996, pp. 640-653

M. Romera, G. Pastor and F. Montoya, "Misiurewicz points in one-dimensional quadratic maps", Physica A, 232 (1996), 517-535. Preprint
Julia-Mandelbrot Space at Mu-ency by Robert Munafo
Carleson, Lennart, Gamelin, Theodore W.: Complex Dynamics Series: Universitext, Subseries: Universitext: Tracts in Mathematics, 1st ed. 1993. Corr. 2nd printing, 1996, IX, 192 p. 28 illus., ISBN 978-0-387-97942-7
Holomorphic motions and puzzels by P Roesch
Lasse Rempe, Dierk Schleicher : Bifurcation Loci of Exponential Maps and Quadratic Polynomials: Local Connectivity, Triviality of Fibers, and Density of Hyperbolicity
Alternate Parameter Planes by David E. Joyce
exponentialmap by Robert Munafo
Mandelbrot set by Saratov group of theoretical nonlinear dynamics
Moehlis, Kresimir Josic, Eric T. Shea-Brown (2006) Periodic orbit. Scholarpedia,
The Schwarzian Derivative & the Critical Orbit by Wes McKinney 18.091 20 April 2005




