


Bombieri norm




Bombieri norm

In mathematics, the Bombieri norm, named after Enrico Bombieri, is a norm on homogeneous polynomials with coefficient in 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  (there is also a version for non homogeneous univariate polynomials). This norm has many remarkable properties, the most important being listed in this article.
Bombieri scalar product for homogeneous polynomials
To start with the geometry, the Bombieri scalar product for homogeneous polynomials with N variables can be defined as follows using multi-index notation:



by definition different monomials are orthogonal, so that


 
  if 
 
 

while



by definition



In the above definition and in the rest of this article the following notation applies:
if



write



and



and



Bombieri inequality
The fundamental property of this norm is the Bombieri inequality:
let 
 
 
 
  be two homogeneous polynomials respectively of degree 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  variables, then, the following inequality holds:



Here the Bombieri inequality is the left hand side of the above statement, while the right side means that the Bombieri norm is an algebra norm. Giving the left hand side is meaningless without that constraint, because in this case, we can achieve the same result with any norm by multiplying the norm by a well chosen factor.
This multiplicative inequality implies that the product of two polynomials is bounded from below by a quantity that depends on the multiplicand polynomials. Thus, this product can not be arbitrarily small. This multiplicative inequality is useful in metric algebraic geometry and number theory.
Invariance by isometry
Another important property is that the Bombieri norm is invariant by composition with an isometry:
let 
 
 
 
  be two homogeneous polynomials of degree 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  variables and let 
 
 
 
  be an isometry of 
 
 
 
  (or 
 
 
 
 ). Then, the we have 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  this implies 
 
 
 
 .
This result follows from a nice integral formulation of the scalar product:



where 
 
 
 
  is the unit sphere of 
 
 
 
  with its canonical measure 
 
 
 
 .
Other inequalities
Let 
 
 
 
  be a homogeneous polynomial of degree 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  variables and let 
 
 
 
 . We have:








where 
 
 
 
  denotes the Euclidean norm.
The Bombieri norm is useful in polynomial factorization, where it has some advantages over the Mahler measure, according to Knuth (Exercises 20-21, pages 457-458 and 682-684).
See also

Grassmann manifold
Hardy space
Homogeneous polynomial
Plücker embedding

References






"
Category:Norms (mathematics) Category:Analytic number theory Category:Polynomials Category:Homogeneous polynomials Category:Complex analysis Category:Several complex variables


