


Flow velocity




Flow velocity

In continuum mechanics the macroscopic velocity,12 also flow velocity in fluid dynamics or drift velocity in electromagnetism, is a vector field which is used to mathematically describe the motion of a continuum. The length of the flow velocity vector is the flow speed and is a scalar.
Definition
The flow velocity u of a fluid is a vector field



which gives the velocity of an element of fluid at a position 
 
 
 
  and time 
 
 
 
 .
The flow speed q is the length of the flow velocity vector3



and is a scalar field.
Uses
The flow velocity of a fluid effectively describes everything about the motion of a fluid. Many physical properties of a fluid can be expressed mathematically in terms of the flow velocity. Some common examples follow:
Steady flow
The flow of a fluid is said to be steady if 
 
 
 
  does not vary with time. That is if



Incompressible flow
If a fluid is incompressible the divergence of 
 
 
 
  is zero:



That is, if 
 
 
 
 
  is a solenoidal vector field.
Irrotational flow
A flow is irrotational if the curl of 
 
 
 
  is zero:



That is, if 
 
 
 
  is an irrotational vector field.
A flow in a simply-connected domain which is irrotational can be described as a potential flow, through the use of a velocity potential

 
  with 
 
 
 
 
  If the flow is both irrotational and incompressible, the Laplacian of the velocity potential must be zero
 
 

Vorticity
The vorticity, 
 
 
 
 , of a flow can be defined in terms of its flow velocity by



Thus in irrotational flow the vorticity is zero.
The velocity potential
If an irrotational flow occupies a simply-connected fluid region then there exists a scalar field

 
  such that



The scalar field 
 
 
 
  is called the velocity potential for the flow. (See Irrotational vector field.)
References
See also

Velocity gradient
Velocity potential
Drift velocity
Group velocity
Particle velocity
Vorticity
Enstrophy
Strain rate
Stream function
Pressure gradient

External links
"
Category:Fluid dynamics Category:Continuum mechanics Category:Vector calculus Category:Velocity



↩
↩
↩




