


Pairing-based cryptography




Pairing-based cryptography

Pairing-based cryptography is the use of a pairing between elements of two cryptographic groups to a third group with a mapping 
 
 
 
  to construct or analyze cryptographic systems.
Definition
The following definition is commonly used in most academic papers.1
Let 
 
 
 
  be two additive cyclic groups of prime order 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  another cyclic group of order 
 
 
 
 
  written multiplicatively. A pairing is a map
 
 
 
 , which satisfies the following properties:

Bilinearity


Non-degeneracy


Computability: there exist an efficient algorithm to compute 
 
 
 
 .

Classification
If the same group is used for the first two groups (i.e. 
 
 
 
 
 ), the pairing is called symmetric and is a mapping from two elements of one group to an element from a second group.
Some researchers classify pairing instantiations into three (or more) basic types:

Type 1

 
 ;
Type 2

 
  but there is an efficiently computable homomorphism

 
 ;
Type 3

 
  and there are no efficiently computable homomorphisms between 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .2

Usage in cryptography
If symmetric, pairings can be used to reduce a hard problem in one group to a different, usually easier problem in another group.
For example, in groups equipped with a bilinear mapping such as the Weil pairing or Tate pairing, generalizations of the computational Diffie–Hellman problem are believed to be infeasible while the simpler decisional Diffie–Hellman problem can be easily solved using the pairing function. The first group is sometimes referred to as a Gap Group because of the assumed difference in difficulty between these two problems in the group.
While first used for cryptanalysis, 3 pairings have also been used to construct many cryptographic systems for which no other efficient implementation is known, such as identity based encryption or attribute based encryption schemes.
A contemporary example of using bilinear pairings is exemplified in the Boneh-Lynn-Shacham signature scheme.
Cryptanalysis
In June 2012 the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Kyushu University, and Fujitsu Laboratories Limited improved the previous bound for successfully computing a discrete logarithm on a supersingular elliptic curve from 676 bits to 923 bits.4
References
External links

Lecture on Pairing-Based Cryptography
The Pairing-Based Crypto Lounge
Ben Lynn's PBC Library

"
Category:Public-key cryptography Category:Pairing-based cryptography











