


Gromov's inequality for complex projective space




Gromov's inequality for complex projective space

In Riemannian geometry, Gromov's optimal stable 2-systolic inequality is the inequality


 
 ,
valid for an arbitrary Riemannian metric on the complex projective space, where the optimal bound is attained by the symmetric Fubini–Study metric, providing a natural geometrisation of quantum mechanics. Here 
 
 
 
  is the stable 2-systole, which in this case can be defined as the infimum of the areas of rational 2-cycles representing the class of the complex projective line 
 
 
 
  in 2-dimensional homology.
The inequality first appeared in Gromov's 1981 book entitled Structures métriques pour les variétés riemanniennes (Theorem 4.36).
The proof of Gromov's inequality relies on the Wirtinger inequality for exterior 2-forms.
Projective planes over division algebras 
 
 

In the special case n=2, Gromov's inequality becomes 
 
 
 
 . This inequality can be thought of as an analog of Pu's inequality for the real projective plane

 
 . In both cases, the boundary case of equality is attained by the symmetric metric of the projective plane. Meanwhile, in the quaternionic case, the symmetric metric on 
 
 
 
  is not its systolically optimal metric. In other words, the manifold 
 
 
 
  admits Riemannian metrics with higher systolic ratio 
 
 
 
  than for its symmetric metric, see Bangert et al. (2009).
See also

Loewner's torus inequality
Pu's inequality
Gromov's inequality
Gromov's systolic inequality for essential manifolds
Systolic geometry

References

Bangert, V; Katz, M.; Shnider, S.; Weinberger, S.: E_7, Wirtinger inequalities, Cayley 4-form, and homotopy. Duke Mathematical Journal 146 (2009), no. 1, 35-70. See arXiv:math.DG/0608006
Gromov, M.: Structures métriques pour les variétés riemanniennes. Edited by J. Lafontaine and P. Pansu. Textes Mathématiques, 1. CEDIC, Paris, 1981 (first edition of Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces).


"
Category:Geometric inequalities Category:Differential geometry Category:Riemannian geometry Category:Systolic geometry


