


Remez inequality




Remez inequality

In mathematics, the Remez inequality, discovered by the Soviet mathematician Evgeny Yakovlevich Remez , gives a bound on the sup norms of certain polynomials, the bound being attained by the Chebyshev polynomials.
The inequality
Let σ be an arbitrary fixed positive number. Define the class of polynomials πn(σ) to be those polynomials p of the nth degree for which



on some set of measure ≥ 2 contained in the closed interval [−1, 1+σ]. Then the Remez inequality states that



where Tn(x) is the Chebyshev polynomial of degree n, and the supremum norm is taken over the interval [−1, 1+σ].
Observe that Tn is increasing on 
 
 
 
 , hence



The R.i., combined with an estimate on Chebyshev polynomials, implies the following corollary: If J ⊂ R is a finite interval, and E ⊂ J is an arbitrary measurable set, then


 
  for any polynomial p of degree n.
Extensions: Nazarov–Turán Lemma
Inequalities similar to (*) have been proved for different classes of functions, and are known as Remez-type inequalities. One important example is Nazarov's inequality for exponential sums :
Let



be an exponential sum (with arbitrary λk ∈C), and let J ⊂ R be a finite interval, E ⊂ J — an arbitrary measurable set. Then



where C>0 is a numerical constant.
In the special case when λk are pure imaginary and integer, and the subset E is itself an interval, the inequality was proved by Pál Turán and is known as Turán's lemma.
This inequality also extends to 
 
 
 
  in the following way



for some A>0 independent of p, E, and n. When



a similar inequality holds for p>2. For p=∞ there is an extension to multidimensional polynomials.
Proof: Applying Nazarov's lemma to 
 
 
 
  leeds to



thus



Now fix a set 
 
 
 
  and take 
 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , that is



Note that this implies that 
 
 

Now


 
 
  which completes the proof.
Pólya inequality
One of the corollaries of the R.i. is the Pólya inequality, which was proved by George Pólya , and states that the Lebesgue measure of a sub-level set of a polynomial p of degree n is bounded in terms of the leading coefficient LC(p) as follows:



References








"
Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Inequalities


