


Siegel disc




Siegel disc

Siegel disc is a connected component in the Fatou set where the dynamics is analytically conjugated to an irrational rotation.
Description
Given a holomorphic endomorphism

 
  on a Riemann surface

 
  we consider the dynamical system generated by the iterates of 
 
 
 
  denoted by 
 
 
 
 . We then call the orbit

 
  of 
 
 
 
  as the set of forward iterates of 
 
 
 
 . We are interested in the asymptotic behavior of the orbits in 
 
 
 
  (which will usually be 
 
 
 
 , the complex plane or 
 
 
 
 , the Riemann sphere), and we call 
 
 
 
  the phase plane or dynamical plane.
One possible asymptotic behavior for a point 
 
 
 
  is to be a fixed point, or in general a periodic point. In this last case 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the period and 
 
 
 
  means 
 
 
 
  is a fixed point. We can then define the multiplier of the orbit as 
 
 
 
  and this enables us to classify periodic orbits as attracting if 
 
 
superattracting if 
 
 
 
 ), repelling if 
 
 
 
  and indifferent if 
 
 
 
 . Indifferent periodic orbits split in rationally indifferent and irrationally indifferent, depending on whether 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
 , respectively.
Siegel discs are one of the possible cases of connected components in the Fatou set (the complementary set of the Julia set), according to Classification of Fatou components, and can occur around irrationally indifferent periodic points. The Fatou set is, roughly, the set of points where the iterates behave similarly to their neighbours (they form a normal family). Siegel discs correspond to points where the dynamics of 
 
 
 
  is analytically conjugated to an irrational rotation of the complex disc.
Name
The disk is named in honor of Carl Ludwig Siegel.
Gallery
Image:SiegelDisk.jpg |Siegel disc for a polynomial-like mapping Image:FigureJuliaSetForPolynomialLike.jpg|Julia set for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the golden ratio. Orbits of some points inside the Siegel disc emphasized Image:UnboundedSiegeldisk.jpg|Julia set for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the golden ratio. Orbits of some points inside the Siegel disc emphasized. The Siegel disc is either unbounded or its boundary is an indecomposable continuum.1
File:Golden Mean Quadratic Siegel Disc Speed.png | Filled Julia set for 
 
 
 
  for Golden Mean rotation number with interior colored proportional to the average discrete velocity on the orbit = abs( z_(n+1) - z_n ). Note that there is only one Siegel disc and many preimages of the orbits within the Siegel disk File:Golden Mean Quadratic Siegel Disc.png|Filled Julia set for 
 
 
 
  for Golden Mean rotation number with Siegel disc and some orbits inside File:Siegel quadratic 3,2,1000,1... ,.png|Julia set of quadratic polynomial with Siegel disk for rotation number [3,2,1000,1...]
Formal definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a holomorphic endomorphism where 
 
 
 
  is a Riemann surface, and let U be a connected component of the Fatou set 
 
 
 
 . We say U is a Siegel disc of f around the point z_0 if there exists an analytic homeomorphism 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the unit disc and such that 
 
 
 
  for some 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Siegel's theorem proves the existence of Siegel discs for irrational numbers satisfying a strong irrationality condition (a Diophantine condition), thus solving an open problem since Fatou conjectured his theorem on the Classification of Fatou components.2
Later A. D. Brjuno improved this condition on the irrationality, enlarging it to the Brjuno numbers.3
This is part of the result from the Classification of Fatou components.
See also

Herman ring

References

Siegel disks ar Scholarpedia

"
Category:Fractals Category:Limit sets Category:Complex dynamics



Rubén Berenguel and Núria Fagella ''An entire transcendental family with a persistent Siegel disc, 2009 preprint: arXiV:0907.0116↩
Lennart Carleson and Theodore W. Gamelin, Complex Dynamics, Springer 1993↩
John W. Milnor, Dynamics in One Complex Variable (Third Edition), Annals of Mathematics Studies 160, Princeton University Press 2006 (First appeared in 1990 as a Stony Brook IMS Preprint, available as arXiV:math.DS/9201272.)↩




