


Matthews correlation coefficient




Matthews correlation coefficient
The '''Matthews correlation coefficient''' is used in [[machine learning]] as a measure of the quality of binary (two-class) [[Binary classification|classifications]], introduced by bi
 ochemist Brian W. Matthews in 1975.1 It takes into account true and false positives and negatives and is generally regarded as a balanced measure which can be used even if the classes are of very different sizes. The MCC is in essence a correlation coefficient between the observed and predicted binary classifications; it returns a value between −1 and +1. A coefficient of +1 represents a perfect prediction, 0 no better than random prediction and −1 indicates total disagreement between prediction and observation. The statistic is also known as the phi coefficient. MCC is related to the chi-square statistic for a 2×2 contingency table



where n is the total number of observations.
While there is no perfect way of describing the confusion matrix of true and false positives and negatives by a single number, the Matthews correlation coefficient is generally regarded as being one of the best such measures. Other measures, such as the proportion of correct predictions (also termed accuracy), are not useful when the two classes are of very different sizes. For example, assigning every object to the larger set achieves a high proportion of correct predictions, but is not generally a useful classification.
The MCC can be calculated directly from the confusion matrix using the formula:



In this equation, TP is the number of true positives, TN the number of true negatives, FP the number of false positives and FN the number of false negatives. If any of the four sums in the denominator is zero, the denominator can be arbitrarily set to one; this results in a Matthews correlation coefficient of zero, which can be shown to be the correct limiting value.
The original formula as given by Matthews was:2












This is equal to the formula given above. As a correlation coefficient, the Matthews correlation coefficient is the geometric mean of the regression coefficients of the problem and its dual. The component regression coefficients of the Matthews correlation coefficient are markedness (deltap) and informedness (deltap').34
Confusion Matrix




Terminology and derivations
 from a confusion matrix



true positive (TP)
eqv. with hit
 
true negative (TN)
eqv. with correct rejection
 
false positive (FP)
eqv. with false alarm, Type I error

false negative (FN)
eqv. with miss, Type II error




sensitivity or true positive rate (TPR)
eqv. with hit rate, recall




specificity (SPC) or True Negative Rate



precision or positive predictive value (PPV)



negative predictive value (NPV)



fall-out or false positive rate (FPR)



false discovery rate (FDR)



Miss Rate or False Negative Rate (FNR)






accuracy (ACC)



F1 score
is the harmonic mean of precision and sensitivity




Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC)




Informedness



Markedness




; Sources: Fawcett (2006) and Powers (2011).56



Let us define an experiment from P positive instances and N negative instances for some condition. The four outcomes can be formulated in a 2×2 contingency table or confusion matrix, as follows:
See also

Phi coefficient
F1 score
Cramér's V, a similar measure of association between nominal variables.
Cohen's kappa

References
"
Category:Machine learning Category:Information retrieval evaluation Category:Statistical classification Category:Computational chemistry Category:Cheminformatics Category:Bioinformatics Category:Statistical ratios Category:Summary statistics for contingency tables



↩

↩
↩
↩





