


EcosimPro




EcosimPro

EcosimPro is a simulation tool developed by Empresarios Agrupados A.I.E for modelling simple and complex physical processes that can be expressed in terms of Differential algebraic equations or Ordinary differential equations and Discrete event simulation.
The application runs on the various Microsoft Windows platforms and uses its own graphic environment for model design.
The modelling of physical components is based on the EcosimPro language (EL) which is very similar to other conventional Object-oriented programming1 languages but is powerful enough to model continuous and discrete processes.
This tool employs a set of libraries containing various types of components (mechanical, electrical, pneumatic, hydraulic, etc.) that can be reused to model any type of system.
It is used within ESA for propulsion systems analysis2 and is the recommended ESA analysis tool for ECLS systems.34
Origins
The EcosimPro Tool Project began in 1989 with funds from the European Space Agency (ESA) and with the goal of simulating environmental control and life support systems for manned spacecraft,5 such as the Hermes shuttle. The multidisciplinary nature of this modelling tool led to its use in many other disciplines, including fluid mechanics, chemical processing, control, energy, propulsion and flight dynamics. These complex applications have demonstrated that EcosimPro is very robust and ready for use in many other fields.
The modelling language
Code examples
Differential equation
 To familiarize yourself with the use of EcosimPro, first create a simple component to solve a differential equation. Although EcosimPro is designed to simulate complex systems, it can also be used independently of a physical system as if it were a pure equation solver. The example in this section illustrates this type of use. It solves the following differential equation to introduce a delay to variable x:



which is equivalent to



where x and y have a time dependence that will be defined in the experiment. Tau is datum provided given by the user; we will use a value of 0.6 seconds. This equation introduces a delay in the x variable with respect to y with value tau. To simulate this equation we will create an EcosimPro component with the equation in it.
The component to be simulated in EL is like thus:
COMPONENT equation_test
    DATA
       REAL tau = 0.6      "delay time (seconds)"
    DECLS
       REAL x, y
    CONTINUOUS
       y' = (x - y) / tau
 END COMPONENT
Pendulum
 One example of applied calculus could be the movement of a perfect pendulum (no friction taken into account). We would have the following data: the force of gravity ‘g’; the length of the pendulum ‘L’; and the pendulum’s mass ‘M’. As variables to be calculated we would have: the Cartesian position at each moment in time of the pendulum ‘x’ and ‘y’ and the tension on the wire of the pendulum ‘T’. The equations that define the model would be:
- Projecting the length of the cable on the Cartesian axes and applying Pythagoras’ theorem we get:



By decomposing force in Cartesians we get



and



To obtain the differential equations we can convert:



and



(note
 
 
 
  is the first derivative of the position and equals the speed. 
 
 
 
  is the second derivative of the position and equals the acceleration)
This example can be found in the DEFAULT_LIB library as “pendulum.el”: 
COMPONENT pendulum   "Pendulum example"
    DATA
       REAL g = 9.806               "Gravity (m/s^2)"
       REAL L = 1.                  "Pendulum longitude (m)"
       REAL M = 1.                  "Pendulum mass (kg)"
    DECLS
       REAL x                       "Pendulum X position (m)"
       REAL y                       "Pendulum Y position (m)"
       REAL T                       "Pendulum wire tension force (N)"
    CONTINUOUS
       x**2 + y**2 = L**2
       M * x'' = - T * (x / L)
       M * y'' = - T * (y / L) - M * g
 END COMPONENT
The last two equations respectively express the accelerations, x’’ and y’’, on the X and Y axes
Maths capabilities

Symbolic handling of equations (e.g.: derivation, etc.)
Robust solvers for non-linear and DAE systems: DASSL,6 Newton-Raphson 78


Math wizards for:
 
Defining boundary conditions
Solving algebraic loops
Reducing high-index DAE problems 9

Clever mathematical algorithms based on graph theory to minimize the number of unknown variables and equations
Powerful discrete events handler to stop simulation when an event occurs

Applications
EcosimPro has been used in many fields and disciplines. The following paragraphs show several applications

Control: This library provides components for the representation of control loops, including the typical P, PI and PID controllers, and signal processors, etc.
Turbojet: Library for modelling turbine reactors. With components such as turbines, nozzles, compressors, burners, etc.
ECLSS: A complete library of components has been developed to model complex environmental conditions for manned spacecraft10
ESPSS: A standard set of libraries with components and functions for the simulation of launch vehicle propulsion systems and spacecraft propulsion systems.11
Thermal: This library contains the components necessary to develop Lumped Parameter Thermal Models, i.e., diffusive thermal nodes, boundary thermal nodes, linear thermal conductors and radiative thermal conductors.
Energy: In the field of Energy, EcosimPro has been used in different applications such as heat balances (Thermal_Balance), hydraulic systems (Pipe Networks Tool), molten carbonate and alkaline fuel cells, etc.
Cryogenics: Simulation of large cryogenics systems, for instace, at CERN.12
Others:
 
Water treatment
Waste treatment
Agri-food Biotech processes
Etc.


See also

AMESim
APMonitor
Dymola
MapleSim
Model-based design
SimulationX
MWorks
Wolfram SystemModeler

References


External links

EcosimPro official site

"
Category:Simulation software Category:Computer-aided engineering software Category:Scientific simulation software



↩

↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩




