


TCP-Illinois




TCP-Illinois

TCP-Illinois is a variant of TCP congestion control protocol, developed at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. It is especially targeted at high-speed, long-distance networks. A sender side modification to the standard TCP congestion control algorithm, it achieves a higher average throughput than the standard TCP, allocates the network resource fairly as the standard TCP, is compatible with the standard TCP, and provides incentives for TCP users to switch.
Principles of operation
TCP-Illinois is a loss-delay based algorithm, which uses packet loss as the primary congestion signal to determine the direction of window size change, and uses queuing delay as the secondary congestion signal to adjust the pace of window size change. Similarly to the standard TCP, TCP-Illinois increases the window size W by 
 
 
 
  for each acknowledgment, and decreases 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  for each loss event. Unlike the standard TCP, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are not constants. Instead, they are functions of average queuing delay 
 
 

 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is decreasing and 
 
 
 
  is increasing.
There are numerous choices of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . One such class is:




We let 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be continuous functions and thus 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Suppose 
 
 
 
  is the maximum average queuing delay and we denote 
 
 
 
 , then we also have 
 
 
 
 
 . From these conditions, we have


 
  This specific choice is demonstrated in Figure 1.
(Figure)
Tcpillinois1.jpg

Properties and Performance
TCP-Illinois increases the throughput much more quickly than TCP when congestion is far and increases the throughput very slowly when congestion is imminent. As a result, the window curve is concave and the average throughput achieved is much larger than the standard TCP, see Figure 2.
(Figure)
tcpillinois2.jpg

It also has many other desirable features, like fairness, compatibility with the standard TCP, providing incentive for TCP users to switch, robust against inaccurate delay measurement.
References



See also

H-TCP
BIC TCP
HSTCP
TCP
FAST TCP

External links

TCP-Illinois Homepage


Paper on experimental evaluation of TCP Illinois Hamilton Institute and Caltech, March 2008.

"
Illinois Category:Internet Standards


