


Generalized Dirichlet distribution




Generalized Dirichlet distribution

In statistics, the generalized Dirichlet distribution (GD) is a generalization of the Dirichlet distribution with a more general covariance structure and almost twice the number of parameters. Random variables with a GD distribution are neutral but not completely neutral.1
The density function of 
 
 
 
  is


 
  where we define 
 
 
 
 . Here 
 
 
 
  denotes the Beta function. This reduces to the standard Dirichlet distribution if 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  (
 
 
 
  is arbitrary).
For example, if k=4, then the density function of 
 
 
 
  is



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Connor and Mosimann define the PDF as they did for the following reason. Define random variables 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  have the generalized Dirichlet distribution as parametrized above, if the 
 
 
 
  are iid beta with parameters 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 .
Alternative form given by Wong
Wong 2 gives the slightly more concise form for 
 
 



 
  where 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Note that Wong defines a distribution over a 
 
 
 
  dimensional space (implicitly defining 
 
 
 
 ) while Connor and Mosiman use a 
 
 
 
  dimensional space with 
 
 
 
 .
General moment function
If 
 
 
 
 , then


 
  where 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Thus



Reduction to standard Dirichlet distribution
As stated above, if 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  then the distribution reduces to a standard Dirichlet. This condition is different from the usual case, in which setting the additional parameters of the generalized distribution to zero results in the original distribution. However, in the case of the GDD, this results in a very complicated density function.
Bayesian analysis
Suppose 
 
 
 
  is generalized Dirichlet, and that 
 
 
 
  is multinomial with 
 
 
 
  trials (here 
 
 
 
 ). Writing 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  the joint posterior of 
 
 
 
  is a generalized Dirichlet distribution with



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 

Sampling experiment
Wong gives the following system as an example of how the Dirichlet and generalized Dirichlet distributions differ. He posits that a large urn contains balls of 
 
 
 
  different colours. The proportion of each colour is unknown. Write 
 
 
 
  for the proportion of the balls with colour 
 
 
 
  in the urn.
Experiment 1. Analyst 1 believes that 
 
 
 
  (ie, 
 
 
 
  is Dirichlet with parameters 
 
 
 
 ). The analyst then makes 
 
 
 
  glass boxes and puts 
 
 
 
  marbles of colour 
 
 
 
  in box 
 
 
 
  (it is assumed that the 
 
 
 
  are integers 
 
 
 
 ). Then analyst 1 draws a ball from the urn, observes its colour (say colour 
 
 
 
 ) and puts it in box 
 
 
 
 . He can identify the correct box because they are transparent and the colours of the marbles within are visible. The process continues until 
 
 
 
  balls have been drawn. The posterior distribution is then Dirichlet with parameters being the number of marbles in each box.
Experiment 2. Analyst 2 believes that 
 
 
 
  follows a generalized Dirichlet distribution
 
 
 
 . All parameters are again assumed to be positive integers. The analyst makes 
 
 
 
  wooden boxes. The boxes have two areas: one for balls and one for marbles. The balls are coloured but the marbles are not coloured. Then for 
 
 
 
 , he puts 
 
 
 
  balls of colour 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  marbles, in to box 
 
 
 
 . He then puts a ball of colour 
 
 
 
  in box 
 
 
 
 . The analyst then draws a ball from the urn. Because the boxes are wood, the analyst cannot tell which box to put the ball in (as he could in experiment 1 above); he also has a poor memory and cannot remember which box contains which colour balls. He has to discover which box is the correct one to put the ball in. He does this by opening box 1 and comparing the balls in it to the drawn ball. If the colours differ, the box is the wrong one. The analyst puts a marble (sic) in box 1 and proceeds to box 2. He repeats the process until the balls in the box match the drawn ball, at which point he puts the ball (sic) in the box with the other balls of matching colour. The analyst then draws another ball from the urn and repeats until 
 
 
 
  balls are drawn. The posterior is then generalized Dirichlet with parameters 
 
 
 
  being the number of balls, and 
 
 
 
  the number of marbles, in each box.
Note that in experiment 2, changing the order of the boxes has a non-trivial effect, unlike experiment 1.
See also

Dirichlet-multinomial distribution
Lukacs's proportion-sum independence theorem

References
"
Category:Continuous distributions Category:Probability distributions Category:Multivariate continuous distributions Category:Conjugate prior distributions Category:Exponential family distributions



R. J. Connor and J. E. Mosiman 1969. Concepts of independence for proportions with a generalization of the Dirichlet distribution. Journal of the American Statistical Association, volume 64, pp194--206↩
T.-T. Wong 1998. Generalized Dirichlet distribution in Bayesian analysis. Applied Mathematics and Computation, volume 97, pp165-181↩




