


Revenue equivalence




Revenue equivalence

Revenue equivalence is a concept in auction theory that states that given certain conditions, any auction mechanism that results in the same outcomes (i.e. allocates items to the same bidders) also has the same expected revenue.
Revenue Equivalence Theorem
An auction is a special case of a mechanism. In this case, the mechanism takes buyers' bids and decides an outcome of the auction: who gets the object and what are the transfers for each buyer. The set of outcomes can be denoted by



The x component describes the allocation of the object and t the transfers.
The buyer's types, or valuations of the object, are independent identically distributed random variables. A buyer of type 
 
 
 
  has linear utility function ui over the set of outcomes (the theorem also holds for the more general quasilinear utility functions):



Thus an auction is a Bayesian game in which a player's strategy is his bid as a function of his type. An auction (more generally, a mechanism) is said to be Bayesian incentive compatible if all players bidding their true type is a Bayesian Nash equilibrium strategy profile.
Under these assumptions, the Revenue Equivalence Theorem then says the following:
Theorem For any two Bayesian incentive compatible auctions, if under their respective Bayesian Nash equilibria where all players bid their type,

a buyer of type θi has the same probability of getting the object across auctions, and
a buyer of lowest type has the same expected utility across auctions,

then the total expected transfers Eθ(Σti), i.e. the auctioneer's expected revenue, is the same for the two auctions.
In other words, if a buyer of given type has the same expected utility in the two auctions in the interim stage, then the seller's expected revenues are the same. However, ex post, the two mechanisms need not implement the same social choice functions. Two such examples are the second price auction and first price auction. Assume the types are drawn independently from the uniform distribution on [0,1]. In the second price auction, bidding one's own type is a dominant strategy, therefore a fortiori the auction is Bayesian incentive compatible. For the first price auction, it can be shown that the bid functions



form a Bayesian Nash equilibrium (a simple argument via the revelation principle shows it can be made Bayesian incentive compatible). Thus the Revenue Equivalence Theorem applies: in both auctions, the highest types get the object and a buyer of type 0 has zero expected interim utility. They do not implement the same social choice functions.
Equivalence of Auction Mechanisms in Single Item Auctions
In fact, we can use revenue equivalence to prove that many types of auctions are revenue equivalent. For example, the first price auction, second price auction, and the all pay auction are all revenue equivalent.
Second Price Auction
Consider the second price single item auction, in which the player with the highest bid pays the second highest bid. It is optimal for each player 
 
 
 
  to bid her own value 
 
 
 
 .
Suppose 
 
 
 
  wins the auction, and pays the second highest bid, or 
 
 
 
 . The revenue from this auction is simply 
 
 
 
 .
First Price Auction
In the first price auction, where the player with the highest bid simply pays her bid, if all players bid using a bidding function 
 
 
 
 , this is a Nash equilibrium.
In other words, if each player bids such that they bid the expected value of second highest bid, assuming that theirs was the highest, then no player has any incentive to deviate. If this were true, then it is easy to see that the expected revenue from this auction is also 
 
 
 
  if 
 
 
 
  wins the auction.
Proof
To prove this, suppose that a player 1 bids 
 
 
 
 , effectively bluffing that her value is 
 
 
 
  rather than 
 
 
 
 . We want to find a value of 
 
 
 
  such that the player's expected payoff is maximized.
The probability of winning is then 
 
 
 
 . The expected cost of this bid is 
 
 
 
 , a random variable. Then we can rewrite the above as


 
 .
Using the general fact that 
 
 
 
 , we obtain


 
  maximizes the player's expected payoff. Since 
 
 
 
 .
Second Price Auction
The expected payment of the first player in the second price auction can be computed as follows:



Since players bid truthfully in a second price auction, we can replace all prices with players' values. If player 1 wins, he pays what player 2 bids, or 
 
 
 
 . Player 1 himself bids 
 
 
 
 . Since payment is zero when player 1 loses, the above is



Since 
 
 
 
  come from a uniform distribution, we can simplify this to



First Price Auction
We can use revenue equivalence to generate the correct symmetric bidding function in the first price auction. Suppose that in the first price auction, each player has the bidding function 
 
 
 
 , where this function is unknown at this point.
The expected payment of player 1 in this game is then


 
  (as above)
Now, a player simply pays what the player bids, and let's assume that players with higher values still win, so that the probability of winning is simply a player's value, as in the second price auction. We will later show that this assumption was correct. Again, a player pays nothing if he loses the auction. We then obtain



and by revenue equivalence,
$$b(v_1) \cdot v_1 = \frac{v_1^2}{2} \Rightarrow b(v_1) = \frac{v_1}{2}$$
Indeed, with this bidding function, the player with the higher value still wins. We can also show that this is the correct equilibrium bidding function, by thinking about how a player should maximize his bid given that all other players are bidding using this bidding function.
All-pay Auctions
Similarly, we know that the expected payment of player 1 in the second price auction is $\frac{v_1^2}{2}$, and this must be equal to the expected payment in the all-pay auction, i.e.
$$\frac{v_1^2}{2} = b(v_1)$$
Thus, the bidding function for each player in the all-pay auction is $\frac{v^2}{2}$
Further reading


.

.

"
Category:Auction theory


