


Binomial inverse theorem




Binomial inverse theorem

In mathematics, the binomial inverse theorem is useful for expressing matrix inverses in different ways.
If A, U, B, V are matrices of sizes p×p, p×q, q×q, q×p, respectively, then



provided A and B + BVA−1UB are nonsingular. Nonsingularity of the latter requires that B−1 exist since it equals  and the rank of the latter cannot exceed the rank of B.1
Since B is invertible, the two B terms flanking the parenthetical quantity inverse in the right-hand side can be replaced with  which results in



This is the Woodbury matrix identity, which can also be derived using matrix blockwise inversion.
A more general formula exists when B is singular and possibly even non-square:2



Formulas also exist for certain cases in which A is singular.3
Verification
First notice that



Now multiply the matrix we wish to invert by its alleged inverse:









which verifies that it is the inverse.
So we get that if A−1 and 
 
 
 
  exist, then 
 
 
 
  exists and is given by the theorem above.4
Special cases
First
If p = q and U = V = Ip is the identity matrix, then



Remembering the identity


 
  we can also express the previous equation in the simpler form as



Second
If B = Iq is the identity matrix and q = 1, then U is a column vector, written u, and V is a row vector, written vT. Then the theorem implies the Sherman-Morrison formula:



This is useful if one has a matrix A with a known inverse A−1 and one needs to invert matrices of the form A+uvT quickly for various u and v.
Third
If we set A = Ip and B = Iq, we get



In particular, if q = 1, then



which is a particular case of the Sherman-Morrison formula given above.
See also

Invertible matrix
Matrix determinant lemma
Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse#Updating the pseudoinverse

References


"
Category:Linear algebra Category:Matrix theory Category:Theorems in algebra



Henderson, H. V., and Searle, S. R. (1981), "On deriving the inverse of a sum of matrices", SIAM Review 23, pp. 53-60.

Kurt S. Riedel, "A Sherman—Morrison—Woodbury Identity for Rank Augmenting Matrices with Application to Centering", SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 13 (1992)659-662,  preprint 





