


Metrical task system




Metrical task system

Task systems are mathematical objects used to model the set of possible configuration of online algorithms. They were introduced by Borodin, Linial and Saks (1992) to model a variety of online problems. A task system determines a set of states and costs to change states. Task systems obtain as input a sequence of requests such that each request assigns processing times to the states. The objective of an online algorithm for task systems is to create a schedule that minimizes the overall cost incurred due to processing the tasks with respect to the states and due to the cost to change states.
If the cost function to change states is a metric, the task system is a metrical task system (MTS). This is the most common type of task systems. Metrical task systems generalize online problems such as paging, list accessing, and the k-server problem (in finite spaces).
Formal Definition
A task system is a pair 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is a set of states and 
 
 
 
  is a distance function. If 
 
 
 
  is a metric, 
 
 
 
  is a metrical task system. An input to the task system is a sequence 
 
 
 
  such that for each 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is a vector of 
 
 
 
  non-negative entries that determine the processing costs for the 
 
 
 
  states when processing the 
 
 
 
 th task.
An algorithm for the task system produces a schedule 
 
 
 
  that determines the sequence of states. For instance, 
 
 
 
  means that the 
 
 
 
 th task 
 
 
 
  is run in state 
 
 
 
 . The processing cost of a schedule is 
 
 

The objective of the algorithm is to find a schedule such that the cost is minimized.
Known Results
As usual for online problems, the most common measure to analyze algorithms for metrical task systems is the competitive analysis, where the performance of an online algorithm is compared to the performance of an optimal offline algorithm. For deterministic online algorithms, there is a tight bound 
 
 
 
  on the competitive ratio due to Borodin et al. (1992).
For randomized online algorithms, the competitive ratio is lower bounded by 
 
 
 
  and upper bounded by 
 
 
 
 . The lower bound is due to Bartal et al. (2006,2005). The upper bound is due to Fiat and Mendel (2003) who improved upon a result of Bartal et al. (1997).
There are many results for various types of restricted metrics.
See also

Adversary model
Competitive analysis
K-server problem
Online algorithm
Page replacement algorithm
Real-time computing

References
















"
Category:Online algorithms


