


Digital signature forgery




Digital signature forgery

In a cryptographic digital signature or MAC system, digital signature forgery is the ability to create a pair consisting of a message 
 
 
 
  and a signature (or MAC) 
 
 
 
  that is valid for 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  has not been signed in the past by the legitimate signer. There are three types of forgery: existential, selective, and universal.1
Types
Besides the following attacks, there is also a total break: when adversary can compute the signer's private key and therefore forge any possible signature on any message2
Existential forgery
Existential forgery is the creation (by an adversary) of at least one message/signature pair 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  was not produced by the legitimate signer. The adversary need not have any control over 
 
 
 
 ; 
 
 
 
  need not have any particular meaning; and indeed it may even be gibberish — as long as the pair 
 
 
 
  is valid, the adversary has succeeded in constructing an existential forgery.
Existential forgery is essentially the weakest adversarial goal, therefore the strongest schemes are those that are "existentially unforgeable". Nevertheless, many state-of-art signature algorithms allow existential forgery. For example, an RSA forgery can be done as follows:

Let 
 
 
 
  be the RSA public key.
Choose a random signature 
 
 
 
 .
Send the message as
 
 
 
 .
The recipient check the signature
 
 
 
  so the check will pass.

Note: the sender cannot control the message content so it will be a random message, that may help in some cases.
Multiplication forgery
This forgery can be used with two messages with their signatures as follows:

Let 
 
 
 
  be RSA signature on the message 
 
 
 
  under the key 
 
 
 
 .
Analogously, 
 
 
 
 .
in that case 
 
 
 
  will be valid RSA signature on the message 
 
 
 
  under the key 
 
 
 
 .3

Selective forgery
Selective forgery is the creation (by an adversary) of a message/signature pair 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  has been chosen by the adversary prior to the attack. 
 
 
 
  may be chosen to have interesting mathematical properties with respect to the signature algorithm; however, in selective forgery, 
 
 
 
  must be fixed before the start of the attack.
The ability to successfully conduct a selective forgery attack implies the ability to successfully conduct an existential forgery attack.
Universal forgery
Universal forgery is the creation (by an adversary) of a valid signature 
 
 
 
  for any given message 
 
 
 
 . An adversary capable of universal forgery is able to sign messages he chose himself (as in selective forgery), messages chosen at random, or even specific messages provided by an opponent.
References
"
Category:Cryptography










