


Graph toughness




Graph toughness

 In graph theory, toughness is a measure of the connectivity of a graph. A graph 
 
 
 
  is said to be 
 
 
 
 -tough for a given real number

 
  if, for every integer

 
 , 
 
 
 
  cannot be split into 
 
 
 
  different connected components by the removal of fewer than 
 
 
 
  vertices. For instance, a graph is 
 
 
 
 -tough if the number of components formed by removing a set of vertices is always at most as large as the number of removed vertices. The toughness of a graph is the maximum 
 
 
 
  for which it is 
 
 
 
 -tough; this is a finite number for all graphs except the complete graphs, which by convention have infinite toughness.
Graph toughness was first introduced by . Since then there has been extensive work by other mathematicians on toughness; the recent survey by  lists 99 theorems and 162 papers on the subject.
Examples
Removing 
 
 
 
  vertices from a path graph can split the remaining graph into as many as 
 
 
 
  connected components. The maximum ratio of components to removed vertices is achieved by removing one vertex (from the interior of the path) and splitting it into two components. Therefore, paths are 
 
 
 
 -tough. In contrast, removing 
 
 
 
  vertices from a cycle graph leaves at most 
 
 
 
  remaining connected components, and sometimes leaves exactly 
 
 
 
  connected components, so a cycle is 
 
 
 
 -tough.
Connection to vertex connectivity
If a graph is 
 
 
 
 -tough, then one consequence (obtained by setting 
 
 
 
 ) is that any set of 
 
 
 
  nodes can be removed without splitting the graph in two. That is, every 
 
 
 
 -tough graph is also 

 
 -vertex-connected.
Connection to Hamiltonicity
observed that every cycle, and therefore every Hamiltonian graph, is 
 
 
 
 -tough; that is, being 
 
 
 
 -tough is a necessary condition for a graph to be Hamiltonian. He conjectured that the connection between toughness and Hamiltonicity goes in both directions: that there exists a threshold 
 
 
 
  such that every 
 
 
 
 -tough graph is Hamiltonian. Chvátal's original conjecture that 
 
 
 
  would have proven Fleischner's theorem but was disproved by  The existence of a larger toughness threshold for Hamiltonicity remains open.
References


.

.

.

"
Category:Graph connectivity Category:Graph invariants


