


Russo–Vallois integral




Russo–Vallois integral

In mathematical analysis, the Russo–Vallois integral is an extension to stochastic processes of the classical Riemann–Stieltjes integral



for suitable functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The idea is to replace the derivative

 
 
  by the difference quotient


 
  and to pull the limit out of the integral. In addition one changes the type of convergence.
Definitions
Definition: A sequence 
 
 
 
  of stochastic processes converges uniformly on compact sets in probability to a process 
 
 




if, for every 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 




One sets:






and



Definition: The forward integral is defined as the ucp-limit of




Definition: The backward integral is defined as the ucp-limit of




Definition: The generalized bracket is defined as the ucp-limit of




For continuous semimartingales

 
  and a cadlag function H, the Russo–Vallois integral coincidences with the usual Ito integral:



In this case the generalised bracket is equal to the classical covariation. In the special case, this means that the process



is equal to the quadratic variation process.
Also for the Russo-Vallois Integral an Ito formula holds: If 
 
 
 
 
  is a continuous semimartingale and



then



By a duality result of Triebel one can provide optimal classes of Besov spaces, where the Russo–Vallois integral can be defined. The norm in the Besov space



is given by



with the well known modification for 
 
 
 
 
 . Then the following theorem holds:
Theorem: Suppose









Then the Russo–Vallois integral



exists and for some constant 
 
 
 
 
  one has



Notice that in this case the Russo–Vallois integral coincides with the Riemann–Stieltjes integral and with the Young integral for functions with finite p-variation.
References

Russo, Vallois: Forward, backward and symmetric integrals, Prob. Th. and rel. fields 97 (1993)
Russo, Vallois: The generalized covariation process and Ito-formula, Stoch. Proc. and Appl. 59 (1995)
Zähle; Forward Integrals and SDE, Progress in Prob. Vol. 52 (2002)
Fournier, Adams: Sobolev Spaces, Elsevier, second edition (2003)

"
Category:Definitions of mathematical integration Category:Stochastic processes


