


Discrete measure




Discrete measure

(Figure)
Schematic representation of the Dirac measure by a line surmounted by an arrow. The Dirac measure is a discrete measure whose support is the point 0. The Dirac measure of any set containing 0 is 1, and the measure of any set not containing 0 is 0.

In mathematics, more precisely in measure theory, a measure on the real line is called a discrete measure (in respect to the Lebesgue measure) if it is at most concentrated on a countable set. Note that the support need not be a discrete set. Geometrically, a discrete measure (on the real line, with respect to Lebesgue measure) is a collection of point masses.
Definition and properties
A measure 
 
 
 
  defined on the Lebesgue measurable sets of the real line with values in 
 
 
 
  is said to be discrete if there exists a (possibly finite) sequence of numbers



such that



The simplest example of a discrete measure on the real line is the Dirac delta function

 
  One has 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

More generally, if 
 
 
 
  is a (possibly finite) sequence of real numbers, 
 
 
 
  is a sequence of numbers in 
 
 
 
  of the same length, one can consider the Dirac measures

 
  defined by


 
  for any Lebesgue measurable set 
 
 
 
  Then, the measure



is a discrete measure. In fact, one may prove that any discrete measure on the real line has this form for appropriately chosen sequences 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 

Extensions
One may extend the notion of discrete measures to more general measure spaces. Given a measure space 
 
 
 
  and two measures 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  on it, 
 
 
 
  is said to be discrete in respect to 
 
 
 
  if there exists an at most countable subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that

All singletons 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  are measurable (which implies that any subset of 
 
 
 
  is measurable)







Notice that the first two requirements are always satisfied for an at most countable subset of the real line if 
 
 
 
  is the Lebesgue measure, so they were not necessary in the first definition above.
As in the case of measures on the real line, a measure 
 
 
 
  on 
 
 
 
  is discrete in respect to another measure 
 
 
 
  on the same space if and only if 
 
 
 
  has the form



where 
 
 
 
  the singletons 
 
 
 
  are in 
 
 
 
  and their 
 
 
 
  measure is 0.
One can also define the concept of discreteness for signed measures. Then, instead of conditions 2 and 3 above one should ask that 
 
 
 
  be zero on all measurable subsets of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  be zero on measurable subsets of 
 
 

References



External links



"
Category:Measures (measure theory)


