


Racah W-coefficient




Racah W-coefficient

Racah's W-coefficients were introduced by Giulio Racah in 1942.1 These coefficients have a purely mathematical definition. In physics they are used in calculations involving the quantum mechanical description of angular momentum, for example in atomic theory.
The coefficients appear when there are three sources of angular momentum in the problem. For example, consider an atom with one electron in an s orbital and one electron in a p orbital. Each electron has electron spin angular momentum and in addition the p orbital has orbital angular momentum (an s orbital has zero orbital angular momentum). The atom may be described by LS coupling or by jj coupling as explained in the article on angular momentum coupling. The transformation between the wave functions that correspond to these two couplings involves a Racah W-coefficient.
Apart from a phase factor, Racah's W-coefficients are equal to Wigner's 6-j symbols, so any equation involving Racah's W-coefficients may be rewritten using 6-j symbols. This is often advantageous because the symmetry properties of 6-j symbols are easier to remember.
Racah coefficients are related to recoupling coefficients by


 
  Recoupling coefficients are elements of a unitary transformation and their definition is given in the next section. Racah coefficients have more convenient symmetry properties than the recoupling coefficients (but less convenient than the 6-j symbols).
Recoupling coefficients
Coupling of two angular momenta 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the construction of simultaneous eigenfunctions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , as explained in the article on Clebsch–Gordan coefficients. The result is


 
  where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
Coupling of three angular momenta 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , may be done by first coupling 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and next coupling 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to total angular momentum 
 
 
 
 :



Alternatively, one may first couple 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and next couple 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 :



Both coupling schemes result in complete orthonormal bases for the 
 
 
 
  dimensional space spanned by


 
  Hence, the two total angular momentum bases are related by a unitary transformation. The matrix elements of this unitary transformation are given by a scalar product and are known as recoupling coefficients. The coefficients are independent of 
 
 
 
  and so we have


 
  The independence of 
 
 
 
  follows readily by writing this equation for 
 
 
 
  and applying the lowering operator

 
 
  to both sides of the equation.
Algebra
Let


 
  be the usual triangular factor, then the Racah coefficient is a product of four of these by a sum over factorials,


 
  where


 
  and












The sum over 
 
 
 
  is finite over the range2



Relation to Wigner's 6-j symbol
Racah's W-coefficients are related to Wigner's 6-j symbols, which have even more convenient symmetry properties


 
  See 3 or



See also

Clebsch–Gordan coefficients
3-jm symbol
6-j symbol

Notes
Further reading









External links



"
Category:Rotational symmetry Category:Representation theory of Lie groups



↩
The Theory of Atomic Structure and Spectra, Cowan, p. 148↩
Angular momentum 3
 
 
 
  ed. by D.M. Brink and G.R. Satchler Page 142↩




