


9-j symbol




9-j symbol

In physics, Wigner's 9-j symbols were introduced by Eugene Paul Wigner in 1937. They are related to recoupling coefficients in quantum mechanics involving four angular momenta



Recoupling of four angular momentum vectors
Coupling of two angular momenta 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the construction of simultaneous eigenfunctions of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , as explained in the article on Clebsch–Gordan coefficients.
Coupling of three angular momenta can be done in several ways, as explained in the article on Racah W-coefficients. Using the notation and techniques of that article, total angular momentum states that arise from coupling the angular momentum vectors 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  may be written as


 
  Alternatively, one may first couple 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 , before coupling 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 :


 
  Both sets of functions provide a complete, orthonormal basis for the space with dimension 
 
 
 
  spanned by


 
  Hence, the transformation between the two sets is unitary and the matrix elements of the transformation are given by the scalar products of the functions. As in the case of the Racah W-coefficients the matrix elements are independent of the total angular momentum projection quantum number (
 
 
 
 ):



Symmetry relations
A 
 
 
 
  symbol is invariant under reflection in either diagonal:



The permutation of any two rows or any two columns yields a phase factor 
 
 
 
 , where


 
  For example:



Reduction to 6j symbols
The 9j symbols can be calculated as sums over triple-products of 6j symbols where the summation extends over all x admitted by the triangle conditions in the factors:


 
 .
Special case
When 
 
 
 
 
  the 9-j symbol is proportional to a 6-j symbol:



Orthogonality relation
The 9-j symbols satisfy this orthogonality relation:


 
  The symbol 

 is equal to one if the triad 

 satisfies the triangular conditions and zero otherwise.
3n-j symbols
The 6-j symbol is the first representative, 
 
 
 
 , of 3n-j symbols that are defined as sums of products of 
 
 
 
  of Wigner's 3-jm coefficients. The sums are over all combinations of 
 
 
 
  that the 
 
 
 
  j-coefficients admit, i.e., which lead to non-vanishing contributions.
If each 3-jm factor is represented by a vertex and each j by an edge, these 3n-j symbols can be mapped on certain 3-regular graphs with 
 
 
 
  vertices and 
 
 
 
  nodes. The 6-j symbol is associated with the K4 graph on 4 vertices, the 9-j symbol with the utility graph on 6 vertices, and the two different (non-isomorphic) 12-j symbols with the Q_3 and Wagner graphs on 8 vertices. Symmetry relations are generally representative of the automorphism group of these graphs.
See also

Clebsch–Gordan coefficients
3-jm symbol
Racah W-coefficient
6-j symbol

References












External links


(Gives answer in exact fractions)
{{ cite web

|url=http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/369j.html |title=369j-symbol calculator |author=Plasma Laboratory of Weizmann Institute of Science }} (Answer as floating point numbers)



(accurate; C, fortran, python)

"
Category:Rotational symmetry Category:Representation theory of Lie groups Category:Quantum mechanics


