


Coercive function




Coercive function

In mathematics, a coercive function is a function that "grows rapidly" at the extremes of the space on which it is defined. Depending on the context different exact definitions of this idea are in use.
Coercive vector fields
A vector field f : Rn → Rn is called coercive if



where "
 
 
 
 " denotes the usual dot product and 
 
 
 
  denotes the usual Euclidean norm of the vector x.
A coercive vector field is in particular norm-coercive since 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , by Cauchy Schwarz inequality. However a norm-coercive mapping f : Rn → Rn is not necessarily a coercive vector field. For instance the rotation f : R2 → R2, f(x) = (-x2, x1) by 90° is a norm-coercive mapping which fails to be a coercive vector field since 
 
 
 
  for every 
 
 
 
 .
Coercive operators and forms
A self-adjoint operator

 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is a real Hilbert space, is called coercive if there exists a constant 
 
 
 
  such that



for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 

A bilinear form

 
 
  is called coercive if there exists a constant 
 
 
 
  such that



for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 

It follows from the Riesz representation theorem that any symmetric (defined as
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 ), continuous (
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 
  and some constant 
 
 
 
 ) and coercive bilinear form 
 
 
 
  has the representation



for some self-adjoint operator 
 
 
 
  which then turns out to be a coercive operator. Also, given a coercive self-adjoint operator 
 
 
 
 
  the bilinear form 
 
 
 
  defined as above is coercive.
One can also show that any self-adjoint operator 
 
 
 
  is a coercive operator if and only if it is a coercive mapping (in the sense of coercivity of a vector field, where one has to replace the dot product with the more general inner product). The definitions of coercivity for vector fields, operators, and bilinear forms are closely related and compatible.
Norm-coercive mappings
A mapping 
 
 
 
  between two normed vectorspaces 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  is called norm-coercive iff


 
 .
More generally, a function 
 
 
 
  between two topological spaces

 
  and 
 
 
 
  is called coercive if for every compact subset

 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  there exists a compact subset 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
  such that



The composition of a bijective proper map followed by a coercive map is coercive.
(Extended valued) coercive functions
An (extended valued) function 
 
 
 
 
  is called coercive iff


 
  A realvalued coercive function 
 
 
 
  is in particular norm-coercive. However a norm-coercive function 
 
 
 
  is not necessarily coercive. For instance the identity function on 
 
 
 
  is norm-coercive but not coercive.
See also: radially unbounded functions
References





"
Category:Functional analysis Category:General topology Category:Types of functions


