


Watts and Strogatz model




Watts and Strogatz model

 The Watts–Strogatz model is a random graph generation model that produces graphs with small-world properties, including short average path lengths and high clustering. It was proposed by Duncan J. Watts and Steven Strogatz in their joint 1998 Nature paper.1 The model also became known as the (Watts) beta model after Watts used 
 
 
 
  to formulate it in his popular science book Six Degrees.
Rationale for the model
The formal study of random graphs dates back to the work of Paul Erdős and Alfréd Rényi.2 The graphs they considered, now known as the classical or Erdős–Rényi (ER) graphs, offer a simple and powerful model with many applications.
However the ER graphs do not have two important properties observed in many real-world networks:

They do not generate local clustering and triadic closures. Instead because they have a constant, random, and independent probability of two nodes being connected, ER graphs have a low clustering coefficient.
They do not account for the formation of hubs. Formally, the degree distribution of ER graphs converges to a Poisson distribution, rather than a power law observed in many real-world, scale-free networks.

The Watts and Strogatz model was designed as the simplest possible model that addresses the first of the two limitations. It accounts for clustering while retaining the short average path lengths of the ER model. It does so by interpolating between an ER graph and a regular ring lattice. Consequently, the model is able to at least partially explain the "small-world" phenomena in a variety of networks, such as the power grid, neural network of C. elegans, and a network of movie actors. In 2015, researchers from the California Institute of Technology and Princeton University found that the Watts and Strogatz model explains fat-metabolism communication models in budding yeast.3
Algorithm
 Given the desired number of nodes 
 
 
 
 , the mean degree

 
  (assumed to be an even integer), and a special parameter 
 
 
 
 
 , satisfying 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the model constructs an undirected graph with 
 
 
 
  nodes and 
 
 
 
  edges in the following way:

Construct a regular ring lattice, a graph with 
 
 
 
 
  nodes each connected to 
 
 
 
  neighbors, 
 
 
 
  on each side. That is, if the nodes are labeled 
 
 
 
 , there is an edge 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
 
 .
For every node 
 
 
 
  take every edge 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , and rewire it with probability 
 
 
 
 . Rewiring is done by replacing 
 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is chosen with uniform probability from all possible values that avoid self-loops (
 
 
 
 ) and link duplication (there is no edge 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 
  at this point in the algorithm).

Properties
The underlying lattice structure of the model produces a locally clustered network, and the random links dramatically reduce the average path lengths. The algorithm introduces about 
 
 
 
  non-lattice edges. Varying 
 
 
 
  makes it possible to interpolate between a regular lattice (
 
 
 
 ) and a random graph (
 
 
 
 ) approaching the Erdős–Rényi random graph

 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 .
The three properties of interest are the average path length, the clustering coefficient, and the degree distribution.
Average path length
For a ring lattice the average path length is 
 
 
 
  and scales linearly with the system size. In the limiting case of 
 
 
 
  the graph converges to a classical random graph with 
 
 
 
 
 . However, in the intermediate region 
 
 
 
  the average path length falls very rapidly with increasing 
 
 
 
 , quickly approaching its limiting value.
Clustering coefficient
For the ring lattice the clustering coefficient4

 
 , and so tends to 
 
 
 
  as 
 
 
 
 
  grows, independently of the system size.5 In the limiting case of 
 
 
 
  the clustering coefficient attains the value for classical random graphs, 
 
 
 
  and is thus inversely proportional to the system size. In the intermediate region the clustering coefficient remains quite close to its value for the regular lattice, and only falls at relatively high 
 
 
 
 . This results in a region where the average path length falls rapidly, but the clustering coefficient does not, explaining the "small-world" phenomenon.

If we use the Barrat and Weigt6 measure for clustering 
 
 
 
  defined as the fraction between the average number of edges between the neighbors of a node and the average number of possible edges between these neighbors, or, alternatively,
 










then we get 
 
 


Degree distribution
The degree distribution in the case of the ring lattice is just a Dirac delta function centered at 
 
 
 
 . In the limiting case of 
 
 
 
  it is Poisson distribution, as with classical graphs. The degree distribution for 
 
 
 
  can be written as,7



where 
 
 
 
  is the number of edges that the 
 
 
 
  node has or its degree. Here 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 . The shape of the degree distribution is similar to that of a random graph and has a pronounced peak at 
 
 
 
 
  and decays exponentially for large 
 
 
 
 . The topology of the network is relatively homogeneous, and all nodes have more or less the same degree.
Limitations
The major limitation of the model is that it produces an unrealistic degree distribution. In contrast, real networks are often scale-free networks inhomogeneous in degree, having hubs and a scale-free degree distribution. Such networks are better described in that respect by the preferential attachment family of models, such as the Barabási–Albert (BA) model. (On the other hand, the Barabási–Albert model fails to produce the high levels of clustering seen in real networks, a shortcoming not shared by the Watts and Strogatz model. Thus, neither the Watts and Strogatz model nor the Barabási–Albert model should be viewed as fully realistic.)
The Watts and Strogatz model also implies a fixed number of nodes and thus cannot be used to model network growth.
See also

Small-world networks
Erdős–Rényi (ER) model
Barabási–Albert model
Social networks

References
"
Category:Networks Category:Social networks Category:Random graphs



↩
↩
http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004264↩
↩

↩





