


Kan fibration




Kan fibration

In mathematics, Kan complexes and Kan fibrations are part of the theory of simplicial sets. Kan fibrations are the fibrations of the standard model category for simplicial sets and are therefore of fundamental importance. Kan complexes are the fibrant objects in this model category. The name is in honor of Daniel Kan.
Definition
(Figure)
The striped blue simplex in the domain has to exist in order for this map to be a Kan fibration

For each n ≥ 0, recall that the standard 
 
 
 
 -simplex, 
 
 
 
 , is the representable simplicial set


 
  Applying the geometric realization functor to this simplicial set gives a space homeomorphic to the topological standard 
 
 
 
 -simplex: the convex subspace of ℝn+1 consisting of all points 
 
 
 
  such that the coordinates are non-negative and sum to 1.
For each k ≤ n, this has a subcomplex 
 
 
 
 , the k-th horn inside 
 
 
 
 , corresponding to the boundary of the n-simplex, with the k-th face removed. This may be formally defined in various ways, as for instance the union of the images of the n maps 
 
 
 
  corresponding to all the other faces of 
 
 
 
 .1 Horns of the form 
 
 
 
  sitting inside 
 
 
 
  look like the black V at the top of the image to the right. If 
 
 
 
  is a simplicial set, then maps


 
  correspond to collections of 
 
 

 
 -simplices satisfying a compatibility condition. Explicitly, this condition can be written as follows. Write the 
 
 
 
 -simplices as a list 
 
 
 
  and require that


 
  for all 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 .2 These conditions are satisfied for the 
 
 
 
 -simplices of 
 
 
 
  sitting inside 
 
 
 
 .
 A map of simplicial sets 
 
 
 
  is a Kan fibration if, for any 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , and for any maps 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , there exists a map 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Stated this way, the definition is very similar to that of fibrations in topology (see also homotopy lifting property), whence the name "fibration".
Using the correspondence between 
 
 
 
 -simplices of a simplicial set 
 
 
 
  and morphisms 
 
 
 
  (a consequence of the Yoneda lemma), this definition can be written in terms of simplices. The image of the map 
 
 
 
  can be thought of as a horn as described above. Asking that 
 
 
 
  factors through 
 
 
 
  corresponds to requiring that there is an 
 
 
 
 -simplex in 
 
 
 
  whose faces make up the horn from 
 
 
 
  (together with one other face). Then the required map 
 
 
 
  corresponds to a simplex in 
 
 
 
  whose faces include the horn from 
 
 
 
 . The diagram to the right is an example in two dimensions. Since the black V in the lower diagram is filled in by the blue 
 
 
 
 -simplex, if the black V above maps down to it then the striped blue 
 
 
 
 -simplex has to exist, along with the dotted blue 
 
 
 
 -simplex, mapping down in the obvious way.3
A simplicial set X is called a Kan complex if the map from X to 1, the one-point simplicial set, is a Kan fibration. In the model category for simplicial sets, 
 
 
 
  is the terminal object and so a Kan complex is exactly the same as a fibrant object.
Examples
An important example comes from the singular simplices used to define singular homology. Given a space 
 
 
 
 , define a singular 
 
 
 
 -simplex of X to be a continuous map from the standard topological 
 
 
 
 -simplex (as described above) to 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  Taking the set of these maps for all non-negative 
 
 
 
  gives a graded set,


 
 . To make this into a simplicial set, define face maps 
 
 
 
  by


 
  and degeneracy maps 
 
 
 
  by


 
 . Since the union of any 
 
 
 
  faces of 
 
 
 
  is a strong deformation retract of 
 
 
 
 , any continuous function defined on these faces can be extended to 
 
 
 
 , which shows that 
 
 
 
  is a Kan complex.4
It can be shown that the simplicial set underlying a simplicial group is always fibrant.
Applications
The homotopy groups of a fibrant simplicial set may be defined combinatorially, using horns, in a way that agrees with the homotopy groups of the topological space which realizes it.
See also

Weak Kan complex (also called quasi-category, ∞-category)
∞-groupoid

References


Bibliography




"
Category:Simplicial sets Category:Homotopy theory



See Goerss and Jardine, page 7↩
See May, page 2↩
May uses this simplicial definition; see page 25↩
See May, page 3↩




