


Gloss and matte paint




Gloss and matte paint

 In paint technology, terms gloss and matte refer to visual appearance of a finish with respect to its gloss level. Glossy paints are shiny and reflect most light in the specular (mirror-like) direction, while on matte paints most of the light diffuses in a range of angles. The gloss level of paint can also affect its apparent colour.
Between those two extremes, there is a number of intermediate gloss levels. Their common names, from the most dull to the most shiny, include: flat, matte, eggshell, satin, silk, semi-gloss and high gloss. These terms are not standardized, and not all manufacturers use all these terms.1
Terminology
One manufacturer measures gloss as percentages (at an unspecified angle) and gives:

Flat (1–9% gloss)
Low Sheen (10–25% gloss)
Eggshell (26–40% gloss)
Semi Gloss (41–69% gloss)
Gloss (70–89% gloss)

Technology
Gloss level of a paint is principally determined by the ratio of resinous, adhesive binder and solid, powdery pigment. The more binder the coating contains, the more regular reflection will be made from its smooth surface; conversely, with less binder, grains of pigment become exposed to the surface, scattering the light and providing matte effect. To a lesser extent, gloss is also affected by other factors: refraction index of the pigment particles, viscosity and refraction index of the binder.2
An important indicator is pigment-volume concentration (PVC), defined as the ratio of pigment volume and total paint volume:3


As a gloss finish will reveal surface imperfections such as sanding marks, surfaces must generally be prepared more thoroughly for gloss finishes. Gloss-finish paints are generally more resistant to damage than flat paint, more resistant to staining, and easier to clean.4 Flat paint may become glossier through burnishing or staining with grease; glossy paint may lose its gloss and look scratched if abraded. Unlike gloss paint, flat paint can generally be touched up locally without repainting the entire surface.
Gloss level can be characterized by the angular distribution of light scattered from a surface, measured with a glossmeter, but there are various ways of measuring this, and different industries have different standards.
Applications
In traditional household interiors, walls are usually painted in flat or eggshell gloss, wooden trim (including doors and window sash) in high gloss, and ceilings almost invariably in flat. Similarly, exterior trim is usually painted with a gloss paint, while the body of the house is painted in a lower gloss.
References
"
Category:Interior design Category:Painting materials






Koleske, Paint and Coating Testing Manual, p. 615, ISBN 0-8031-2060-5




