


Machmeter




Machmeter

(Figure)
Illustration showing the face of a Machmeter reading a Mach number of 0.83

A Machmeter is an aircraft pitot-static system flight instrument that shows the ratio of the true airspeed to the speed of sound, a dimensionless quantity called Mach number. This is shown on a Machmeter as a decimal fraction. An aircraft flying at the speed of sound is flying at a Mach number of one, expressed as Mach 1.
Use
As an aircraft in transonic flight approaches the speed of sound, it first reaches its critical mach number, where air flowing over low-pressure areas of its surface locally reaches the speed of sound, forming shock waves. The indicated airspeed for this condition changes with ambient temperature, which in turn changes with altitude. Therefore, indicated airspeed is not entirely adequate to warn the pilot of the impending problems. Mach number is more useful, and most high-speed aircraft are limited to a maximum operating Mach number, also known as MMO.
For example, if the MMO is Mach 0.83, then at  where the speed of sound under standard conditions is , the true airspeed at MMO is . The speed of sound increases with air temperature, so at Mach 0.83 at  where the air is much warmer than at , the true airspeed at MMO would be .
Operation
Some older mechanical Machmeters use an altitude aneroid and an airspeed capsule which together convert pitot-static pressure into Mach number. Modern electronic Machmeters use information from an air data computer system.
Calibration
In subsonic flow the Mach meter can be calibrated according to:



where:


 
  is Mach number


 
  is total pressure and


 
  is static pressure

and assuming the ratio of specific heats is 1.4
 

When a shock wave forms across the pitot tube the required formula is derived from the Rayleigh Supersonic Pitot equation, and is solved iteratively:


 
  where:


 
  is now impact pressure measured behind a normal shock.
Note that the inputs required are impact pressure (or total pressure) and static pressure. Air temperature input is not required.
See also

Airspeed indicator
Mach number
Pitot-static system

References




"
Category:Aircraft instruments Category:Measuring instruments Category:Speed sensors


