


Bernstein inequalities (probability theory)




Bernstein inequalities (probability theory)

In probability theory, Bernstein inequalities give bounds on the probability that the sum of random variables deviates from its mean. In the simplest case, let X1, ..., Xn be independent Bernoulli random variables taking values +1 and −1 with probability 1/2 (this distribution is also known as the Rademacher distribution), then for every positive 
 
 
 
 ,



Bernstein inequalities were proved and published by Sergei Bernstein in the 1920s and 1930s.1234 Later, these inequalities were rediscovered several times in various forms. Thus, special cases of the Bernstein inequalities are also known as the Chernoff bound, Hoeffding's inequality and Azuma's inequality.
Some of the inequalities
1. Let X1, ..., Xn be independent zero-mean random variables. Suppose that |X i| ≤ M almost surely, for all i. Then, for all positive t,



2. Let X1, ..., Xn be independent random variables. Suppose that for some positive real L and every integer k > 1,



Then



3. Let X1, ..., Xn be independent random variables. Suppose that



for all integer k > 3. Denote



Then,



4. Bernstein also proved generalizations of the inequalities above to weakly dependent random variables. For example, inequality (2) can be extended as follows. Let X1, ..., Xn be possibly non-independent random variables. Suppose that for all integer i > 0,



Then


 
  More general results for martingales can be found in Fan et al. (2012).5
Proofs
The proofs are based on an application of Markov's inequality to the random variable



for a suitable choice of the parameter λ > 0.
See also

McDiarmid's inequality
Markov inequality
Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality
Hoeffding's inequality
Chebyshev's inequality
Azuma's inequality
Bennett's inequality
Concentration inequality

References
(according to: S.N.Bernstein, Collected Works, Nauka, 1964)
A modern translation of some of these results can also be found in   "
Category:Probability theory Category:Probabilistic inequalities



S.N.Bernstein, "On a modification of Chebyshev’s inequality and of the error formula of Laplace" vol. 4, #5 (original publication: Ann. Sci. Inst. Sav. Ukraine, Sect. Math. 1, 1924)↩
↩
S.N.Bernstein, "Theory of Probability" (Russian), Moscow, 1927↩
J.V.Uspensky, "Introduction to Mathematical Probability", McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1937↩
↩




