


Satellite knot




Satellite knot
In the [[knot theory|mathematical theory of knots]], a '''satellite knot''' is a [[knot (mathematics)|knot]] that contains an [[incompressible surface|incompressible]], non [[boundary-parallel]] [[torus]] in its [[knot complement|complement]].Colin Adams, ''The Knot Book: An Elem
 entary Introduction to the Mathematical Theory of Knots, (2001), ISBN 0-7167-4219-5 Every knot is either hyperbolic, a torus, or a satellite knot. The class of satellite knots include composite knots, cable knots and Whitehead doubles. (See'' Basic families, below for definitions of the last two classes.) A satellite link is one that orbits a companion knot K in the sense that it lies inside a regular neighborhood of the companion.1
 A satellite knot 
 
 
 
  can be picturesquely described as follows: start by taking a nontrivial knot 
 
 
 
  lying inside an unknotted solid torus 
 
 
 
 . Here "nontrivial" means that the knot 
 
 
 
  is not allowed to sit inside of a 3-ball in 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is not allowed to be isotopic to the central core curve of the solid torus. Then tie up the solid torus into a nontrivial knot.  This means there is a non-trivial embedding 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The central core curve of the solid torus 
 
 
 
  is sent to a knot 
 
 
 
 
 , which is called the "companion knot" and is thought of as the planet around which the "satellite knot" 
 
 
 
  orbits.The construction ensures that 
 
 
 
  is a non-boundary parallel incompressible torus in the complement of 
 
 
 
 . Composite knots contain a certain kind of incompressible torus called a swallow-follow torus, which can be visualized as swallowing one summand and following another summand. 
Since 
 
 
 
  is an unknotted solid torus, 
 
 
 
 
  is a tubular neighbourhood of an unknot 
 
 
 
 . The 2-component link 
 
 
 
  together with the embedding 
 
 
 
  is called the pattern associated to the satellite operation.
A convention: people usually demand that the embedding 
 
 
 
  is untwisted in the sense that 
 
 
 
 
  must send the standard longitude of 
 
 
 
  to the standard longitude of 
 
 
 
 . Said another way, given two disjoint curves 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  must preserve their linking numbers i.e.
 
 
 
 .
Basic families
When 
 
 
 
  is a torus knot, then 
 
 
 
  is called a cable knot. Examples 3 and 4 are cable knots.
If 
 
 
 
  is a non-trivial knot in 
 
 
 
  and if a compressing disc for 
 
 
 
 
  intersects 
 
 
 
  in precisely one point, then 
 
 
 
  is called a connect-sum. Another way to say this is that the pattern 
 
 
 
  is the connect-sum of a non-trivial knot 
 
 
 
  with a Hopf link.
If the link 
 
 
 
 
  is the Whitehead link, 
 
 
 
  is called a Whitehead double. If 
 
 
 
  is untwisted, 
 
 
 
  is called an untwisted Whitehead double.
Examples
Example 1: The connect-sum of a figure-8 knot and trefoil.
Example 2: Untwisted Whitehead double of a figure-8.
Example 3: Cable of a connect-sum.
Example 4: Cable of trefoil.
Examples 5 and 6 are variants on the same construction. They both have two non-parallel, non-boundary-parallel incompressible tori in their complements, splitting the complement into the union of three manifolds. In Example 5 those manifolds are: the Borromean rings complement, trefoil complement and figure-8 complement. In Example 6 the figure-8 complement is replaced by another trefoil complement.
 
Origins
In 1949 2 Horst Schubert proved that every oriented knot in 
 
 
 
  decomposes as a connect-sum of prime knots in a unique way, up to reordering, making the monoid of oriented isotopy-classes of knots in 
 
 
 
 
  a free commutative monoid on countably-infinite many generators. Shortly after, he realized he could give a new proof of his theorem by a close analysis of the incompressible tori present in the complement of a connect-sum. This led him to study general incompressible tori in knot complements in his epic work Knoten und Vollringe,3 where he defined satellite and companion knots.
Follow-up work
Schubert's demonstration that incompressible tori play a major role in knot theory was one several early insights leading to the unification of 3-manifold theory and knot theory. It attracted Waldhausen's attention, who later used incompressible surfaces to show that a large class of 3-manifolds are homeomorphic if and only if their fundamental groups are isomorphic.4 Waldhausen conjectured what is now the Jaco–Shalen–Johannson-decomposition of 3-manifolds, which is a decomposition of 3-manifolds along spheres and incompressible tori. This later became a major ingredient in the development of geometrization, which can be seen as a partial-classification of 3-dimensional manifolds. The ramifications for knot theory were first described in the long-unpublished manuscript of Bonahon and Siebenmann.5
Uniqueness of satellite decomposition
In Knoten und Vollringe, Schubert proved that in some cases, there is essentially a unique way to express a knot as a satellite. But there are also many known examples where the decomposition is not unique.6 With a suitably enhanced notion of satellite operation called splicing, the JSJ decomposition gives a proper uniqueness theorem for satellite knots.78
See also

Hyperbolic knot
Torus knot

References


"
 




Schubert, H. Die eindeutige Zerlegbarkeit eines Knotens in Primknoten. S.-B Heidelberger Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. 1949 (1949), 57–104.
Schubert, H. Knoten und Vollringe. Acta Math. 90 (1953), 131–286.
Waldhausen, F. On irreducible 3-manifolds which are sufficiently large.Ann. of Math. (2) 87 (1968), 56–88.
F.Bonahon, L.Siebenmann, New Geometric Splittings of Classical Knots, and the Classification and Symmetries of Arborescent Knots, 1
Motegi, K. Knot Types of Satellite Knots and Twisted Knots. Lectures at Knots '96. World Scientific.
Eisenbud, D. Neumann, W. Three-dimensional link theory and invariants of plane curve singularities. Ann. of Math. Stud. 110
Budney, R. JSJ-decompositions of knot and link complements in S^3. L'enseignement Mathematique 2e Serie Tome 52 Fasc. 3–4 (2006). arXiv:math.GT/0506523




