


Proof sketch for Gödel's first incompleteness theorem




Proof sketch for Gödel's first incompleteness theorem

This article gives a sketch of a proof of Gödel's first incompleteness theorem. This theorem applies to any formal theory that satisfies certain technical hypotheses, which are discussed as needed during the sketch. We will assume for the remainder of the article that a fixed theory satisfying these hypotheses has been selected.
Throughout this article the word "number" refers to a natural number. The key property these numbers possess is that any natural number can be obtained by starting with the number 0 and adding 1 a finite number of times.
Hypotheses of the theory
Gödel's theorem applies to any formal theory that satisfies certain properties. Each formal theory has a signature that specifies the nonlogical symbols in the language of the theory. For simplicity, we will assume that the language of the theory consists of:

A constant symbol 
 
 
 
 .
A unary function symbol 
 
 
 
  for the successor operation and binary function symbols + and × for addition and multiplication.
Symbols for logical conjunction, 
 
 
 
 , disjunction, 
 
 
 
 
 , and negation, 
 
 
 
 .
Universal, 
 
 
 
 , and existential, 
 
 
 
 , quantifiers.
Binary relations, = and <, for equality and order (less than).
Left and right parentheses for establishing precedence of quantifiers.
A single variable symbol 
 
 
 
  and a symbol * that can be used to construct additional variables of the form 
 
 


This is the language of Peano arithmetic. A well-formed formula is a sequence of these symbols that is formed so as to have a well-defined reading as a mathematical formula. Thus 
 
 
 
  is well formed while 
 
 
 
  is not well formed. A theory is a set of well-formed formulas with no free variables.
A theory is consistent if there is no formula 
 
 
 
  such that both 
 
 
 
  and its negation are provable. ω-consistency is a stronger property than consistency. Suppose that 
 
 
 
 
  is a formula with one free variable 
 
 
 
 . In order to be ω-consistent, the theory cannot prove both 
 
 
 
  while also proving 
 
 
 
  for each natural number 
 
 
 
 .
The theory is assumed to be effective, which means that the set of axioms must be recursively enumerable. This means that it is theoretically possible to write a computer program that, if allowed to run forever, would output the axioms of the theory one at a time and not output anything else. This requirement is necessary; there are theories that are complete, consistent, and include elementary arithmetic, but no such theory can be effective.
Outline of the proof

For a simplified outline of the proof, see Gödel's incompleteness theorems


The sketch here is broken into three parts. In the first part, each formula of the theory is assigned a number, known as a Gödel number, in a manner that allows the formula to be effectively recovered from the number. This numbering is extended to cover finite sequences of formulas. In the second part, a specific formula 
 
 
 
 
  is constructed such that for any two numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  holds if and only if 
 
 
 
  represents a sequence of formulas that constitutes a proof of the formula that 
 
 
 
  represents. In the third part of the proof, we construct a self-referential formula that, informally, says "I am not provable", and prove that this sentence is neither provable nor disprovable within the theory.
Gödel numbering
The first step of the proof is to represent (well-formed) formulas of the theory, and finite lists of these formulas, as natural numbers. These numbers are called the Gödel numbers of the formulas.
Begin by assigning a natural number to each symbol of the language of arithmetic, similar to the manner in which the ASCII code assigns a unique binary number to each letter and certain other characters. This article will employ the following assignment, very similar to the one Douglas Hofstadter used in his Gödel, Escher, Bach:







Number

Symbol

Meaning





666

0

zero



123





successor function



111

=

equality relation



212

<

less than relation



112

+

addition operator



236

✕

multiplication operator



362

(

left parenthesis



323

)

right parenthesis







Number

Symbol

Meaning





262





a variable name



163

*

star (used to make more variables)



333

∃

existential quantifier



626

∀

for all



161

∧

logical and



616

∨

logical or



223

¬

logical not






The Gödel number of a formula is obtained by concatenating the Gödel numbers of each symbol making up the formula. The Gödel numbers for each symbol are separated by a zero because by design, no Gödel number of a symbol includes a 
 
 
 
 . Hence any formula may be correctly recovered from its Gödel number. Let 
 
 
 
  denote the Gödel number of the formula 
 
 
 
 .
Given the above Gödel numbering, the sentence asserting that addition commutes, 
 
 
 
 
  translates as the number:





(Spaces have been inserted on each side of every 0 only for readability; Gödel numbers are strict concatenations of decimal digits.) Not all natural numbers represent a formula. For example, the number





translates to "
 
 
 
 ", which is not well-formed.
Because each natural number can be obtained by applying the successor operation 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 
  a finite number of times, every natural number has its own Gödel number. For example, the Gödel number corresponding to 
 
 
 
 , is:



 
 .
 

The assignment of Gödel numbers can be extended to finite lists of formulas. To obtain the Gödel number of a list of formulas, write the Gödel numbers of the formulas in order, separating them by two consecutive zeros. Since the Gödel number of formula never contains two consecutive zeros, each formula in a list of formulas can be effectively recovered from the Gödel number for the list.
It is crucial that the formal arithmetic be capable of proving a minimum set of facts. In particular, it must be able to prove that every number has a Gödel number. A second fact that the theory must prove is that given any Gödel number of a formula 
 
 
 
  with one free variable 
 
 
 
  and any number 
 
 
 
 
 , there is a Gödel number of the formula 
 
 
 
  obtained by replacing all occurrences of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
 , and that this second Gödel number can be effectively obtained from the Gödel number of 
 
 
 
 
  as a function of 
 
 
 
 . To see that this is in fact possible, note that given the Gödel number for 
 
 
 
 , one can recreate the original formula, make the substitution, and then find the Gödel number of the resulting formula. This is a uniform procedure.
The provability relation
Deduction rules can then be represented by binary relations on Gödel numbers of lists of formulas. In other words, suppose that there is a deduction rule , by which one can move from the formulas  to a new formula 
 
 
 
 . Then the relation  corresponding to this deduction rule says that 
 
 
 
  is related to 
 
 
 
 
  (in other words,  holds) if 
 
 
 
  is the Gödel number of a list of formulas containing  and  and 
 
 
 
  is the Gödel number of the list of formulas consisting of those in the list coded by 
 
 
 
  together with 
 
 
 
 . Because each deduction rule is concrete, it is possible to effectively determine for any natural numbers 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  whether they are related by the relation.
The second stage in the proof is to use the Gödel numbering, described above, to show that the notion of provability can be expressed within the formal language of the theory. Suppose the theory has deduction rules:  . Let  be their corresponding relations, as described above.
Every provable statement is either an axiom itself, or it can be deduced from the axioms by a finite number of applications of the deduction rules. We wish to define a set of numbers 
 
 
 
  that represents all these provable statements. We define 
 
 
 
  as the minimal set consisting of all numbers in 
 
 
 
  (representing axioms) and closed under all the relations  . This means that whenever 
 
 
 
 
  is in the set 
 
 
 
  and  for some numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the number 
 
 
 
  is also in the set 
 
 
 
 
 . It is not hard to see that 
 
 
 
  represents the set of provable statements. That is, the members of 
 
 
 
  are the Gödel numbers of the provable statements.
A proof of a formula 
 
 
 
  is itself a string of mathematical statements related by particular relations (each is either an axiom or related to former statements by deduction rules), where the last statement is 
 
 
 
 . Thus one can define the Gödel number of a proof. Moreover, one may define a statement form 
 
 
 
 
 , which for every two numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is provable if and only if 
 
 
 
  is the Gödel number of a proof of the statement 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 .


 
  is in fact an arithmetical relation, just as "
 
 
 
 " is, though a (much) more complicated one. Given such a relation 
 
 
 
 , for any two specific numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 , either the formula 
 
 
 
 , or its negation 
 
 
 
 , but not both, is provable. This is because the relation between these two numbers can be simply "checked". Formally this can be proven by induction, where all these possible relations (which are of infinite number) are constructed one by one. The detailed construction of the formula 
 
 
 
  makes essential use of the assumption that the theory is effective; it would not be possible to construct this formula without such an assumption.
Self-referential formula
For every number 
 
 
 
  and every formula 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a free variable, we define 
 
 
 
 , a relation between two numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , such that it corresponds to the statement "
 
 
 
 
  is not the Gödel number of a proof of 
 
 
 
 ". Here, 
 
 
 
  can be understood as 
 
 
 
  with its own Gödel number as its argument.
Note that 
 
 
 
  takes as an argument 
 
 
 
 
 , the Gödel number of 
 
 
 
 . In order to prove either 
 
 
 
 , or 
 
 
 
 , it is necessary to perform number-theoretic operations on 
 
 
 
  that mirror the following steps: decode the number 
 
 
 
 
  into the formula 
 
 
 
 , replace all occurrences of 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  with the number 
 
 
 
 , and then compute the Gödel number of the resulting formula 
 
 
 
 
 .
Note that for every specific number 
 
 
 
  and formula 
 
 
 
  is a straightforward (though complicated) arithmetical relation between two numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , building on the relation 
 
 
 
 
  defined earlier. Further, 
 
 
 
  is provable if the finite list of formulas encoded by 
 
 
 
  is not a proof of 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is provable if the finite list of formulas encoded by 
 
 
 
 
  is a proof of 
 
 
 
 . Given any numbers 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
 
  (but not both) is provable.
Any proof of 
 
 
 
  can be encoded by a Gödel number 
 
 
 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  does not hold. If 
 
 
 
  holds for all natural numbers 
 
 
 
 
 , then there is no proof of 
 
 
 
 . In other words, 
 
 
 
 , a formula about natural numbers, corresponds to "there is no proof of 
 
 
 
 ".
We now define the formula 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 
  is a free variable. The formula 
 
 
 
  itself has a Gödel number 
 
 
 
  as does every formula.
This formula has a free variable 
 
 
 
 . Suppose we replace it with 
 
 
 
 , the Gödel number of a formula 
 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is a free variable. Then, 
 
 
 
  corresponds to "there is no proof of 
 
 
 
 ", as we have seen.
Consider the formula 
 
 
 
 . This formula concerning the number 
 
 
 
 
  corresponds to "there is no proof of 
 
 
 
 ". We have here the self-referential feature that is crucial to the proof: A formula of the formal theory that somehow relates to its own provability within that formal theory. Very informally, 
 
 
 
  says: "I am not provable".
We will now show that neither the formula 
 
 
 
 , nor its negation 
 
 
 
 , is provable.
Suppose 
 
 
 
 
  is provable. Let 
 
 
 
  be the Gödel number of a proof of 
 
 
 
 . Then, as seen earlier, the formula 
 
 
 
  is provable. Proving both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
  violates the consistency of the formal theory. We therefore conclude that 
 
 
 
  is not provable.
Consider any number 
 
 
 
 . Suppose 
 
 
 
  is provable. Then, 
 
 
 
  must be the Gödel number of a proof of 
 
 
 
 
 . But we have just proved that 
 
 
 
  is not provable. Since either 
 
 
 
  or 
 
 
 
  must be provable, we conclude that, for all natural numbers 
 
 
 
  is provable.
Suppose the negation of 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
 , is provable. Proving both 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
 , for all natural numbers 
 
 
 
 , violates ω-consistency of the formal theory. Thus if the theory is ω-consistent, 
 
 
 
 
  is not provable.
We have sketched a proof showing that:
For any formal, recursively enumerable (i.e. effectively generated) theory of Peano Arithmetic,

if it is consistent, then there exists an unprovable formula (in the language of that theory).
 


if it is ω-consistent, then there exists a formula such that both it and its negation are unprovable.
 

The truth of the Gödel sentence
The proof of Gödel's incompleteness theorem just sketched is proof-theoretic (also called syntactic) in that it shows that if certain proofs exist (a proof of 
 
 
 
  or its negation) then they can be manipulated to produce a proof of a contradiction. This makes no appeal to whether 
 
 
 
  is "true", only to whether it is provable. Truth is a model-theoretic, or semantic, concept, and is not equivalent to provability except in special cases.
By analyzing the situation of the above proof in more detail, it is possible to obtain a conclusion about the truth of 
 
 
 
  in the standard model ℕ of natural numbers. As just seen, 
 
 
 
  is provable for each natural number 
 
 
 
 
 , and is thus true in the model ℕ. Therefore, within this model,


 
  holds. This is what the statement "
 
 
 
  is true" usually refers to—the sentence is true in the intended model. It is not true in every model, however: If it were, then by Gödel's completeness theorem it would be provable, which we have just seen is not the case.
Boolos's short proof
George Boolos (1998) vastly simplified the proof of the First Theorem, if one agrees that the theorem is equivalent to:

"There is no algorithm

 
  whose output contains all true sentences of arithmetic and no false ones."

"Arithmetic" refers to Peano or Robinson arithmetic, but the proof invokes no specifics of either, tacitly assuming that these systems allow '$n n$ abbreviate 
 
 
 
  successive applications of the successor function, starting from 
 
 
 
 
 . Boolos then asserts (the details are only sketched) that there exists a defined predicate 
 
 
 
  that comes out true iff an arithmetic formula containing 
 
 
 
  symbols names the number 
 
 
 
 . This proof sketch contains the only mention of Gödel numbering; Boolos merely assumes that every formula can be so numbered. Here, a formula 
 
 
names the number 
 
 
 
 
  iff the following is provable:



Boolos then defines the related predicates:













 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 the number of symbols appearing in 
 
 
 
 .



 
  formalizes Berry's paradox. The balance of the proof, requiring but 12 lines of text, shows that the sentence 
 
 
 
  is true for some number $n$, but no algorithm $M$ will identify it as true. Hence in arithmetic, truth outruns proof. QED.
The above predicates contain the only existential quantifiers appearing in the entire proof. The '


