


Jackknife resampling




Jackknife resampling

In statistics, the jackknife is a resampling technique especially useful for variance and bias estimation. The jackknife predates other common resampling methods such as the bootstrap. The jackknife estimator of a parameter is found by systematically leaving out each observation from a dataset and calculating the estimate and then finding the average of these calculations. Given a sample of size 
 
 
 
 
 , the jackknife estimate is found by aggregating the estimates of each 
 
 
 
  estimate in the sample.
The jackknife technique was developed by Maurice Quenouille (1949, 1956). John W. Tukey (1958) expanded on the technique and proposed the name "jackknife" since, like a Boy Scout's jackknife, it is a "rough and ready" tool that can solve a variety of problems even though specific problems may be more efficiently solved with a purpose-designed tool.
The jackknife is a linear approximation of the bootstrap.
Estimation
The jackknife estimate of a parameter can be found by estimating the parameter for each subsample omitting the ith observation to estimate the previously unknown value of a parameter (say 
 
 
 
 ).



Variance estimation
An estimate of the variance of an estimator can be calculated using the jackknife technique.



where 
 
 
 
 
  is the parameter estimate based on leaving out the ith observation, and 
 
 
 
  is the estimator based on all of the samples.
Bias estimation and correction
The jackknife technique can be used to estimate the bias of an estimator calculated over the entire sample. Say 
 
 
 
  is the calculated parameter of interest based on all 
 
 
 
  observations. Here,


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the estimation of parameter of interest based on sample omitting ith observation (jackknife estimator), and 
 
 
 
  is the mean jackknife estimator. The parameter bias estimate is,



This reduces bias by an order of magnitude, from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 .
This provides an estimated correction of bias due to the estimation method. The jackknife does not correct for a biased sample.
Notes
References







.

"
Category:Statistical terminology Category:Computational statistics Category:Data analysis Category:Statistical inference Category:Resampling (statistics)


