


Properties of polynomial roots




Properties of polynomial roots

In mathematics, a polynomial is an expression of the form


 
  where the  belong to some field, which, in this article, is always the field 
 
 
 
  of the complex numbers. The natural number 
 
 
 
  is known as the degree of the polynomial.
In the following, 
 
 
 
 
  will be used to represent the polynomial, so we have


 
  A root of the polynomial 
 
 
 
  is a solution of the equation

 
 , that is a complex number 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 
 .
The fundamental theorem of algebra combined with the factor theorem states that the polynomial p has n roots, if they are counted with their multiplicities.
This article concerns various properties of the roots of 
 
 
, essentially related to their location in the complex plane.
Continuous dependence of coefficients
The n roots of a polynomial of degree n depend continuously on the coefficients.
This result implies that the eigenvalues of a matrix depend continuously on the matrix. A proof can be found in a book of Tyrtyshnikov.1
The problem of approximating the roots given the coefficients is ill-conditioned. See, for example, Wilkinson's polynomial.
Complex conjugate root theorem
The complex conjugate root theorem states that if the coefficients of a polynomial are real, then the non-real roots appear in pairs of the type a ± ib.
For example, the equation x2 + 1 = 0 has roots ±i.
Radical conjugate roots
It can be proved that if a polynomial P(x) with rational coefficients has a + √b as a root, where a, b are rational and 
 
 
 
  is irrational, then a − √b is also a root. First observe that


 
  Denote this quadratic polynomial by D(x). Then, by the Euclidean division of polynomials,


 
  where c, d are rational numbers (by virtue of the fact that the coefficients of P(x) and D(x) are all rational). But a + √b is a root of P(x):


 
  It follows that c, d must be zero, since otherwise the final equality could be arranged to suggest the irrationality of rational values (and vice versa). Hence P(x) = D(x)Q(x), for some quotient polynomial Q(x), and D(x) is a factor of P(x).2
This property may be generalized as: If an irreducible polynomial P has a root in common with a polynomial Q, then P divides Q evenly.
Bounds on (complex) polynomial roots
Based on the Rouché theorem
A very general class of bounds on the magnitude of roots is implied by the Rouché theorem. If there is a positive real number R and a coefficient index k such that








then there are exactly k (counted with multiplicity) roots of absolute value less than R. For k=0,n there is always a solution to this inequality, for example

for k=n,





 
  or
 





are upper bounds for the size of all roots,
 


for k=0,





 
  or
 






are lower bounds for the size of all of the roots.

for all other indices, the function








is convex on the positive real numbers, thus the minimizing point is easy to determine numerically. If the minimal value is negative, one has found additional information on the location of the roots.
 

One can increase the separation of the roots and thus the ability to find additional separating circles from the coefficients, by applying the root squaring operation of the Dandelin-Graeffe iteration to the polynomial.
A different approach is by using the Gershgorin circle theorem applied to some companion matrix of the polynomial, as it is used in the Weierstraß–(Durand–Kerner) method. From initial estimates of the roots, that might be quite random, one gets unions of circles that contain the roots of the polynomial.
Other bounds
Useful upper bounds for the magnitudes of all of a polynomial's roots3 include the near optimal Fujiwara bound4



which is an improvement (as the geometric mean) of Kojima's bound:5



Other bounds are the Cauchy bound:6



and the Lagrange bound:78



or



These expressions return only bounds surpassing unity, so they cannot be used for some polynomials.
A tighter upper bound on the magnitudes of the roots is9



Without loss of generality we assume the polynomial to be monic with general term . Let { aj } be the set of negative coefficients. An upper bound for the positive real roots is given by the sum of the two largest numbers in the set { |aj|1/j }. This is an improvement on Fujiwara's bound which uses twice the maximum value of this set as its upper bound.
A similar bound also due to Lagrange holds for a polynomial with complex coefficients. Again assume the polynomial to be monic with general term . Then the upper bound for the absolute values of the roots is given by the sum of the two greatest values in the set { |ai|1/i }. Again this is an improvement on Fujiwara's bound which uses twice the maximum value of this set as its upper bound.
A third bound also due to Lagrange holds for a polynomial with real coefficients. Let the aixn-i be the general term of the polynomial with 
 
 
 
 . Let the first d terms of the polynomial have positive coefficients and let A be the maximum of these 
 
 
 
  coefficients. Then 1 + ( A / a0 )1/( 1 + d ) is an upper bound to the positive roots of the polynomial.
Sun and Hsieh obtained an improvement on Cauchy's bound.10 assume the polynomial is monic with general term . Sun and Hsieh showed that upper bounds  and  could be obtained from the following equations.


 is the positive root of the cubic equation



They also noted that 
Proof
Let 
 
 
 
  be a root of the polynomial



in order to prove the inequality ζ{{!}} ≤ Rp}} we can assume, of course, 
 
 
 
 . Writing the equation as



and using the Hölder's inequality we find



Now, if 
 
 
 
 , this is



thus



In the case 
 
 




thus



simplifying we get,



Therefore



holds, for all 
 
 
 
 
 .
Landau's inequality
Previous bounds are upper bounds for each root separately. Landau's inequality provides an upper bound for the absolute values of the product of the roots that have an absolute value greater than one. This bound for the product of roots is not much greater than the preceding bounds of each root separately.11
Let 
 
 
 
  be the 
 
 
 
  roots of the polynomial 
 
 
 
 , and


 
  Then



This bound is useful to bound the coefficients of a divisor of a polynomial: if


 
  is a divisor of 
 
 
 
 , then



Bounds on positive polynomial roots
There also exist bounds on just the positive roots of polynomials; these bounds were developed by Akritas, Strzeboński and Vigklas based on previous work by Doru Stefanescu. They are used in the computer algebra systems Mathematica, Sage, SymPy, Xcas etc.1213
Gauss–Lucas theorem
The Gauss–Lucas theorem states that the convex hull of the roots of a polynomial contains the roots of the derivative of the polynomial.
A sometimes useful corollary is that if all roots of a polynomial have positive real part, then so do the roots of all derivatives of the polynomial.
A related result is Bernstein's inequality. It states that for a polynomial P of degree n with derivative P′ we have



Polynomials with real roots
It is possible to determine the bounds of the roots of a polynomial using Samuelson's inequality. This method is due to a paper by Laguerre.14
Let 
 
 
 
  be a polynomial with all real roots. Then its roots are located in the interval with endpoints



Example: The polynomial 
 
 
 
  has four real roots −3, −2, −1 and 1. The above formula gives



thus its roots are contained in 
 
 
 
 .
Statistical repartition of the roots
The statistical properties of the roots of a random polynomial have been the subject of several studies. Let



be a random polynomial. If the coefficients ai are independently and identically distributed with a mean of zero, the real roots are mostly located near ±1. The complex roots can be shown to be on or close to the unit circle.
If the coefficients are Gaussian distributed with a mean of zero and variance of σ then the mean density of real roots is given by the Kac formula1516



where



When the coefficients are Gaussian distributed with a non zero mean and variance of σ, a similar but more complex formula is known.
Asymptotic results
For large n, a number of asymptotic formulae are known. For a fixed x



and



where m( x ) is the mean density of real roots. The expected number of real roots is



where C is a constant approximately equal to 0.6257358072 and O() is the order operator.
This result has been shown by Kac, Erdös and others to be insensitive to the actual distribution of coefficients. Numerical testing of this formula has confirmed these earlier results.
See also

Abel–Ruffini theorem
Content (algebra)
Descartes' rule of signs
Gauss–Lucas theorem
Halley's method
Hudde's rules
Jenkins–Traub algorithm
Laguerre's method
Marden's theorem
Newton's identities
Quadratic function#Upper bound on the magnitude of the roots
Rational root theorem
Sturm's theorem
Vieta's formulas

Notes

17

References



"
Category:Polynomials




↩
↩
Fujiwara M (1916) Über die obere Schranke des absoluten Betrages der Wurzeln einer algebraischen Gleichung, Tôhoku Math J 10: 167–171↩
Kojima T (1917) On the limits of the roots of an algebraic equation, Tôhoku Math J 11 119–127↩
Cauchy AL (1829) Exercises de mathematique. Oeuvres 2 (9) p122↩
Lagrange J–L (1798) Traite de la r'esolution des equations numeriques. Paris.↩
Hirst HP & Macey WT (1997) Bounding the roots of polynomials. Coll Math J 28 (4) 292↩
Cohen, Alan M., "Bounds for the roots of polynomial equations", Mathematical Gazette 93, March 2009, 87–88.↩
Sun YJ and Hsieh JG (1996) A note on circular bound of polynomial zeros, IEEE Trans Circuits Syst. I 43, 476-478↩
Mignotte, Maurice, "Some useful bounds". Computer algebra, 259–263, Springer, Vienna, 1983↩
↩
↩
.↩
Kac M (1943) Bull Am Math Soc 49, 314↩
Kac M (1948) Proc London Math Soc 50, 390↩
↩




