


Charles Loewner




Charles Loewner

Charles Loewner (29 May 1893 – 8 January 1968) was an American mathematician. His name was Karel Löwner in Czech and Karl Löwner in German.
Karl Loewner was born into a Jewish family in Lany, about 30 km from Prague, where his father Sigmund Löwner was a store owner.12
Loewner received his Ph.D. from the University of Prague in 1917 under supervision of Georg Pick. One of his central mathematical contributions is the proof of the Bieberbach conjecture in the first highly nontrivial case of the third coefficient. The technique he introduced, the Loewner differential equation, has had far-reaching implications in geometric function theory; it was used in the final solution of the Bieberbach conjecture by Louis de Branges in 1985. Loewner worked at the University of Berlin, University of Prague, University of Louisville, Brown University, Syracuse University and eventually at Stanford University. His students include Lipman Bers, Roger A. Horn, Adriano Garsia, and P. M. Pu.
Loewner's torus inequality
In 1949 Loewner proved his torus inequality, to the effect that every metric on the 2-torus satisfies the optimal inequality



where sys is its systole. The boundary case of equality is attained if and only if the metric is flat and homothetic to the so-called equilateral torus, i.e. torus whose group of deck transformations is precisely the hexagonal lattice spanned by the cube roots of unity in 
 
 
 
 .
Book by Loewner

Loewner, C.: Theory of continuous groups. Notes by H. Flanders and M. Protter. Mathematicians of Our Time 1, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.—London, 1971.

See also

Loewner differential equation
Schramm–Loewner evolution
Loop-erased random walk
Systolic geometry

References

Berger, Marcel: À l'ombre de Loewner. (French) Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 5 (1972), 241–260.
Loewner, Charles; Nirenberg, Louis: Partial differential equations invariant under conformal or projective transformations. Contributions to analysis (a collection of papers dedicated to Lipman Bers), pp. 245–272. Academic Press, New York, 1974.

External links

Stanford memorial resolution



"
Category:1893 births Category:1968 deaths Category:20th-century American mathematicians Category:Czech mathematicians Category:Mathematical analysts Category:Jewish scientists



Loewner Biography
2.2 Charles Loewner




