


Jackson's inequality




Jackson's inequality

In approximation theory, Jackson's inequality is an inequality bounding the value of function's best approximation by algebraic or trigonometric polynomials in terms of the modulus of continuity or modulus of smoothness of the function or of its derivatives.1 Informally speaking, the smoother the function is, the better it can be approximated by polynomials.
Statement: trigonometric polynomials
For trigonometric polynomials, the following was proved by Dunham Jackson:
Theorem 1: If 
 
 
 
  is an 
 
 
 
  times differentiable periodic function such that



then, for every positive integer 
 
 
 
 , there exists a trigonometric polynomial

 
  of degree at most 
 
 
 
  such that



where 
 
 
 
  depends only on 
 
 
 
 .
The Akhiezer–Krein–Favard theorem gives the sharp value of 
 
 
 
  (called the Akhiezer–Krein–Favard constant):



Jackson also proved the following generalisation of Theorem 1:
Theorem 2: Denote by 
 
 
 
  the modulus of continuity of the 
 
 
 
 -th derivative of 
 
 
 
  with the step 
 
 
 
 . Then one can find a trigonometric polynomial

 
  of degree 
 
 
 
  such that



An even more general result of four authors can be formulated as the following Jackson theorem.
Theorem 3: For every natural number 
 
 
 
 , if 
 
 
 
  is 
 
 
 
 -periodic continuous function, there exists a trigonometric polynomial

 
  of degree 
 
 
 
  such that



where constant 
 
 
 
  depends on 
 
 
 
 , and 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
 
 -th order modulus of smoothness.
For 
 
 
 
  this result was proved by Dunham Jackson. Antoni Zygmund proved the inequality in the case when 
 
 
 
  in 1945. Naum Akhiezer proved the theorem in the case 
 
 
 
  in 1956. For 
 
 
 
  this result was established by Sergey Stechkin in 1967.
Further remarks
Generalisations and extensions are called Jackson-type theorems. A converse to Jackson's inequality is given by Bernstein's theorem. See also constructive function theory.
References
External links




"
Category:Approximation theory Category:Inequalities Category:Theorems in approximation theory








