


Sophomore's dream




Sophomore's dream

In mathematics, sophomore's dream is a name occasionally used for the identities (especially the first)


 
 
  discovered in 1697 by Johann Bernoulli.
The name "sophomore's dream", which appears in , is in contrast to the name "freshman's dream" which is given to the incorrect1 equation . The sophomore's dream has a similar too-good-to-be-true feel, but is in fact true.
Proof
 We prove the second identity; the first is completely analogous.
The key ingredients of the proof are:

Write xx = exp(x log x).
Expand exp(x log x) using the power series for exp.
Integrate termwise.
Integrate by substitution.

Expand xx as



Therefore we have 
 
 

By uniform convergence of the power series, we may interchange summation and integration



To evaluate the above integrals we perform the change of variable in the integral

 
 , with 
 
 
 
 , giving us


 
  By the well-known Euler's integral identity for the Gamma function


 
  so that:



Summing these (and changing indexing so it starts at n = 1 instead of n = 0) yields the formula.
Historical proof
The original proof, given in , and presented in modernized form in , differs from the one above in how the termwise integral 
 
 
 
  is computed, but is otherwise the same, omitting technical details to justify steps (such as termwise integration). Rather than integrating by substitution, yielding the Gamma function (which was not yet known), Bernoulli used integration by parts to iteratively compute these terms.
The integration by parts proceeds as follows, varying the two exponents independently to obtain a recursion. An indefinite integral is computed initially, omitting the constant of integration

 
  both because this was done historically, and because it drops out when computing the definite integral. One may integrate 
 
 
 
  by taking u = (ln x)n and dv = xm dx, which yields:



(also in the list of integrals of logarithmic functions). This reduces the power on the logarithm in the integrand by 1 (from 
 
 
 
  to 
 
 
 
 ) and thus one can compute the integral inductively, as



where (n) i denotes the falling factorial; there is a finite sum because the induction stops at 0, since n is an integer.
In this case m = n, and they are integers, so



Integrating from 0 to 1, all the terms vanish except the last term at 1,2 which yields:



From a modern point of view, this is (up to a scale factor) equivalent to computing Euler's integral identity for the Gamma function, 
 
 
 
  on a different domain (corresponding to changing variables by substitution), as Euler's identity itself can also be computed via an analogous integration by parts.
See Also

Series (mathematics)

Notes
References
Formula

Johann Bernoulli, 1697, collected in Johannis Bernoulli, Opera omnia, vol. 3, pp. 376–381


OEIS,  and 




Sophomore's dream. 200,000 digits of the first constant

Function

Literature for x^x and Sophomore's Dream, Tetration Forum, 03/02/2010
The Coupled Exponential, Jay A. Fantini, Gilbert C. Kloepfer, 1998
Sophomore's Dream Function, Jean Jacquelin, 2010, 13 pp.



"
Category:Integrals



Incorrect unless one is working over a field or unital commutative ring of prime characteristic n or a factor of n. The correct result is given by the binomial theorem.↩
All the terms vanish at 0 because 
 
 
 
  by l'Hôpital's rule (Bernoulli omitted this technicality), and all but the last term vanish at 1 since ln(1) = 0.↩




