


Vector measure




Vector measure

In mathematics, a vector measure is a function defined on a family of sets and taking vector values satisfying certain properties. It is a generalization of the concept of finite measure, which takes nonnegative real values only.
Definitions and first consequences
Given a field of sets

 
  and a Banach space

 
 , a finitely additive vector measure (or measure, for short) is a function 
 
 
 
  such that for any two disjoint sets

 
  and 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  one has



A vector measure 
 
 
 
  is called countably additive if for any sequence

 
  of disjoint sets in 
 
 
 
  such that their union is in 
 
 
 
  it holds that



with the series on the right-hand side convergent in the norm of the Banach space 
 
 

It can be proved that an additive vector measure 
 
 
 
  is countably additive if and only if for any sequence 
 
 
 
  as above one has



where 
 
 
 
  is the norm on 
 
 

Countably additive vector measures defined on sigma-algebras are more general than finite measures, finite signed measures, and complex measures, which are countably additive functions taking values respectively on the real interval 
 
 
 
  the set of real numbers, and the set of complex numbers.
Examples
Consider the field of sets made up of the interval 
 
 
 
  together with the family 
 
 
 
  of all Lebesgue measurable sets contained in this interval. For any such set 
 
 
 
 , define



where 
 
 
 
  is the indicator function of 
 
 
 
  Depending on where 
 
 
 
  is declared to take values, we get two different outcomes.



 
  viewed as a function from 
 
 
 
  to the Lp-space

 
  is a vector measure which is not countably-additive.




 
  viewed as a function from 
 
 
 
  to the Lp-space 
 
 
 
  is a countably-additive vector measure.

Both of these statements follow quite easily from the criterion (*) stated above.
The variation of a vector measure
Given a vector measure 
 
 
 
  the variation

 
  of 
 
 
 
  is defined as



where the supremum is taken over all the partitions



of 
 
 
 
  into a finite number of disjoint sets, for all 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . Here, 
 
 
 
  is the norm on 
 
 

The variation of 
 
 
 
  is a finitely additive function taking values in 
 
 
 
  It holds that



for any 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  If 
 
 
 
  is finite, the measure 
 
 
 
  is said to be of bounded variation. One can prove that if 
 
 
 
  is a vector measure of bounded variation, then 
 
 
 
  is countably additive if and only if 
 
 
 
  is countably additive.
Lyapunov's theorem
In the theory of vector measures, Lyapunov's theorem states that the range of a (non-atomic) vector measure is closed and convex.123 In fact, the range of a non-atomic vector measure is a zonoid (the closed and convex set that is the limit of a convergent sequence of zonotopes).4 It is used in economics,5 This paper builds on two papers by Aumann:


 Vind's article was noted by  with this comment:

The concept of a convex set (i.e., a set containing the segment connecting any two of its points) had repeatedly been placed at the center of economic theory before 1964. It appeared in a new light with the introduction of integration theory in the study of economic competition: If one associates with every agent of an economy an arbitrary set in the commodity space and if one averages those individual sets over a collection of insignificant agents, then the resulting set is necessarily convex. [Debreu appends this footnote: "On this direct consequence of a theorem of A. A. Lyapunov, see ."] But explanations of the ... functions of prices ... can be made to rest on the convexity of sets derived by that averaging process. Convexity in the commodity space obtained by aggregation over a collection of insignificant agents is an insight that economic theory owes ... to integration theory. [Italics added]

 in ("bang–bang") control theory,6789 and in statistical theory.10 Lyapunov's theorem has been proved by using the Shapley–Folkman lemma,11 which has been viewed as a discrete analogue of Lyapunov's theorem.1213 14
References
Books



Kluvánek, I., Knowles, G, Vector Measures and Control Systems, North-Holland Mathematics Studies 20, Amsterdam, 1976.



See also

Bochner integral

"
Category:Measures (measure theory) Category:Functional analysis Category:Control theory Category:Mathematical and quantitative methods (economics)



Kluvánek, I., Knowles, G., Vector Measures and Control Systems, North-Holland Mathematics Studies 20, Amsterdam, 1976.↩
↩
↩

↩


↩

↩
↩

↩
Page 210: ↩




