


Multivariate interpolation




Multivariate interpolation

In numerical analysis, multivariate interpolation or spatial interpolation is interpolation on functions of more than one variable.
The function to be interpolated is known at given points 
 
 
 
  and the interpolation problem consist of yielding values at arbitrary points 
 
 
 
 .
Regular grid
For function values known on a regular grid (having predetermined, not necessarily uniform, spacing), the following methods are available.
Any dimension

Nearest-neighbor interpolation

2 dimensions

Barnes interpolation
Bilinear interpolation
Bicubic interpolation
Bézier surface
Lanczos resampling
Delaunay triangulation
Inverse distance weighting
Kriging
Natural neighbor
Spline interpolation

Bitmap resampling is the application of 2D multivariate interpolation in image processing.
Three of the methods applied on the same dataset, from 16 values located at the black dots. The colours represent the interpolated values.
Image:Nearest2DInterpolExample.png|Nearest neighbor Image:BilinearInterpolExample.png|Bilinear Image:BicubicInterpolationExample.png|Bicubic
See also Padua points, for polynomial interpolation in two variables.
3 dimensions

Trilinear interpolation
Tricubic interpolation

See also bitmap resampling.
Tensor product splines for N dimensions
Catmull-Rom splines can be easily generalized to any number of dimensions. The cubic Hermite spline article will remind you that 
 
 
 
  for some 4-vector 
 
 
 
  which is a function of x alone, where 
 
 
 
  is the value at 
 
 
 
  of the function to be interpolated. Rewrite this approximation as


 
  This formula can be directly generalized to N dimensions:1


 
  Note that similar generalizations can be made for other types of spline interpolations, including Hermite splines. In regards to efficiency, the general formula can in fact be computed as a composition of successive 
 
 
 
 -type operations for any type of tensor product splines, as explained in the tricubic interpolation article. However, the fact remains that if there are 
 
 
 
  terms in the 1-dimensional 
 
 
 
 -like summation, then there will be 
 
 
 
  terms in the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional summation.
Irregular grid (scattered data)
Schemes defined for scattered data on an irregular grid should all work on a regular grid, typically reducing to another known method.

Nearest-neighbor interpolation
Triangulated irregular network-based natural neighbor
Triangulated irregular network-based linear interpolation (a type of piecewise linear function)
Inverse distance weighting
Kriging
Radial basis function
Thin plate spline
Polyharmonic spline (the thin-plate-spline is a special case of a polyharmonic spline)
Least-squares spline

Notes


External links

Example C++ code for several 1D, 2D and 3D spline interpolations (including Catmull-Rom splines).
Multi-dimensional Hermite Interpolation and Approximation, Prof. Chandrajit Bajaja, Purdue University

"
Category:Interpolation  



Two hierarchies of spline interpolations. Practical algorithms for multivariate higher order splines




