


Gauss–Lucas theorem




Gauss–Lucas theorem

In complex analysis, a branch of mathematics, the Gauss–Lucas theorem gives a geometrical relation between the roots of a polynomial P and the roots of its derivative P'. The set of roots of a real or complex polynomial is a set of points in the complex plane. The theorem states that the roots of P' all lie within the convex hull of the roots of P, that is the smallest convex polygon containing the roots of P. When P has a single root then this convex hull is a single point and when the roots lie on a line then the convex hull is a segment of this line. The Gauss–Lucas theorem, named after Carl Friedrich Gauss and Félix Lucas is similar in spirit to Rolle's theorem.
Formal statement
If P is a (nonconstant) polynomial with complex coefficients, all zeros of P' belong to the convex hull of the set of zeros of P.1
Special cases
It is easy to see that if P(x) = ax2 + bx + ''c '' is a second degree polynomial, the zero of P' (x) = 2ax + b is the average of the roots of P. In that case, the convex hull is the line segment with the two roots as endpoints and it is clear that the average of the roots is the middle point of the segment.
For a third degree complex polynomial P (cubic function) with three distinct zeros, Marden's theorem states that the zeros of P' are the foci of the Steiner inellipse which is the unique ellipse tangent to the midpoints of the triangle formed by the zeros of P.
For a fourth degree complex polynomial P (quartic function) with four distinct zeros forming a concave quadrilateral, one of the zeros of P lies within the convex hull of the other three; all three zeros of P' lie in two of the three triangles formed by the interior zero of P and two others zeros of P.2
In addition, if a polynomial of degree n of real coefficients has n distinct real zeros 
 
 
 
  which is the convex hull of the set of roots.
The convex hull of the roots of the polynomial 
 
 
 
  particularly includes the point 
 
 
 
 .
Proof
Over the complex numbers, P is a product of prime factors



where the complex numbers 
 
 
 
  are the – not necessary distinct – zeros of the polynomial P, the complex number 
 
 
 
  is the leading coefficient of P and ''n '' is the degree of P. Let ''z '' be any complex number for which 
 
 
 
 . Then we have for the logarithmic derivative



In particular, if z is a zero of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then



or



This may also be written as



Taking their conjugates, we see that 
 
 
 
  is a weighted sum with positive coefficients that sum to one, or the barycenter on affine coordinates, of the complex numbers 
 
 
 
  (with different mass assigned on each root whose weights collectively sum to 1).
If 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
 , and is still a convex combination of the roots of $P$.
See also

Marden's theorem
Bôcher's theorem
Sendov's conjecture
Rational root theorem
Routh–Hurwitz theorem
Hurwitz's theorem (complex analysis)
Descartes' rule of signs
Rouché's theorem
Sturm's theorem
Properties of polynomial roots
Gauss's lemma (polynomial)
Polynomial function theorems for zeros
Content (algebra)

Notes
References

Morris Marden, Geometry of Polynomials, AMS, 1966.

External links

Lucas–Gauss Theorem by Bruce Torrence, the Wolfram Demonstrations Project.

"
Category:Convex analysis Category:Articles containing proofs Category:Theorems in complex analysis Category:Polynomials



Marden (1966), Theorem (6,1).
A. Rüdinger (2014), http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0689




