


Irrational rotation




Irrational rotation

In the mathematical theory of dynamical systems, an irrational rotation is a map



where θ is an irrational number. Under the identification of a circle with R/Z, or with the interval [0, 1] with the boundary points glued together, this map becomes a rotation of a circle by a proportion θ of a full revolution (i.e., an angle of 2πθ radians). Since θ is irrational, the rotation has infinite order in the circle group and the map Tθ has no periodic orbits.
Alternatively, we can use multiplicative notation for an irrational rotation by introducing the map



The relationship between the additive and multiplicative notations is the group isomorphism


 
 .
It can be shown that  is an isometry.
There is a strong distinction in circle rotations that depends on whether  is rational or irrational. Rational rotations are less interesting examples of dynamical systems due to the fact that if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , then 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 . It can also be shown that 
 
 
 
  when 
 
 
 
 .
Significance
Irrational rotations form a fundamental example in the theory of dynamical systems. According to the Denjoy theorem, every orientation-preserving -diffeomorphism of the circle with an irrational rotation number  is topologically conjugate to . An irrational rotation is a measure-preserving ergodic transformation, but it is not mixing. The Poincaré map for the dynamical system associated with the Kronecker foliation on a torus with angle  is the irrational rotation by . C*-algebras associated with irrational rotations, known as irrational rotation algebras, have been extensively studied.
Properties

If  is irrational, then the orbit of element of 
 
 
 
  under the rotation  is dense in 
 
 
 
 . Therefore, irrational rotations are topologically transitive.
If  is irrational, then  is uniquely ergodic.
Irrational (and rational) rotations are not topologically mixing.
Irrational rotations are ergodic with respect to the Lebesgue measure.
Irrational rotations are uniquely ergodic, with the Lebesgue measure serving as the unique invariant probability measure.
Suppose . Since  is ergodic,

 
 .

Generalizations

Circle rotations are examples of group translations.
For a general orientation preserving homomorphism  of  to itself we call a homeomorphism 
 
 
 
  a lift of  if 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 .1

Applications

Skew Products over Rotations of the Circle: In 19692 William A. Veech constructed examples of minimal and not uniquely ergodic dynamical systems as follows: "Take two copies of the unit circle and mark off segment  of length  in the counterclockwise direction on each one with endpoint at 0. Now take  irrational and consider the following dynamical system. Start with a point , say in the first circle. Rotate counterclockwise by  until the first time the orbit lands in ; then switch to the corresponding point in the second circle, rotate by  until the first time the point lands in ; switch back to the first circle and so forth. Veech showed that if  is irrational, then there exists irrational  for which this system is minimal and the Lebesgue measure is not uniquely ergodic."3

See also

Bernoulli map
Modular arithmetic
Siegel disc
Toeplitz algebra
Phase locking (circle map)

References
 4 5 }}
Further reading

C. E. Silva, Invitation to ergodic theory, Student Mathematical Library, vol 42, American Mathematical Society, 2008 ISBN 978-0-8218-4420-5

"
Category:Dynamical systems






↩
↩




