


Differential graded category




Differential graded category

In mathematics, especially homological algebra, a differential graded category or DG category for short, is a category whose morphism sets are endowed with the additional structure of a differential graded Z-module.
In detail, this means that 
 
 
 
 , the morphisms from any object A to another object B of the category is a direct sum 
 
 
 
  and there is a differential d on this graded group, i.e. for all n a linear map 
 
 
 
 , which has to satisfy 
 
 
 
 . This is equivalent to saying that 
 
 
 
  is a cochain complex. Furthermore, the composition of morphisms 
 
 
 
  is required to be a map of complexes, and for all objects A of the category, one requires 
 
 
 
 .
See also

Differential algebra
Graded (mathematics)
Graded category

Examples

Any additive category may be considered to be a DG-category by imposing the trivial grading (i.e. all 
 
 
 
  vanish for n ≠ 0) and trivial differential (d = 0).
A little bit more sophisticated is the category of complexes 
 
 
 
  over an additive category 
 
 
 
 . By definition, 
 
 
 
  is the group of maps 
 
 
 
  which do not need to respect the differentials of the complexes A and B, i.e. 
 
 
 
 . The differential of such a morphism 
 
 
 
  of degree n is defined to be 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  are the differentials of A and B, respectively. This applies to the category of complexes of quasi-coherent sheaves on a scheme over a ring.
A DG-category with one object is the same as a DG-ring. A DG-ring over a field is called DG-algebra, or differential graded algebra.

Further properties
The category of small dg-categories can be endowed with a model category structure such that weak equivalences are those functors that induce an equivalence of derived categories.1
Given a dg-category C over some ring R, there is a notion of smoothness and properness of C that reduces to the usual notions of smooth and proper morphisms in case C is the category of quasi-coherent sheaves on some scheme X over R.
References





External links

http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/dg-category

"
Category:Homological algebra



↩




