


Artin–Rees lemma




Artin–Rees lemma

In mathematics, the Artin–Rees lemma is a basic result about modules over a Noetherian ring, along with results such as the Hilbert basis theorem. It was proved in the 1950s in independent works by the mathematicians Emil Artin and David Rees; a special case was known to Oscar Zariski prior to their work.
One consequence of the lemma is the Krull intersection theorem. The result is also used to prove the exactness property of completion .
Statement
Let I be an ideal in a Noetherian ring R; let M be a finitely generated R-module and let N a submodule of M. Then there exists an integer k ≥ 1 so that, for n ≥ k,



Proof
The lemma immediately follows from the fact that R is "Noetherian" once necessary notions and notations are set up.1
For any ring R and an ideal I in R, we set 
 
 
 
  (B for blow-up.) We say a decreasing sequence of submodules 
 
 
 
  is an I-filtration if 
 
 
 
 ; moreover, it is stable if 
 
 
 
  for sufficiently large n. If M is given an I-filtration, we set 
 
 
 
 ; it is a graded module over 
 
 
 
 .
Now, let M be a R-module with the I-filtration 
 
 
 
  by finitely generated R-modules. We make an observation


 
  is a finitely generated module over 
 
 
 
  if and only if the filtration is I-stable. Indeed, if the filtration is I-stable, then 
 
 
 
  is generated by the first 
 
 
 
  terms 
 
 
 
  and those terms are finitely generated; thus, 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated. Conversely, if it is finitely generated, say, by 
 
 
 
 , then, for 
 
 
 
 , each f in 
 
 
 
  can be written as


 
  with the generators 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
 . That is, 
 
 
 
 .
We can now prove the lemma, assuming R is Noetherian. Let 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  are an I-stable filtration. Thus, by the observation, 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated over 
 
 
 
 . But 
 
 
 
  is a Noetherian ring since R is. (The ring 
 
 
 
  is called the Rees algebra.) Thus, 
 
 
 
  is a Noetherian module and any submodule is finitely generated over 
 
 
 
 ; in particular, 
 
 
 
  is finitely generated when N is given the induced filtration; i.e., 
 
 
 
 . Then the induced filtration is I-stable again by the observation.
Proof of Krull's intersection theorem
Besides the use in completion of a ring, a typical application of the lemma is the proof of the Krull's intersection theorem, which says
 
 
 
  for a proper ideal I in a Noetherian local ring. By the lemma applied to the intersection N, we find k such that for 
 
 
 
 ,








But then 
 
 
 
  and thus 
 
 
 
  by Nakayama.
References


Eisenbud, David, Commutative Algebra with a View Toward Algebraic Geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 150, Springer-Verlag, 1995, ISBN 0-387-94268-8.

External links



"
Category:Commutative algebra Category:Lemmas Category:Module theory Category:Ring theory








