


Vapor quality




Vapor quality

In thermodynamics, vapor quality is the mass fraction in a saturated mixture that is vapour;1 i.e. saturated vapour has a "quality" of 100%, and saturated liquid has a "quality" of 0%. Vapour quality is an intensive property which can be used in conjunction with other independent intensive properties to specify the thermodynamic state of the working fluid of a thermodynamic system. It has no meaning for substances which are not saturated mixtures (i.e., compressed liquids or superheated fluids).
Quality 
 
 
 
  can be calculated by dividing the mass of the vapor by the mass of the total mixture:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  indicates mass.
Another definition used by chemical engineers defines quality (q) of a fluid as the fraction that is saturated liquid.2 By this definition, a saturated liquid has q = 0. A saturated vapor has q = 1.3
Calculation
The above expression for vapor quality can be expressed as:


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is equal to either specific enthalpy, specific entropy, specific volume or specific internal energy, 
 
 
 
  is the value of the specific property of saturated liquid state and 
 
 
 
  is the value of the specific property of the substance in dome zone, which we can find both liquid 
 
 
 
  and vapor 
 
 
 
 
 .
Another expression of the same concept is:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the vapor mass and 
 
 
 
  is the liquid mass.
Steam quality
The genesis of the idea of vapor quality was derived from the origins of thermodynamics, where an important application was the steam engine. Low quality steam would contain a high moisture percentage and therefore damage components more easily. High quality steam would not corrode the steam engine. Steam engines use water vapor (steam) to drive pistons or turbines which create work. The quality of steam can be quantitatively described by steam quality (steam dryness), the proportion of saturated steam in a saturated water/steam mixture. I.e., a steam quality of 0 indicates 100% water while a steam quality of 1 (or 100%) indicates 100% steam.
The quality of steam on which steam whistles are blown is variable and may affect frequency. Steam quality determines the velocity of sound, which declines with decreasing dryness due to the inertia of the liquid phase. Also, the specific volume of steam for a given temperature decreases with decreasing dryness.45
Steam quality is very useful in determining enthalpy of saturated water/steam mixtures since the enthalpy of steam (gaseous state) is many orders of magnitude higher than enthalpy of water (liquid state).
See also

Vapor
Vapor pressure
Cannabis consumption
Electronic cigarette
Water vapor

References
"
Category:Water Category:Liquid water Category:Water in gas Category:Steam power Category:Physical quantities





Perry's Chemical Engineers' Handbook (7th Edition), p 13-29
Soo, Shao L. (1989). Particulates and Continuum: A Multiphase Fluid Dynamics. CRC Press.
Menon, E. Sashi. (2005). Piping Calculations Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill.




