   Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase      Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase   Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase () is an enzyme that catalyzes the fourth step in the de novo  biosynthesis of pyrimidine . It catalyses the oxidation of dihydroorotate to orotate :   (S)-dihydroorotate + O 2    ⇌   normal-⇌   \rightleftharpoons   orotate + H 2 O 2    Image:4,5-Dihydroorotic acid.svg| 4,5-Dihydroorotic  acid  Image:Orotic acid.svg| Orotic  acid . Note the double bond in the ring.  Human dihydroorotate dehydrogenase is a ubiquitous FMN  flavoprotein . In bacteria (gene pyrD), it is located on the inner side of the cytosolic membrane . In some yeasts, such as in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (gene URA1), it is a cytosolic protein, whereas, in other eukaryotes, it is found in the mitochondria. 1  Clinical significance  The immunomodulatory drugs teriflunomide and leflunomide have been shown to inhibit DHODH. Human DHODH has two domains: an alpha/beta-barrel domain containing the active site and an alpha-helical domain that forms the opening of a tunnel leading to the active site. Leflunomide has been shown to bind in this tunnel. 2 Leflunomide is being used for treatment of rheumatoid and psoriatic arthritis.  Mutations in this gene have been shown to cause Miller syndrome  3 also known as Genee-Wiedemann syndrome, Wildervanck-Smith syndrome or post axial acrofacial dystosis (POADS).  Model organisms  Model organisms have been used in the study of DHODH function. A conditional knockout mouse line called Dhodh tm1b(EUCOMM)Wtsi was generated at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute . 4 Male and female animals underwent a standardized phenotypic screen 5 to determine the effects of deletion. 6 7 8 9 Additional screens performed: - In-depth immunological phenotyping 10      Dhodh knockout mouse phenotype     Characteristic     All data available at. 11 12     Peripheral blood leukocytes 6 Weeks     Insulin     Haematology 6 Weeks     Homozygous viability at P14     Recessive lethal study     Body weight     Neurological assessment     Grip strength     Dysmorphology     Indirect calorimetry     Glucose tolerance test     Auditory brainstem response     DEXA     Radiography     Eye morphology     Clinical chemistry     Haematology 16 Weeks     Peripheral blood leukocytes 16 Weeks     Heart weight     Salmonella infection     Cytotoxic T Cell Function     Spleen Immunophenotyping     Mesenteric Lymph Node Immunophenotyping     Bone Marrow Immunophenotyping      .  References  Further reading     External links     "  Category:Protein domains  Category:Peripheral membrane proteins     ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩  ↩     