


Minimal polynomial (linear algebra)




Minimal polynomial (linear algebra)

In linear algebra, the minimal polynomial  of an 
 
 
matrix

 
  over a field

 
  is the monic polynomial

 
  over 
 
 
 
  of least degree such that 
 
 
 
 . Any other polynomial 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  is a (polynomial) multiple of .
The following three statements are equivalent:



 
  is a root of ,


 
  is a root of the characteristic polynomial  of 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  is an eigenvalue of matrix 
 
 
 
 .

The multiplicity of a root 
 
 
 
  of  is the largest power 
 
 
 
  such that  strictly contains . In other words, increasing the exponent up to 
 
 
 
  will give ever larger kernels, but further increasing 
 
 
 
  will just give the same kernel.
If the field 
 
 
 
  is not algebraically closed, then the minimal and characteristic polynomials need not factor according to their roots (in 
 
 
 
 ) alone, in other words they may have irreducible polynomial factors of degree greater than 
 
 
 
 . For irreducible polynomials 
 
 
 
  one has similar equivalences:



 
  divides ,


 
  divides ,
the kernel of 
 
 
 
  has dimension at least 
 
 
 
 .
the kernel of 
 
 
 
  has dimension at least 
 
 
 
 .

Like the characteristic polynomial, the minimal polynomial does not depend on the base field, in other words considering the matrix as one with coefficients in a larger field does not change the minimal polynomial. The reason is somewhat different from for the characteristic polynomial (where it is immediate from the definition of determinants), namely the fact that the minimal polynomial is determined by the relations of linear dependence between the powers of 
 
 
 
 : extending the base field will not introduce any new such relations (nor of course will it remove existing ones).
The minimal polynomial is often the same as the characteristic polynomial, but not always. For example, if 
 
 
 
  is a multiple  of the identity matrix, then its minimal polynomial is 
 
 
 
  since the kernel of  0}} is already the entire space; on the other hand its characteristic polynomial is  (the only eigenvalue is 
 
 
 
 , and the degree of the characteristic polynomial is always equal to the dimension of the space). The minimal polynomial always divides the characteristic polynomial, which is one way of formulating the Cayley–Hamilton theorem (for the case of matrices over a field).
Formal definition
Given an endomorphism

 
  on a finite-dimensional vector space

 
  over a field

 
 , let  be the set defined as



where 
 
 
 
  is the space of all polynomials over the field 
 
 
 
 .  is a proper ideal of 
 
 
 
 . Since 
 
 
 
  is a field, 
 
 
 
  is a principal ideal domain, thus any ideal is generated by a single polynomial, which is unique up to units in 
 
 
 
 . A particular choice among the generators can be made, since precisely one of the generators is monic. The minimal polynomial is thus defined to be the monic polynomial which generates . It is the monic polynomial of least degree in .
Applications
An endomorphism

 
  of a finite dimensional vector space over a field 
 
 
 
  is diagonalizable if and only if its minimal polynomial factors completely over 
 
 
 
  into distinct linear factors. The fact that there is only one factor 
 
 
 
  for every eigenvalue 
 
 
 
  means that the generalized eigenspace for 
 
 
 
  is the same as the eigenspace for 
 
 
 
 : every Jordan block has size 
 
 
 
 . More generally, if 
 
 
 
  satisfies a polynomial equation 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  factors into distinct linear factors over 
 
 
 
 , then it will be diagonalizable: its minimal polynomial is a divisor of 
 
 
 
  and therefore also factors into distinct linear factors. In particular one has:

 X k − 1}}: finite order endomorphisms of complex vector spaces are diagonalizable. For the special case 
 
 
 
  of involutions, this is even true for endomorphisms of vector spaces over any field of characteristic other than 
 
 
 
 , since  (X − 1)(X + 1)}} is a factorization into distinct factors over such a field. This is a part of representation theory of cyclic groups.
 X 2 − X {{=}} X(X − 1)}}: endomorphisms satisfying  φ}} are called projections, and are always diagonalizable (moreover their only eigenvalues are 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 ).
By contrast if  X k}} with 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  (a nilpotent endomorphism) is not necessarily diagonalizable, since  has a repeated root 
 
 
 
 .

These cases can also be proved directly, but the minimal polynomial gives a unified perspective and proof.
Computation
For a vector 
 
 
 
  in 
 
 
 
  define:



This definition satisfies the properties of a proper ideal. Let  be the monic polynomial which generates it.
Properties
; otherwise a recursive computation of 
 
 
 
  suffices to find . }}
Example
Define 
 
 
 
  to be the endomorphism of  with matrix, on the canonical basis,



Taking the first canonical basis vector  and its repeated images by 
 
 
 
  one obtains



of which the first three are easily seen to be linearly independent, and therefore span all of . The last one then necessarily is a linear combination of the first three, in fact

 −4T 2⋅e1 − T⋅e1 + e1}},
 

so that:

 X 3 + 4X 2 + X − 1}}.
 

This is in fact also the minimal polynomial  and the characteristic polynomial : indeed  divides  which divides , and since the first and last are of degree 
 
 
 
  and all are monic, they must all be the same. Another reason is that in general if any polynomial in 
 
 
 
  annihilates a vector 
 
 
 
 , then it also annihilates 
 
 
 
  (just apply 
 
 
 
  to the equation that says that it annihilates 
 
 
 
 ), and therefore by iteration it annihilates the entire space generated by the iterated images by 
 
 
 
  of 
 
 
 
 ; in the current case we have seen that for  e1}} that space is all of , so  0}}. Indeed one verifies for the full matrix that  is the null matrix:



References



"
Category:Matrix theory Category:Polynomials


