


1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ⋯




1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ⋯

(Figure)
The first 15,000 partial sums of 0 + 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ...

In mathematics, 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ··· is the infinite series whose terms are the successive positive integers, given alternating signs. Using sigma summation notation the sum of the first m terms of the series can be expressed as



The infinite series diverges, meaning that its sequence of partial sums, , does not tend towards any finite limit. Nonetheless, in the mid-18th century, Leonhard Euler wrote what he admitted to be a paradoxical equation:



A rigorous explanation of this equation would not arrive until much later. Starting in 1890, Ernesto Cesàro, Émile Borel and others investigated well-defined methods to assign generalized sums to divergent series—including new interpretations of Euler's attempts. Many of these summability methods easily assign to  a "sum" of 
 
 
 
  after all. Cesàro summation is one of the few methods that do not sum , so the series is an example where a slightly stronger method, such as Abel summation, is required.
The series 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ... is closely related to Grandi's series . Euler treated these two as special cases of  for arbitrary n, a line of research extending his work on the Basel problem and leading towards the functional equations of what are now known as the Dirichlet eta function and the Riemann zeta function.
Explanation of the paradox
In mathematics, if a set of rules is consistent with itself, then one can work with those rules. According to the definitions of "sum" and "equals" that most people are used to, it makes no sense to say that 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ... equals anything. However, there are other, somewhat more generous, ways of defining "sum" and "equals" that don't contradict our ordinary, finite arithmetic, but which produce some additional surprising results with infinite sums. One way to see how that could possibly work is if the series (1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ...) is added to itself four times in just the right way, causing all the positive terms and all the negative terms to cancel out, except for one of the initial 1's. Thus, as four copies of the series add up to 1, the series itself would equal 1/4.
  1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + 5 - 6 + . . . . . 
     + 1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + 5 - . . . . . 
     + 1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + 5 - . . . . . . 
         + 1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + . . . . . . . 
 --------------------------------------------
 = 1 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + . . . 
Divergence
The series' terms (1, −2, 3, −4, ...) do not approach 0; therefore  diverges by the term test. For later reference, it will also be useful to see the divergence on a fundamental level. By definition, the convergence or divergence of an infinite series is determined by the convergence or divergence of its sequence of partial sums, and the partial sums of  are:1

1 = 1,
 
1 − 2 = −1,
 
1 − 2 + 3 = 2,
 
1 − 2 + 3 − 4 = −2,
 
1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + 5 = 3,
 
1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + 5 − 6 = −3,
 
...
 

This sequence is notable for including every integer exactly once—even 0 if one counts the empty partial sum—and thereby establishing the countability of the set 
 
 
 
 
  of integers.2 The sequence of partial sums clearly shows that the series does not converge to a particular number (for any proposed limit x, we can find a point beyond which the subsequent partial sums are all outside the interval [x-1, x+1]), so  diverges.
Heuristics for summation
Stability and linearity
Since the terms 1, −2, 3, −4, 5, −6, ... follow a simple pattern, the series  can be manipulated by shifting and term-by-term addition to yield a numerical value. If it can make sense to write  for some ordinary number s, the following manipulations argue for 3



 So 
 
 
 
 . This derivation is depicted graphically on the right.
Although 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ... does not have a sum in the usual sense, the equation  can be supported as the most natural answer if such a sum is to be defined. A generalized definition of the "sum" of a divergent series is called a summation method or summability method, which sums some subset of all possible series. There are many different methods (some of which are described below) that are characterized by the properties that they share with ordinary summation. What the above manipulations actually prove is the following: Given any summability method that is linear and stable and sums the series , the sum it produces is 
 
 
 
 .4 Furthermore, since



such a method must also sum Grandi's series as 5
Cauchy product
In 1891, Ernesto Cesàro expressed hope that divergent series would be rigorously brought into calculus, pointing out, "One already writes  and asserts that both the sides are equal to 
 
 
 
 ."6 For Cesàro, this equation was an application of a theorem he had published the previous year, one that may be identified as the first theorem in the history of summable divergent series. The details on his summation method are below; the central idea is that  is the Cauchy product of  with .
 The Cauchy product of two infinite series is defined even when both of them are divergent. In the case where Σan = Σbn = Σ(−1)n, the terms of the Cauchy product are given by the finite diagonal sums



The product series is then



Thus a summation method that respects the Cauchy product of two series and sums  will also sum . With the result of the previous section, this implies an equivalence between summability of  and  with methods that are linear, stable, and respect the Cauchy product.
Cesàro's theorem is a subtle example. The series  is Cesàro-summable in the weakest sense, called  while  requires a stronger form of Cesàro's theorem,7 being  Since all forms of Cesàro's theorem are linear and stable, the values of the sums are as we have calculated.
Specific methods
Cesàro and Hölder
(Figure)
Data about the (H, 2) sum of 
 
 


To find the (C, 1) Cesàro sum of 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ..., if it exists, one needs to compute the arithmetic means of the partial sums of the series. The partial sums are:

1, −1, 2, −2, 3, −3, ...,
 

and the arithmetic means of these partial sums are:

1, 0, 
 
 
 
 , 0, 
 
 
 
 , 0, 
 
 
 
 , ....
 

This sequence of means does not converge, so 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ... is not Cesàro summable.
There are two well-known generalizations of Cesàro summation: the conceptually simpler of these is the sequence of (H, n) methods for natural numbers n. The (H, 1) sum is Cesàro summation, and higher methods repeat the computation of means. Above, the even means converge to 
 
 
 
 , while the odd means are all equal to 0, so the means of the means converge to the average of 0 and 
 
 
 
 , namely 
 
 
 
 .8 So  is (H, 2) summable to 
 
 
 
 .
The "H" stands for Otto Hölder, who first proved in 1882 what mathematicians now think of as the connection between Abel summation and (H, n) summation;  was his first example.9 The fact that 
 
 
 
  is the (H, 2) sum of  guarantees that it is the Abel sum as well; this will also be proved directly below.
The other commonly formulated generalization of Cesàro summation is the sequence of (C, n) methods. It has been proven that (C, n) summation and (H, n) summation always give the same results, but they have different historical backgrounds. In 1887, Cesàro came close to stating the definition of (C, n) summation, but he gave only a few examples. In particular, he summed  to 
 
 
 
  by a method that may be rephrased as (C, n) but was not justified as such at the time. He formally defined the (C, n) methods in 1890 in order to state his theorem that the Cauchy product of a (C, n)-summable series and a (C, m)-summable series is (C, m + n + 1)-summable.10
Abel summation
 In a 1749 report, Leonhard Euler admits that the series diverges but prepares to sum it anyway:

Euler proposed a generalization of the word "sum" several times. In the case of  his ideas are similar to what is now known as Abel summation:

There are many ways to see that, at least for absolute values |x| 1-2x+3x^2-4x^3+\cdots = \frac{1}{(1+x)^2}. One can take the Taylor expansion of the right-hand side, or apply the formal long division process for polynomials. Starting from the left-hand side, one can follow the general heuristics above and try multiplying by (1+x) twice or squaring the geometric series  Euler also seems to suggest differentiating the latter series term by term.11
In the modern view, the series 1 − 2x + 3x2 − 4x3 + ... does not define a function at  so that value cannot simply be substituted into the resulting expression. Since the function is defined for all  one can still take the limit as x approaches 1, and this is the definition of the Abel sum:



Euler and Borel
 Euler applied another technique to the series: the Euler transform, one of his own inventions. To compute the Euler transform, one begins with the sequence of positive terms that makes up the alternating series—in this case  The first element of this sequence is labeled a0.
Next one needs the sequence of forward differences among ; this is just  The first element of this sequence is labeled Δa0. The Euler transform also depends on differences of differences, and higher iterations, but all the forward differences among  are 0. The Euler transform of  is then defined as



In modern terminology, one says that  is Euler summable to 
 
 
 
 .
The Euler summability implies another kind of summability as well. Representing  as



one has the related everywhere-convergent series



The Borel sum of 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ... is therefore12



Separation of scales
Saichev and Woyczyński arrive at  by applying only two physical principles: infinitesimal relaxation and separation of scales. To be precise, these principles lead them to define a broad family of "φ-summation methods", all of which sum the series to 
 
 
 
 :

If φ(x) is a function whose first and second derivatives are continuous and integrable over (0, ∞), such that φ(0) = 1 and the limits of φ(x) and xφ(x) at +∞ are both 0, then13









This result generalizes Abel summation, which is recovered by letting φ(x) = exp(−x). The general statement can be proved by pairing up the terms in the series over m and converting the expression into a Riemann integral. For the latter step, the corresponding proof for  applies the mean value theorem, but here one needs the stronger Lagrange form of Taylor's theorem.
Generalization
(Figure)
Excerpt from p.233 of the E212 — Institutiones calculi differentialis cum eius usu in analysi finitorum ac doctrina serierum. Euler sums similar series, ca. 1755.

The threefold Cauchy product of  is  the alternating series of triangular numbers; its Abel and Euler sum is 
 
 
 
 .14 The fourfold Cauchy product of  is  the alternating series of tetrahedral numbers, whose Abel sum is 
 
 
 
 .
Another generalization of 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ... in a slightly different direction is the series  for other values of n. For positive integers n, these series have the following Abel sums:15


 
  where Bn are the Bernoulli numbers. For even n, this reduces to



This last sum became an object of particular ridicule by Niels Henrik Abel in 1826:
Cesàro's teacher, Eugène Charles Catalan, also disparaged divergent series. Under Catalan's influence, Cesàro initially referred to the "conventional formulas" for  as "absurd equalities", and in 1883 Cesàro expressed a typical view of the time that the formulas were false but still somehow formally useful. Finally, in his 1890 Sur la multiplication des séries, Cesàro took a modern approach starting from definitions.16
The series are also studied for non-integer values of n; these make up the Dirichlet eta function. Part of Euler's motivation for studying series related to  was the functional equation of the eta function, which leads directly to the functional equation of the Riemann zeta function. Euler had already become famous for finding the values of these functions at positive even integers (including the Basel problem), and he was attempting to find the values at the positive odd integers (including Apéry's constant) as well, a problem that remains elusive today. The eta function in particular is easier to deal with by Euler's methods because its Dirichlet series is Abel summable everywhere; the zeta function's Dirichlet series is much harder to sum where it diverges.17 For example, the counterpart of  in the zeta function is the non-alternating series , which has deep applications in modern physics but requires much stronger methods to sum.
References
Footnotes




Originally published as 



2nd Ed. published by Chelsea Pub. Co., 1991. . ISBN 0828403341.



Author also known as A. I. Markushevich and Alekseï Ivanovitch Markouchevitch. Also published in Boston, Mass by Heath with . Additionally, , .





"
Category:Divergent series Category:Mathematical series Category:Mathematics paradoxes



Hardy p.8↩
Beals p.23↩
Hardy (p.6) presents this derivation in conjunction with evaluation of Grandi's series .↩
Hardy p.6↩
Hardy p.6↩
Ferraro, p.130.↩
Hardy, p.3; Weidlich, pp.52–55.↩
Hardy, p.9. For the full details of the calculation, see Weidlich, pp.17–18.↩
Ferraro, p.118; Tucciarone, p.10. Ferraro criticizes Tucciarone's explanation (p.7) of how Hölder himself thought of the general result, but the two authors' explanations of Hölder's treatment of 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ... are similar.↩
Ferraro, pp.123–128.↩
For example, Lavine (p.23) advocates long division but does not carry it out; Vretblad (p.231) calculates the Cauchy product. Euler's advice is vague; see Euler et al., pp.3, 26. John Baez even suggests a category-theoretic method involving multiply pointed sets and the quantum harmonic oscillator. Baez, John C. Euler's Proof That 1 + 2 + 3 + ... =-1/12 (PDF). math.ucr.edu (December 19, 2003). Retrieved on March 11, 2007.↩
Weidlich p. 59↩
Saichev and Woyczyński, pp.260–264.↩
Kline, p.313.↩
Knopp, p.491; there appears to be an error at this point in Hardy, p.3.↩
Ferraro, pp.120–128.↩
Euler et al., pp.20–25.↩




