


Contact mechanics




Contact mechanics

(Figure)
Stresses in a contact area loaded simultaneously with a normal and a tangential force. Stresses were made visible using photoelasticity.

Contact mechanics is the study of the deformation of solids that touch each other at one or more points.12 The physical and mathematical formulation of the subject is built upon the mechanics of materials and continuum mechanics and focuses on computations involving elastic, viscoelastic, and plastic bodies in static or dynamic contact. Central aspects in contact mechanics are the pressures and adhesion acting perpendicular to the contacting bodies' surfaces (known as the normal direction) and the frictional stresses acting tangentially between the surfaces. This page focuses mainly on the normal direction, i.e. on frictionless contact mechanics. Frictional contact mechanics is discussed separately.
Contact mechanics is part of Mechanical engineering; it provides necessary information for the safe and energy efficient design of technical systems and for the study of tribology and indentation hardness. Principles of contacts mechanics can be applied in areas such as locomotive wheel-rail contact, coupling devices, braking systems, tires, bearings, combustion engines, mechanical linkages, gasket seals, metalworking, metal forming, ultrasonic welding, electrical contacts, and many others. Current challenges faced in the field may include stress analysis of contact and coupling members and the influence of lubrication and material design on friction and wear. Applications of contact mechanics further extend into the micro- and nanotechnological realm.
The original work in contact mechanics dates back to 1882 with the publication of the paper "On the contact of elastic solids"3 ("Ueber die Berührung fester elastischer Körper") by Heinrich Hertz. Hertz was attempting to understand how the optical properties of multiple, stacked lenses might change with the force holding them together. Hertzian contact stress refers to the localized stresses that develop as two curved surfaces come in contact and deform slightly under the imposed loads. This amount of deformation is dependent on the modulus of elasticity of the material in contact. It gives the contact stress as a function of the normal contact force, the radii of curvature of both bodies and the modulus of elasticity of both bodies. Hertzian contact stress forms the foundation for the equations for load bearing capabilities and fatigue life in bearings, gears, and any other bodies where two surfaces are in contact.
History
 Classical contact mechanics is most notably associated with Heinrich Hertz.4 In 1882, Hertz solved the contact problem of two elastic bodies with curved surfaces. This still-relevant classical solution provides a foundation for modern problems in contact mechanics. For example, in mechanical engineering and tribology, Hertzian contact stress is a description of the stress within mating parts. The Hertzian contact stress usually refers to the stress close to the area of contact between two spheres of different radii.
It was not until nearly one hundred years later that Johnson, Kendall, and Roberts found a similar solution for the case of adhesive contact.5 This theory was rejected by Boris Derjaguin and co-workers6 who proposed a different theory of adhesion7 in the 1970s. The Derjaguin model came to be known as the DMT (after Derjaguin, Muller and Toporov) model,8 and the Johnson et al. model came to be known as the JKR (after Johnson, Kendall and Roberts) model for adhesive elastic contact. This rejection proved to be instrumental in the development of the Tabor9 and later Maugis1011 parameters that quantify which contact model (of the JKR and DMT models) represent adhesive contact better for specific materials.
Further advancement in the field of contact mechanics in the mid-twentieth century may be attributed to names such as Bowden and Tabor. Bowden and Tabor were the first to emphasize the importance of surface roughness for bodies in contact.1213 Through investigation of the surface roughness, the true contact area between friction partners is found to be less than the apparent contact area. Such understanding also drastically changed the direction of undertakings in tribology. The works of Bowden and Tabor yielded several theories in contact mechanics of rough surfaces.
The contributions of Archard (1957)14 must also be mentioned in discussion of pioneering works in this field. Archard concluded that, even for rough elastic surfaces, the contact area is approximately proportional to the normal force. Further important insights along these lines were provided by Greenwood and Williamson (1966),15 Bush (1975),16 and Persson (2002).17 The main findings of these works were that the true contact surface in rough materials is generally proportional to the normal force, while the parameters of individual micro-contacts (i.e., pressure, size of the micro-contact) are only weakly dependent upon the load.
Classical solutions for non-adhesive elastic contact
The theory of contact between elastic bodies can be used to find contact areas and indentation depths for simple geometries. Some commonly used solutions are listed below. The theory used to compute these solutions is discussed later in the article.
Contact between a sphere and a half-space
 An elastic sphere of radius

 
  indents an elastic half-space to depth 
 
 
 
 , and thus creates a contact area of radius


 
  The applied force 
 
 
 
 
  is related to the displacement 
 
 
 
  by18


 
  where


 
  and 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
 
  are the elastic moduli and 
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
  the Poisson's ratios associated with each body.
The distribution of normal pressure in the contact area as a function of distance from the center of the circle is19


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the maximum contact pressure given by


 
  The radius of the circle is related to the applied load 
 
 
 
  by the equation


 
  The depth of indentation 
 
 
 
  is related to the maximum contact pressure by


 
  The maximum shear stress occurs in the interior at 
 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 .
Contact between two spheres
  For contact between two spheres of radii 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the area of contact is a circle of radius 
 
 
 
 . The equations are the same as for a sphere in contact with a half plane except that the effective radius 
 
 
 
 
  is defined as20



Contact between two crossed cylinders of equal radius 
 
 

This is equivalent to contact between a sphere of radius 
 
 
 
  and a plane (see above).
Contact between a rigid cylinder with flat-ended and an elastic half-space
(Figure)
Contact between a rigid cylindrical indenter and an elastic half-space.

If a rigid cylinder is pressed into an elastic half-space, it creates a pressure distribution described by21


 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the radius of the cylinder and


 
  The relationship between the indentation depth and the normal force is given by



Contact between a rigid conical indenter and an elastic half-space
 In the case of indentation of an elastic half-space of Young's modulus 
 
 
 
  using a rigid conical indenter, the depth of the contact region 
 
 
 
  and contact radius 
 
 
 
 
  are related by22


 
  with 
 
 
 
  defined as the angle between the plane and the side surface of the cone. The total indentation depth 
 
 
 
  is given by
 
 

The total force is



The pressure distribution is given by


 
  The stress has a logarithmic singularity at the tip of the cone.
Contact between two cylinders with parallel axes
 In contact between two cylinders with parallel axes, the force is linearly proportional to the indentation depth:23


 
  The radii of curvature are entirely absent from this relationship. The contact radius is described through the usual relationship


 
  with


 
  as in contact between two spheres. The maximum pressure is equal to



The Method of Dimensionality Reduction
 Some contact problems can be solved with the Method of Dimensionality Reduction. In this method, the initial three-dimensional system is replaced with a contact of a body with a linear elastic or viscoelastic foundation (see Fig). The properties of one-dimensional systems coincide hereby exactly with those of the original three-dimensional system, if the form of the bodies is modified and the elements of the foundation are defined according to the rules of the MDR. 24 25 However for exact analytical results, it is required that the contact problem is axisymmetric and the contacts are compact.
Hertzian theory of non-adhesive elastic contact
The classical theory of contact focused primarily on non-adhesive contact where no tension force is allowed to occur within the contact area, i.e., contacting bodies can be separated without adhesion forces. Several analytical and numerical approaches have been used to solve contact problems that satisfy the no-adhesion condition. Complex forces and moments are transmitted between the bodies where they touch, so problems in contact mechanics can become quite sophisticated. In addition, the contact stresses are usually a nonlinear function of the deformation. To simplify the solution procedure, a frame of reference is usually defined in which the objects (possibly in motion relative to one another) are static. They interact through surface tractions (or pressures/stresses) at their interface.
As an example, consider two objects which meet at some surface 
 
 
 
  in the (
 
 
 
 ,
 
 
 
 )-plane with the 
 
 
 
 -axis assumed normal to the surface. One of the bodies will experience a normally-directed pressure distribution 
 
 
 
  and in-plane surface traction distributions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  over the region 
 
 
 
 . In terms of a Newtonian force balance, the forces:


 
  must be equal and opposite to the forces established in the other body. The moments corresponding to these forces:


 
  are also required to cancel between bodies so that they are kinematically immobile.
Assumptions in Hertzian theory
The following assumptions are made in determining the solutions of Hertzian contact problems:

The strains are small and within the elastic limit.
The surfaces are continuous and non-conforming (implying that the area of contact is much smaller than the characteristic dimensions of the contacting bodies).
Each body can be considered an elastic half-space.
The surfaces are frictionless.

Additional complications arise when some or all these assumptions are violated and such contact problems are usually called non-Hertzian.
Analytical solution techniques
 Analytical solution methods for non-adhesive contact problem can be classified into two types based on the geometry of the area of contact.26 A conforming contact is one in which the two bodies touch at multiple points before any deformation takes place (i.e., they just "fit together"). A non-conforming contact is one in which the shapes of the bodies are dissimilar enough that, under zero load, they only touch at a point (or possibly along a line). In the non-conforming case, the contact area is small compared to the sizes of the objects and the stresses are highly concentrated in this area. Such a contact is called concentrated, otherwise it is called diversified.
A common approach in linear elasticity is to superpose a number of solutions each of which corresponds to a point load acting over the area of contact. For example, in the case of loading of a half-plane, the Flamant solution is often used as a starting point and then generalized to various shapes of the area of contact. The force and moment balances between the two bodies in contact act as additional constraints to the solution.
Point contact on a (2D) half-plane
 A starting point for solving contact problems is to understand the effect of a "point-load" applied to an isotropic, homogeneous, and linear elastic half-plane, shown in the figure to the right. The problem may be either plane stress or plane strain. This is a boundary value problem of linear elasticity subject to the traction boundary conditions:


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac delta function. The boundary conditions state that there are no shear stresses on the surface and a singular normal force P is applied at (0,0). Applying these conditions to the governing equations of elasticity produces the result


 
 
  for some point, 
 
 
 
 
 , in the half-plane. The circle shown in the figure indicates a surface on which the maximum shear stress is constant. From this stress field, the strain components and thus the displacements of all material points may be determined.
Line contact on a (2D) half-plane
Normal loading over a region 
 
 

Suppose, rather than a point load 
 
 
 
 , a distributed load 
 
 
 
  is applied to the surface instead, over the range 
 
 

Shear loading over a region 
 
 

The same principle applies for loading on the surface in the plane of the surface. These kinds of tractions would tend to arise as a result of friction. The solution is similar the above (for both singular loads 
 
 
 
  and distributed loads 
 
 
 
 
 ) but altered slightly:


 
  These results may themselves be superposed onto those given above for normal loading to deal with more complex loads.
Point contact on a (3D) half-space
Analogously to the Flamant solution for the 2D half-plane, fundamental solutions are known for the linearly elastic 3D half-space as well. These were found by Boussinesq for a concentrated normal load and by Cerruti for a tangential load. See the section on this in Linear elasticity.
Numerical solution techniques
Distinctions between conforming and non-conforming contact do not have to be made when numerical solution schemes are employed to solve contact problems. These methods do not rely on further assumptions within the solution process since they base solely on the general formulation of the underlying equations 27 28 29 30 .31 Besides the standard equations describing the deformation and motion of bodies two additional inequalities can be formulated. The first simply restricts the motion and deformation of the bodies by the assumption that no penetration can occur. Hence the gap 
 
 
 
  between two bodies can only be positive or zero


 
  where 
 
 
 
  denotes contact. The second assumption in contact mechanics is related to the fact, that no tension force is allowed to occur within the contact area (contacting bodies can be lifted up without adhesion forces). This leads to an inequality which the stresses have to obey at the contact interface. It is formulated for the contact pressure 
 
 



 
  Since for contact, 
 
 
 
 , the contact pressure is always negative, 
 
 
 
 , and further for non contact the gap is open, 
 
 
 
 , and the contact pressure is zero, 
 
 
 
 , the so-called Kuhn–Tucker form of the contact constraints can be written as


 
  These conditions are valid in a general way. The mathematical formulation of the gap depends upon the kinematics of the underlying theory of the solid (e.g., linear or nonlinear solid in two- or three dimensions, beam or shell model).
Non-adhesive contact between rough surfaces
When two bodies with rough surfaces are pressed into each other, the true contact area 
 
 
 
  is much smaller than the apparent contact area 
 
 
 
 . In contact between a "random rough" surface and an elastic half-space, the true contact area is related to the normal force 
 
 
 
  by32333435


 
  with 
 
 
 
  equal to the root mean square (also known as the quadratic mean) of the surface slope and 
 
 
 
  . The median pressure in the true contact surface


 
  can be reasonably estimated as half of the effective elastic modulus 
 
 
 
  multiplied with the root mean square of the surface slope 
 
 
 
  .
For the situation where the asperities on the two surfaces have a Gaussian height distribution and the peaks can be assumed to be spherical,36 the average contact pressure is sufficient to cause yield when 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the uniaxial yield stress and 
 
 
 
  is the indentation hardness.37 Greenwood and Williamson38 defined a dimensionless parameter 
 
 
 
  called the plasticity index that could be used to determine whether contact would be elastic or plastic.
The Greenwood-Williamson model requires knowledge of two statistically dependent quantities; the standard deviation of the surface roughness and the curvature of the asperity peaks. An alternative definition of the plasticity index has been given by Mikic.39 Yield occurs when the pressure is greater than the uniaxial yield stress. Since the yield stress is proportional to the indentation hardness 
 
 
 
 , Micic defined the plasticity index for elastic-plastic contact to be


 
  In this definition 
 
 
 
  represents the micro-roughness in a state of complete plasticity and only one statistical quantity, the rms slope, is needed which can be calculated from surface measurements. For 
 
 
 
 , the surface behaves elastically during contact.
In both the Greenwood-Williamson and Mikic models the load is assumed to be proportional to the deformed area. Hence, whether the system behaves plastically or elastically is independent of the applied normal force.40
Adhesive contact between elastic bodies
When two solid surfaces are brought into close proximity, they experience attractive van der Waals forces. Bradley's van der Waals model41 provides a means of calculating the tensile force between two rigid spheres with perfectly smooth surfaces. The Hertzian model of contact does not consider adhesion possible. However, in the late 1960s, several contradictions were observed when the Hertz theory was compared with experiments involving contact between rubber and glass spheres.
It was observed42 that, though Hertz theory applied at large loads, at low loads

the area of contact was larger than that predicted by Hertz theory,
the area of contact had a non-zero value even when the load was removed, and
there was strong adhesion if the contacting surfaces were clean and dry.

This indicated that adhesive forces were at work. The Johnson-Kendall-Roberts (JKR) model and the Derjaguin-Muller-Toporov (DMT) models were the first to incorporate adhesion into Hertzian contact.
Bradley model of rigid contact
It is commonly assumed that the surface force between two atomic planes at a distance 
 
 
 
  from each other can be derived from the Lennard-Jones potential. With this assumption


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the force (positive in compression), 
 
 
 
  is the total surface energy of both surfaces per unit area, and 
 
 
 
  is the equilibrium separation of the two atomic planes.
The Bradley model applied the Lennard-Jones potential to find the force of adhesion between two rigid spheres. The total force between the spheres is found to be


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the radii of the two spheres.
The two spheres separate completely when the pull-off force is achieved at 
 
 
 
  at which point



Johnson-Kendall-Roberts (JKR) model of elastic contact
  To incorporate the effect of adhesion in Hertzian contact, Johnson, Kendall, and Roberts43 formulated the JKR theory of adhesive contact using a balance between the stored elastic energy and the loss in surface energy. The JKR model considers the effect of contact pressure and adhesion only inside the area of contact. The general solution for the pressure distribution in the contact area in the JKR model is


 
  Note that in the original Hertz theory, the term containing 
 
 
 
  was neglected on the ground that tension could not be sustained in the contact zone. For contact between two spheres


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the radius of the area of contact, 
 
 
 
 
  is the applied force, 
 
 
 
  is the total surface energy of both surfaces per unit contact area, 
 
 
 
  are the radii, Young's moduli, and Poisson's ratios of the two spheres, and


 
  The approach distance between the two spheres is given by


 
  The Hertz equation for the area of contact between two spheres, modified to take into account the surface energy, has the form


 
 
  When the surface energy is zero, 
 
 
 
 , the Hertz equation for contact between two spheres is recovered. When the applied load is zero, the contact radius is


 
  The tensile load at which the spheres are separated, i.e., 
 
 
 
 , is predicted to be


 
  This force is also called the pull-off force. Note that this force is independent of the moduli of the two spheres. However, there is another possible solution for the value of 
 
 
 
 
  at this load. This is the critical contact area 
 
 
 
 , given by



If we define the work of adhesion as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  are the adhesive energies of the two surfaces and 
 
 
 
  is an interaction term, we can write the JKR contact radius as


 
  The tensile load at separation is


 
  and the critical contact radius is given by


 
  The critical depth of penetration is



Derjaguin-Muller-Toporov (DMT) model of elastic contact
The Derjaguin-Muller-Toporov (DMT) model4445 is an alternative model for adhesive contact which assumes that the contact profile remains the same as in Hertzian contact but with additional attractive interactions outside the area of contact.
The area of contact between two spheres from DMT theory is


 
  and the pull-off force is


 
  When the pull-off force is achieved the contact area becomes zero and there is no singularity in the contact stresses at the edge of the contact area.
In terms of the work of adhesion 
 
 



 
  and



Tabor coefficient
In 1977, Tabor46 showed that the apparent contradiction between the JKR and DMT theories could be resolved by noting that the two theories were the extreme limits of a single theory parametrized by the Tabor coefficient (
 
 
 
 ) defined as


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the equilibrium separation between the two surfaces in contact. The JKR theory applies to large, compliant spheres for which 
 
 
 
  is large. The DMT theory applies for small, stiff spheres with small values of 
 
 
 
 .
Maugis-Dugdale model of elastic contact
 Further improvement to the Tabor idea was provided by Maugis47 who represented the surface force in terms of a Dugdale cohesive zone approximation such that the work of adhesion is given by


 
 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the maximum force predicted by the Lennard-Jones potential and 
 
 
 
  is the maximum separation obtained by matching the areas under the Dugdale and Lennard-Jones curves (see adjacent figure). This means that the attractive force is constant for 
 
 
 
 . There is not further penetration in compression. Perfect contact occurs in an area of radius 
 
 
 
  and adhesive forces of magnitude 
 
 
 
 
  extend to an area of radius 
 
 
 
 . In the region 
 
 
 
 , the two surfaces are separated by a distance 
 
 
 
  with 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 
 . The ratio 
 
 
 
  is defined as


 
 .
In the Maugis-Dugdale theory,48 the surface traction distribution is divided into two parts - one due to the Hertz contact pressure and the other from the Dugdale adhesive stress. Hertz contact is assumed in the region 
 
 
 
 . The contribution to the surface traction from the Hertz pressure is given by


 
  where the Hertz contact force 
 
 
 
  is given by


 
  The penetration due to elastic compression is


 
  The vertical displacement at 
 
 
 
  is


 
  and the separation between the two surfaces at 
 
 
 
  is


 
  The surface traction distribution due to the adhesive Dugdale stress is


 
  The total adhesive force is then given by


 
  The compression due to Dugdale adhesion is


 
  and the gap at 
 
 
 
  is


 
  The net traction on the contact area is then given by 
 
 
 
  and the net contact force is 
 
 
 
 . When 
 
 
 
  the adhesive traction drops to zero.
Non-dimensionalized values of 
 
 
 
  are introduced at this stage that are defied as



In addition, Maugis proposed a parameter 
 
 
 
  which is equivalent to the Tabor coefficient. This parameter is defined as


 
  where the step cohesive stress 
 
 
 
  equals to the theoretical stress of the Lennard-Jones potential


 
  Zheng and Yu 49 suggested another value for the step cohesive stress


 
  to match the Lennard-Jones potential, which leads to


 
  Then the net contact force may be expressed as


 
  and the elastic compression as


 
  The equation for the cohesive gap between the two bodies takes the form


 
  This equation can be solved to obtain values of 
 
 
 
  for various values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . For large values of 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and the JKR model is obtained. For small values of 
 
 
 
  the DMT model is retrieved.
Carpick-Ogletree-Salmeron (COS) model
The Maugis-Dugdale model can only be solved iteratively if the value of 
 
 
 
  is not known a-priori. The Carpick-Ogletree-Salmeron approximate solution 50 simplifies the process by using the following relation to determine the contact radius 
 
 
 
 :


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the contact area at zero load, and 
 
 
 
  is a transition parameter that is related to 
 
 
 
  by


 
  The case 
 
 
 
  corresponds exactly to JKR theory while 
 
 
 
  corresponds to DMT theory. For intermediate cases 
 
 
 
  the COS model corresponds closely to the Maugis-Dugdale solution for $0.1 < \lambda < 5$.
See also

Adhesive
Adhesive bonding
Adhesive dermatitis
Adhesive surface forces
Bearing capacity
Bioadhesives
Contact dynamics
Dispersive adhesion
Electrostatic generator
Energetically modified cement
Frictional contact mechanics
Galling
Goniometer
Non-smooth mechanics
Plastic wrap
Shock (mechanics)
Signorini problem
Surface tension
Synthetic setae
Unilateral contact
Wetting

References
External links

1: More about contact stresses and the evolution of bearing stress equations can be found in this publication by NASA Glenn Research Center head the NASA Bearing, Gearing and Transmission Section, Erwin Zaretsky.
2: A MATLAB routine to solve the linear elastic contact mechanics problem entitled; "An LCP solution of the linear elastic contact mechanics problem" is provided at the file exchange at MATLAB Central.
[http://www.fxsolver.com/solve/share/VhTovbqoPtGglYEgSNndkw==/]: Contact mechanics calculator

ja:ヘルツの接触応力"
Category:Bearings (mechanical) Category:Mechanical engineering   Category:Heinrich Hertz



Johnson, K. L, 1985, Contact mechanics, Cambridge University Press.
Popov, Valentin L., 2010, Contact Mechanics and Friction. Physical Principles and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 362 p., ISBN 978-3-642-10802-0.
H. Hertz, Über die berührung fester elastischer Körper (On the contact of rigid elastic solids). In: Miscellaneous Papers. Jones and Schott, Editors, J. reine und angewandte Mathematik 92, Macmillan, London (1896), p. 156 English translation: Hertz, H.
Hertz, H. R., 1882, Ueber die Beruehrung elastischer Koerper (On Contact Between Elastic Bodies), in Gesammelte Werke (Collected Works), Vol. 1, Leipzig, Germany, 1895.
K. L. Johnson and K. Kendall and A. D. Roberts, Surface energy and the contact of elastic solids, Proc. R. Soc. London A 324 (1971) 301-313
D. Maugis, Contact, Adhesion and Rupture of Elastic Solids, Springer-Verlag, Solid-State Sciences, Berlin 2000, ISBN 3-540-66113-1
B. V. Derjaguin and V. M. Muller and Y. P. Toporov, Effect of contact deformations on the adhesion of particles, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 53 (1975) 314--325

D. Tabor, The hardness of solids, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 58 (1977) 145-179

D. Maugis, Adhesion of spheres: The JKR-DMT transition using a Dugdale model, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 150 (1992) 243--269
, Bowden, FP and Tabor, D., 1939, The area of contact between stationary and between moving surfaces, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 169(938), pp. 391--413.
Bowden, F.P. and Tabor, D., 2001, The friction and lubrication of solids, Oxford University Press.
Archard, JF, 1957, Elastic deformation and the laws of friction, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 243(1233), pp.190--205.
Greenwood, JA and Williamson, JBP., 1966, Contact of nominally flat surfaces, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, pp. 300-319.
Bush, AW and Gibson, RD and Thomas, TR., 1975, The elastic contact of a rough surface, Wear, 35(1), pp. 87-111.
Persson, BNJ and Bucher, F. and Chiaia, B., 2002, Elastic contact between randomly rough surfaces: Comparison of theory with numerical results, Physical Review B, 65(18), p. 184106.



Sneddon, I. N., 1965, The Relation between Load and Penetration in the Axisymmetric Boussinesq Problem for a Punch of Arbitrary Profile. Int. J. Eng. Sci. v. 3, pp. 47–57.


Popov, V.L., Method of reduction of dimensionality in contact and friction mechanics: A linkage between micro and macro scales, Friction, 2013, v.1, N. 1, pp.41–62.
Popov, V.L. and Heß, M., Methode der Dimensionsreduktion in Kontaktmechanik und Reibung, Springer, 2013.
Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R., 1989, Mechanical Engineering Design, Fifth Edition, Chapter 2, McGraw-Hill, Inc, 1989, ISBN 0-07-056899-5.
Kalker, J.J. 1990, Three-Dimensional Elastic Bodies in Rolling Contact. (Kluwer Academic Publishers: Dordrecht).
Wriggers, P. 2006, Computational Contact Mechanics. 2nd ed. (Springer Verlag: Heidelberg).
Laursen, T. A., 2002, Computational Contact and Impact Mechanics: Fundamentals of Modeling Interfacial Phenomena in Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis, (Springer Verlag: New York).
Acary V. and Brogliato B., 2008,Numerical Methods for Nonsmooth Dynamical Systems. Applications in Mechanics and Electronics. Springer Verlag, LNACM 35, Heidelberg.
Popov, Valentin L., 2009, Kontaktmechanik und Reibung. Ein Lehr- und Anwendungsbuch von der Nanotribologie bis zur numerischen Simulation, Springer-Verlag, 328 S., ISBN 978-3-540-88836-9.



Hyun, S., and M.O. Robbins, 2007, Elastic contact between rough surfaces: Effect of roughness at large and small wavelengths. Tribology International, v.40, pp. 1413-1422.
Greenwood, J. A. and Williamson, J. B. P., (1966), Contact of nominally flat surfaces, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, vol. 295, pp. 300--319.


Mikic, B. B., (1974), Thermal contact conductance; theoretical considerations, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 17(2), pp. 205-214.

Bradley, RS., 1932, The cohesive force between solid surfaces and the surface energy of solids, Philosophical Magazine Series 7, 13(86), pp. 853--862.


Derjaguin, BV and Muller, VM and Toporov, Y.P., 1975, Effect of contact deformations on the adhesion of particles, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 53(2), pp. 314-326.
Muller, VM and Derjaguin, BV and Toporov, Y.P., 1983, On two methods of calculation of the force of sticking of an elastic sphere to a rigid plane, Colloids and Surfaces, 7(3), pp. 251-259.
Tabor, D., 1977, Surface forces and surface interactions, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 58(1), pp. 2-13.
Maugis, D., 1992, Adhesion of spheres: the JKR-DMT transition using a Dugdale model, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 150(1), pp. 243-269.
Johnson, KL and Greenwood, JA, 1997, An adhesion map for the contact of elastic spheres, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 192(2), pp. 326-333.
Zheng, Z.J. and Yu, J.L., 2007, Using the Dugdale approximation to match a specific interaction in the adhesive contact of elastic objects'', Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 310(1), pp. 27-34.
Carpick, R.W. and Ogletree, D.F. and Salmeron, M., 1999, A general equation for fitting contact area and friction vs load measurements, Journal of colloid and interface science, 211(2), pp. 395-400.




