


Filled Julia set




Filled Julia set

The filled-in Julia set 
 
 
 
  of a polynomial 
 
 
 
  is :

a Julia set and its interior,
non-escaping set

Formal definition
The filled-in Julia set

 
  of a polynomial 
 
 
 
  is defined as the set of all points 
 
 
 
  of the dynamical plane that have bounded orbit with respect to 
 
 


 where :


 
  is the set of complex numbers


 
  is the 
 
 
 
  -fold composition of 
 
 
 
  with itself = iteration of function


Relation to the Fatou set
The filled-in Julia set is the (absolute) complement of the attractive basin of infinity.


The attractive basin of infinity is one of the components of the Fatou set.


In other words, the filled-in Julia set is the complement of the unbounded Fatou component:


Relation between Julia, filled-in Julia set and attractive basin of infinity
The Julia set is the common boundary of the filled-in Julia set and the attractive basin of infinity




 where :

 
  denotes the attractive basin of infinity = exterior of filled-in Julia set = set of escaping points for 
 
 




If the filled-in Julia set has no interior then the Julia set coincides with the filled-in Julia set. This happens when all the critical points of 
 
 
 
  are pre-periodic. Such critical points are often called Misiurewicz points.
Spine
The most studied polynomials are probably those of the form 
 
 
 
 , which are often denoted by 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is any complex number. In this case, the spine 
 
 
 
  of the filled Julia set 
 
 
 
  is defined as arc between 
 
 
-fixed point and 
 
 
 
 ,



with such properties:

spine lies inside 
 
 
 
 .1 This makes sense when 
 
 
 
  is connected and full 2
spine is invariant under 180 degree rotation,
spine is a finite topological tree,
Critical point

 
  always belongs to the spine.3


-fixed point is a landing point of external ray of angle zero 
 
 
 
 ,


 
  is landing point of external ray

 
 .

Algorithms for constructing the spine:

detailed version is described by A. Douady4


Simplified version of algorithm:
 
connect 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  within 
 
 
 
  by an arc,
when 
 
 
 
  has empty interior then arc is unique,
otherwise take the shortest way that contains 
 
 
 
 .5


Curve 
 
 
 
  :



divides dynamical plane into two components.
Images
Image:Time escape Julia set from coordinate (phi-2, 0).jpg|Filled Julia set for fc, c=φ−2=-0.38..., where φ means Golden ratio Image:Julia_IIM_1.jpg| Filled Julia with no interior = Julia set. It is for c=i. Image:Filled.jpg| Filled Julia set for c=-1+0.1*i. Here Julia set is the boundary of filled-in Julia set. Image:ColorDouadyRabbit1.jpg|Douady rabbit
Notes
References

Peitgen Heinz-Otto, Richter, P.H. : The beauty of fractals: Images of Complex Dynamical Systems. Springer-Verlag 1986. ISBN 978-0-387-15851-8.
Bodil Branner : Holomorphic dynamical systems in the complex plane. Department of Mathematics Technical University of Denmark, MAT-Report no. 1996-42.

"
Category:Fractals Category:Limit sets Category:Complex dynamics



Douglas C. Ravenel : External angles in the Mandelbrot set: the work of Douady and Hubbard. University of Rochester
John Milnor : Pasting Together Julia Sets: A Worked Out Example of Mating. Experimental Mathematics Volume 13 (2004)
Saaed Zakeri: Biaccessiblility in quadratic Julia sets I: The locally-connected case
A. Douady, “Algorithms for computing angles in the Mandelbrot set,” in Chaotic Dynamics and Fractals, M. Barnsley and S. G. Demko, Eds., vol. 2 of Notes and Reports in Mathematics in Science and Engineering, pp. 155–168, Academic Press, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 1986.
K M. Brucks, H Bruin : Topics from One-Dimensional Dynamics Series: London Mathematical Society Student Texts (No. 62) page 257




