


Toda oscillator




Toda oscillator

In physics, the Toda oscillator is a special kind of nonlinear oscillator. It represents a chain of particles with exponential potential interaction between neighbors.1 These concepts are named after Morikazu Toda. The Toda oscillator is used as a simple model to understand the phenomenon of self-pulsation, which is a quasi-periodic pulsation of the output intensity of a solid-state laser in the transient regime.
Definition
The Toda oscillator is a dynamical system of any origin, which can be described with dependent coordinate 
 
 
 
  and independent coordinate 
 
 
 
 , characterized in that the evolution along independent coordinate 
 
 
 
  can be approximated with equation



where 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  and prime denotes the derivative.
Physical meaning
The independent coordinate 
 
 
 
  has sense of time. Indeed, it may be proportional to time 
 
 
 
  with some relation like 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is constant.
The derivative

 
  may have sense of velocity of particle with coordinate 
 
 
 
 ; then 
 
 
 
  can be interpreted as acceleration; and the mass of such a particle is equal to unity.
The dissipative function 
 
 
 
  may have sense of coefficient of the speed-proportional friction.
Usually, both parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are supposed to be positive; then this speed-proportional friction coefficient grows exponentially at large positive values of coordinate 
 
 
 
 .
The potential 
 
 
 
  is a fixed function, which also shows exponential growth at large positive values of coordinate 
 
 
 
 .
In the application in laser physics, 
 
 
 
  may have a sense of logarithm of number of photons in the laser cavity, related to its steady-state value. Then, the output power of such a laser is proportional to 
 
 
 
  and may show pulsation at oscillation of 
 
 
 
 .
Both analogies, with a unity mass particle and logarithm of number of photons, are useful in the analysis of behavior of the Toda oscillator.
Energy
Rigorously, the oscillation is periodic only at 
 
 
 
 . Indeed, in the realization of the Toda oscillator as a self-pulsing laser, these parameters may have values of order of 
 
 
 
 ; during several pulses, the amplitude of pulsation does not change much. In this case, we can speak about period of pulsation, function 
 
 
 
  is almost periodic.
In the case 
 
 
 
 , the energy of oscillator 
 
 
 
  does not depend on 
 
 
 
 , and can be treated as constant of motion. Then, during one period of pulsation, the relation between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  can be expressed analytically: 23



where 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are minimal and maximal values of 
 
 
 
 ; this solution is written for the case when 
 
 
 
 .
however, other solutions may be obtained using the translational invariance.
The ratio 
 
 
 
  is a convenient parameter to characterize the amplitude of pulsation, then, the median value 
 
 
 
  can be expressed as 
 
 
 
 ; and the energy 
 
 
 
  also is an elementary function of 
 
 
 
 . For the case 
 
 
 
 , an example of pulsation of the Toda oscillator is shown in Fig.1.
In application, the quantity 
 
 
 
  has no need to be physical energy of the system; in these cases, this dimensionless quantity may be called quasienergy.
Period of pulsation
The period of pulsation is increasing function of the amplitude 
 
 
 
 .
At 
 
 
 
 , the period 
 
 

At 
 
 
 
 , the period 
 
 

In the whole range 
 
 
 
 , the period 
 
 
 
  and the frequency 
 
 
 
  can be approximated with






with at least 8 significant figures. The relative error of this approximation does not exceed 
 
 
 
 .
Decay of pulsation
At small (but still positive) values of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , the pulsation decays slowly, and this decay can be described analytically. In the first approximation parameters 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  give additive contributions to the decay; the decay rate, as well as the amplitude and phase of the nonlinear oscillation can be approximated with elementary functions in the similar manner, as the period above. This allows to approximate the solution of the initial equation; and the error of such approximation is small compared to the difference between behavior of the idealized Toda oscillator and behavior of the experimental realization of the Toda oscillator as self-pulsing laser at the optical bench, although, qualitatively, a self-pulsing laser shows very similar behavior.4
Continuous limit
The Toda chain equations of motion, in the continuous limit in which the distance between neighbors goes to zero, become the KdV equation.5 Here the index labeling the particle in the chain becomes the new spacial coordinate.
In contrast, the Toda field theory is achieved by introducing a new spacial coordinate which is independent of the chain index label. This is done in a relativistically invariant way, so that time and space are treated on equal grounds.6 This means that the Toda field theory is not a continuous limit of the Toda chain.
References
"
Category:Mathematical physics Category:Atomic, molecular, and optical physics













