


Ornstein–Zernike equation




Ornstein–Zernike equation

In statistical mechanics the Ornstein–Zernike equation (named after Leonard Ornstein and Frits Zernike) is an integral equation for defining the direct correlation function. It basically describes how the correlation between two molecules can be calculated. Its applications can mainly be found in fluid theory.
Derivation
The derivation below is heuristic in nature: rigorous derivations require extensive graph analysis or functional techniques. The interested reader is referred to1 for the full derivation.
It is convenient to define the total correlation function:



which is a measure for the "influence" of molecule 1 on molecule 2 at a distance 
 
 
 
  away with 
 
 
 
  as the radial distribution function. In 1914 Ornstein and Zernike proposed 2 to split this influence into two contributions, a direct and indirect part. The direct contribution is defined to be given by the direct correlation function, denoted 
 
 
 
 . The indirect part is due to the influence of molecule 1 on a third molecule, labeled 3, which in turn affects molecule 2, directly and indirectly. This indirect effect is weighted by the density and averaged over all the possible positions of particle 3. This decomposition can be written down mathematically as



which is called the Ornstein–Zernike equation. Its interest is that, by eliminating the indirect influence, 
 
 
 
  is shorter-ranged than 
 
 
 
  and can be more easily described.
If we define the distance vector between two molecules 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 
 
 , the OZ equation can be rewritten using a convolution.


 
 .
If we then denote the Fourier transforms of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  by 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , respectively, and use the convolution theorem we obtain



which yields



One needs to solve for both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  (or, equivalently, their Fourier transforms). This requires an additional equation, known as a closure relation. The Ornstein–Zernike equation can be formally seen as a definition of the direct correlation function 
 
 
 
  in terms of the total correlation function 
 
 
 
 . The details of the system under study (most notably, the shape of the interaction potential 
 
 
 
 ) are taken into account by the choice of the closure relation. Commonly used closures are the Percus–Yevick approximation, well adapted for particles with an impenetrable core, and the hypernetted-chain equation, widely used for "softer" potentials. More information can be found in.3
See also

Percus–Yevick approximation, a closure relation for solving the OZ equation
Hypernetted-chain equation, a closure relation for solving the OZ equation

References


External links

The Ornstein–Zernike equation and integral equations
Multilevel wavelet solver for the Ornstein–Zernike equation Abstract
Analytical solution of the Ornstein–Zernike equation for a multicomponent fluid
The Ornstein–Zernike equation in the canonical ensemble
Ornstein–Zernike Theory for Finite-Range Ising Models Above Tc

"
Category:Statistical mechanics Category:Integral equations



Frisch, H. & Lebowitz J.L. The Equilibrium Theory of Classical Fluids (New York: Benjamin, 1964)
Ornstein, L. S. and Zernike, F. Accidental deviations of density and opalescence at the critical point of a single substance. Proc. Acad. Sci. Amsterdam 1914, 17, 793-806
D.A. McQuarrie, Statistical Mechanics (Harper Collins Publishers) 1976




