


Mass diffusivity




Mass diffusivity

Diffusivity or diffusion coefficient is a proportionality constant between the molar flux due to molecular diffusion and the gradient in the concentration of the species (or the driving force for diffusion). Diffusivity is encountered in Fick's law and numerous other equations of physical chemistry.
The diffusivity is generally prescribed for a given pair of species and pairwise for a multi-species system. The higher the diffusivity (of one substance with respect to another), the faster they diffuse into each other. Typically, a compound's diffusion coefficient is ~10,000× as great in air as in water. Carbon dioxide in air has a diffusion coefficient of 16 mm2/s, and in water its diffusion coefficient is 0.0016 mm2/s.12
Diffusivity has an SI unit of m2/s (length2 / time). In CGS units it is given in cm2/s.
Temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient
Solids
The diffusion coefficient in solids at different temperatures is generally found to be well predicted by the Arrhenius equation:



where

D is the diffusion coefficient (m2 / s)
 
D0 is the maximum diffusion coefficient (at infinite temperature; m2 / s)
 
EA is the activation energy for diffusion in dimensions of (J atom−1)
 
T is the absolute temperature (K)
 
k is the Boltzmann constant


Liquids
An approximate dependence of the diffusion coefficient on temperature in liquids can often be found using Stokes–Einstein equation, which predicts that



where

T1 and T2 denote temperatures 1 and 2, respectively
 
D is the diffusion coefficient (cm2/s)
 
T is the absolute temperature (K),
 
μ is the dynamic viscosity of the solvent (Pa·s)
 

Gases
The dependence of the diffusion coefficient on temperature for gases can be expressed using Chapman–Enskog theory (predictions accurate on average to about 8%):3



where

1 and 2 index the two kinds of molecules present in the gaseous mixture
 
T is the absolute temperature (K)
 
M is the molar mass (g/mol)
 
p is the pressure (atm)
 


 
  is the average collision diameter (the values are tabulated4) (Å)
 
Ω is a temperature-dependent collision integral (the values are tabulated5 but usually of order 1) (dimensionless).
 
D is the diffusion coefficient (which is expressed in cm2/s when the other magnitudes are expressed in the units as given above67).
 

Pressure dependence of the diffusion coefficient
For self-diffusion in gases at two different pressures (but the same temperature), the following empirical equation has been suggested:8


 
  where

P1 and P2 denote pressures 1 and 2, respectively
 
D is the diffusion coefficient (m2/s)
 
ρ is the gas mass density (kg/m3)
 

Effective diffusivity in porous media
The effective diffusion coefficient describes diffusion through the pore space of porous media.9 It is macroscopic in nature, because it is not individual pores but the entire pore space that needs to be considered. The effective diffusion coefficient for transport through the pores, De, is estimated as follows:


 
  where

D is the diffusion coefficient in gas or liquid filling the pores (m2s−1)
 
εt is the porosity available for the transport (dimensionless)
 
δ is the constrictivity (dimensionless)
 
τ is the tortuosity (dimensionless)
 

The transport-available porosity equals the total porosity less the pores which, due to their size, are not accessible to the diffusing particles, and less dead-end and blind pores (i.e., pores without being connected to the rest of the pore system). The constrictivity describes the slowing down of diffusion by increasing the viscosity in narrow pores as a result of greater proximity to the average pore wall. It is a function of pore diameter and the size of the diffusing particles.
Example values
Gases at 1 atm., solutes in liquid at infinite dilution. Legend: (s) – solid; (l) – liquid; (g) – gas; (dis) – dissolved.




Values of diffusion coefficients (gas)



Species pair (solute-solvent)



Water (g) - Air (g)



Oxygen (g) - Air (g)









Values of diffusion coefficients (liquid)



Species pair (solute-solvent)



Acetone (dis) - Water (l)



Air (dis) - Water (l)



Ammonia (dis) - Water (l)



Argon (dis) - Water (l)



Benzene (dis) - Water (l)



Bromine (dis) - Water (l)



Carbon Monoxide (dis) - Water (l)



Carbon Dioxide (dis) - Water (l)



Chlorine (dis) - Water (l)



Ethane (dis) - Water (l)



Ethanol (dis) - Water (l)



Ethylene (dis) - Water (l)



Helium (dis) - Water (l)



Hydrogen (dis) - Water (l)



Hydrogen sulfide (dis) - Water (l)



Methane (dis) - Water (l)



Methanol (dis) - Water (l)



Nitrogen (dis) - Water (l)



Nitric oxide (dis) - Water (l)



Oxygen (dis) - Water (l)



Propane (dis) - Water (l)



Water (l) - Acetone (l)



Water (l) - Ethyl alcohol (l)



Water (l) - Ethyl acetate (l)









Values of diffusion coefficients (solid)



Species pair (solute-solvent)



Hydrogen - Iron (s)



Hydrogen - Iron (s)



Aluminium - Copper (s)





In popular culture
In an episode of The Simpsons, Professor Frink mentioned mass diffusivity.
See also

Atomic diffusion
Effective diffusion coefficient
Lattice diffusion coefficient
Knudsen diffusion

References
"
Category:Transport phenomena Category:Diffusion



CRC Press Online: CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, Section 6, 91st Edition
Diffusion











