


Hartman–Grobman theorem




Hartman–Grobman theorem

In mathematics, in the study of dynamical systems, the Hartman–Grobman theorem or linearization theorem is a theorem about the local behaviour of dynamical systems in the neighbourhood of a hyperbolic equilibrium point. It asserts that linearization---our first resort in applications---is unreasonably effective in predicting qualitative patterns of behaviour.
Basically the theorem states that the behaviour of a dynamical system in a domain near a hyperbolic equilibrium point is qualitatively the same as the behaviour of its linearization near this equilibrium point, provided that no eigenvalue of the linearization has its real part equal to zero. Therefore when dealing with such dynamical systems one can use the simpler linearization of the system to analyze its behaviour around equilibria.
Main theorem
Consider a system evolving in time with state 
 
 
 
  that satisfies the differential equation 
 
 
 
  for some smooth map

 
 . Suppose the map has a hyperbolic equilibrium state 
 
 
 
 
 : that is, 
 
 
 
  and the Jacobian matrix

 
  of 
 
 
 
  at state 
 
 
 
  has no eigenvalue with real part equal to zero. Then there exists a neighborhood 
 
 
 
 
  of the equilibrium 
 
 
 
  and a homeomorphism

 
 , such that 
 
 
 
  and such that in the neighbourhood 
 
 
 
  the flow of 
 
 
 
 
  is topologically conjugate by the smooth map 
 
 
 
  to the flow of its linearization 
 
 
 
 .123 4
Even for infinitely differentiable maps 
 
 
 
 , the homeomorphism 
 
 
 
  need not to be smooth, nor even locally Lipschitz. However, it turns out to be Hölder continuous, with an exponent depending on the constant of hyperbolicity of 
 
 
 
 
 . 5
The Hartman-Grobman theorem has been extended to infinite dimensional Banach spaces, non-autonomous systems 
 
 
 
  (potentially stochastic), and to cater for the topological differences that occur when there are eigenvalues with zero or near-zero real-part. 6 7 8 9
Example
The algebra necessary for this example is easily carried out by a web service that computes normal form coordinate transforms of systems of differential equations, autonomous or non-autonomous, deterministic or stochastic. 10
Consider the 2D system in variables 
 
 
 
  evolving according to the pair of coupled differential equations


 
  This system has an equilibrium at the origin, that is 
 
 
 
 , among others not analysed here. The coordinate transform, 
 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 , given by





 
  is a smooth map between the original 
 
 
 
  and new 
 
 
 
 
  coordinates, at least near the equilibrium at the origin. In the new coordinates the dynamical system transforms to its linearisation


 
  That is, a distorted version of the linearization gives the original dynamics in some finite neighbourhood.
References


External links




"
Category:Theorems in analysis Category:Theorems in dynamical systems






C. Chicone. Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, volume 34 of Texts in Applied Mathematics. Springer, 2006.
Genrich Belitskii and Victoria Rayskin, On the Grobman--Hartman theorem in 
 
 
 
 -Holder class for Banach spaces. Report, http://www.ma.utexas.edu/pub/mp_arc/html/c/11/11-134.pdf
B. Aulbach and T. Wanner. Integral manifolds for Caratheodory type differential equations in Banach spaces. In B. Aulbach and F. Colonius, editors, Six Lectures on Dynamical Systems, pages 45--119. World Scientific, Singapore, 1996.
B. Aulbach and T. Wanner. Invariant foliations for Caratheodory type differential equations in Banach spaces. In V. Lakshmikantham and A. A. Martynyuk, editors, Advances of Stability Theory at the End of XX Century. Gordon & Breach Publishers, 1999. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.45.5229&rep;;=rep1&type;=pdf
B. Aulbach and T. Wanner. The Hartman–Grobman theorem for Caratheodory-type differential equations in Banach spaces. Non-linear Analysis, 40:91--104, 2000. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ S0362-546X(00)85006-3
A. J. Roberts. Normal form transforms separate slow and fast modes in stochastic dynamical systems. Physica A, 387:12--38, 2008. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2007.08.023
A. J. Roberts. Normal form of stochastic or deterministic multiscale differential equations. http://www.maths.adelaide.edu.au/anthony.roberts/sdenf.php, 2009--13




