


Term test




Term test

In mathematics, the nth-term test for divergence1 is a simple test for the divergence of an infinite series:

If 
 
 
 
  or if the limit does not exist, then 
 
 
 
  diverges.

Many authors do not name this test or give it a shorter name.2
Usage
Unlike stronger convergence tests, the term test cannot prove by itself that a series converges. In particular, the converse to the test is not true; instead all one can say is:

If 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  may or may not converge. In other words, if 
 
 
 
  the test is inconclusive.

The harmonic series is a classic example of a divergent series whose terms limit to zero.3 The more general class of p-series,



exemplifies the possible results of the test:

If p ≤ 0, then the term test identifies the series as divergent.
If 0 < p ≤ 1, then the term test is inconclusive, but the series is divergent by the integral test for convergence.
If 1 < p, then the term test is inconclusive, but the series is convergent, again by the integral test for convergence.

Proofs
The test is typically proved in contrapositive form:

If 
 
 
 
  converges, then 
 
 


Limit manipulation
If sn are the partial sums of the series, then the assumption that the series converges means that


 
  for some number s. Then4



Cauchy's criterion
The assumption that the series converges means that it passes Cauchy's convergence test: for every 
 
 
 
  there is a number N such that


 
  holds for all n > N and p ≥ 1. Setting p = 1 recovers the definition of the statement5



Scope
The simplest version of the term test applies to infinite series of real numbers. The above two proofs, by invoking the Cauchy criterion or the linearity of the limit, also work in any other normed vector space.6
Notes
References








"
Category:Convergence tests Category:Articles containing proofs



Kaczor p.336
For example, Rudin (p.60) states only the contrapositive form and does not name it. Brabenec (p.156) calls it just the nth term test. Stewart (p.709) calls it the Test for Divergence.
Rudin p.60
Brabenec p.156; Stewart p.709
Rudin (pp.59-60) uses this proof idea, starting with a different statement of Cauchy criterion.
Hansen p.55; Șuhubi p.375




