


IT Grade




IT Grade

IT Grade refers to the International Tolerance Grade of an industrial process defined in ISO 286.1 This grade identifies what tolerances a given process can produce for a given dimension.
The specific Tolerance for a particular IT grade is calculated via the following formula:2



where:

T is the tolerance in micrometres [µm]
D is the geometric mean dimension in millimeters [mm]
ITG is the IT Grade, a positive integer.

One thinks of 
 
 
 
  as being the key dimension on the part and 
 
 
 
  as being the required tolerance on that key dimension. The larger the ITG, the looser the tolerance.
Meaning and interpretation
An industrial process has an IT Grade associated with, indicating how precise it is. When designing a part, an engineer will typically determine a key dimension (D) and some tolerance (T) on that dimension. Using this formula, the engineer can determine what IT Grade is necessary to produce the part with those specifications. Thus, if injection molding has an IT Grade of 13 and a part needs an IT Grade of 5, one cannot injection mold that part to those specifications. It is useful in determining the processes capable of producing parts to the needed specification.
Alternate formulation
The following has been proposed by an unsigned user, though no source is given. In "Manufacturing Processes II" (Tata McGraw-Hill Education) by H S Bawa, the following Equation is given on Page 95 for sizes over 500 mm:










ITG

IT5

IT6

...

IT17

IT18





k

7

10

...

1600

2500



See also

Tolerances
Manufacturing
Interference fit
Process capability

References
External links

Engineer's Edge - IT Tolerance Grade Chart - All units shown in millimeters
ISO Hole and Shaft tolerances/limits, Roymech, UK.
ISO Hole and Shaft Tolerances iPhone App, Trelleborg Sealing Solutions Germany.

"
Category:Mechanical standards



ISO Standard 286 http://www.webstore.ansi.org/RecordDetail.aspx?sku=ISO+286-1%3a1988↩
Professor Sridhar Kota: ME 452 – Design for Manufacturability, course notes, University of Michigan.↩




