


Sample mean and sample covariance




Sample mean and sample covariance

The sample mean or empirical mean and the sample covariance are statistics computed from a collection of data on one or more random variables. The sample mean is a vector each of whose elements is the sample mean of one of the random variablesthat is, each of whose elements is the arithmetic average of the observed values of one of the variables. The sample covariance matrix is a square matrix whose i, j element is the sample covariance (an estimate of the population covariance) between the sets of observed values of two of the variables and whose i, i element is the sample variance of the observed values of one of the variables. If only one variable has had values observed, then the sample mean is a single number (the arithmetic average of the observed values of that variable) and the sample covariance matrix is also simply a single value (the sample variance of the observed values of that variable).
Sample mean
Let 
 
 
 
  be the ith independently drawn observation (i=1,...,N) on the jth random variable (j=1,...,K). These observations can be arranged into N column vectors, each with K entries, with the K ×1 column vector giving the ith observations of all variables being denoted 
 
 
 
  (i=1,...,N).
The sample mean vector

 
  is a column vector whose jth element 
 
 
 
 
  is the average value of the N observations of the jth variable:



Thus, the sample mean vector contains the average of the observations for each variable, and is written



Sample covariance
The sample covariance matrix is a K-by-K matrix

 
  with entries



where 
 
 
 
 
  is an estimate of the covariance between the 
 
 
th variable and the 
 
 
th variable of the population underlying the data. In terms of the observation vectors, the sample covariance is



Alternatively, arranging the observation vectors as the columns of a matrix, so that


 
 , which is a matrix of K rows and N columns. Here, the sample covariance matrix can be computed as


 
 , where 
 
 
 
  is an N by 
 
 
 
  vector of ones. If the observations are arranged as rows instead of columns, so 
 
 
 
  is now a 1×K row vector and 
 
 
 
  is an N×K matrix whose column j is the vector of N observations on variable j, then applying transposes in the appropriate places yields



Discussion
The sample mean and the sample covariance matrix are unbiased estimates of the mean and the covariance matrix of the random vector

 
 , a row vector whose jth element (j = 1, ..., K) is one of the random variables.1 The sample covariance matrix has 
 
 
 
  in the denominator rather than 
 
 
 
  due to a variant of Bessel's correction: In short, the sample covariance relies on the difference between each observation and the sample mean, but the sample mean is slightly correlated with each observation since it is defined in terms of all observations. If the population mean 
 
 
 
  is known, the analogous unbiased estimate



using the population mean, has 
 
 
 
  in the denominator. This is an example of why in probability and statistics it is essential to distinguish between random variables (upper case letters) and realizations of the random variables (lower case letters).
The maximum likelihood estimate of the covariance



for the Gaussian distribution case has N in the denominator as well. The ratio of 1/N to 1/(N − 1) approaches 1 for large N, so the maximum likelihood estimate approximately equals the unbiased estimate when the sample is large.
Variance of the sample mean
For each random variable, the sample mean is a good estimator of the population mean, where a "good" estimator is defined as being efficient and unbiased. Of course the estimator will likely not be the true value of the population mean since different samples drawn from the same distribution will give different sample means and hence different estimates of the true mean. Thus the sample mean is a random variable, not a constant, and consequently has its own distribution. For a random sample of N observations on the jth random variable, the sample mean's distribution itself has mean equal to the population mean 
 
 
 
  and variance equal to 
 
 
 
  where 
 
 
 
 
  is the variance of the random variable Xj.
Weighted samples
In a weighted sample, each vector 
 
 
 
  (each set of single observations on each of the K random variables) is assigned a weight 
 
 
 
 . Without loss of generality, assume that the weights are normalized:



(If they are not, divide the weights by their sum). Then the weighted mean vector 
 
 
 
  is given by



and the elements 
 
 
 
  of the weighted covariance matrix 
 
 
 
  are 2



If all weights are the same, 
 
 
 
 , the weighted mean and covariance reduce to the sample mean and covariance above.
Criticism
The sample mean and sample covariance are widely used in statistics and applications, and are extremely common measures of location and dispersion, respectively, likely the most common: they are easily calculated and possess desirable characteristics.
However, they suffer from certain drawbacks; notably, they are not robust statistics, meaning that they are sensitive to outliers. As robustness is often a desired trait, particularly in real-world applications, robust alternatives may prove desirable, notably quantile-based statistics such the sample median for location,3 and interquartile range (IQR) for dispersion. Other alternatives include trimming and Winsorising, as in the trimmed mean and the Winsorized mean.
See also

Unbiased estimation of standard deviation
Estimation of covariance matrices
Scatter matrix

References


"
Category:Covariance and correlation Category:Estimation for specific parameters Category:Summary statistics Category:Matrices Category:U-statistics



↩
Mark Galassi, Jim Davies, James Theiler, Brian Gough, Gerard Jungman, Michael Booth, and Fabrice Rossi. GNU Scientific Library - Reference manual, Version 1.15, 2011. Sec. 21.7 Weighted Samples↩
The World Question Center 2006: The Sample Mean, Bart Kosko↩




