


Random measure




Random measure

In probability theory, a random measure is a measure-valued random element.Kallenberg, O., Random Measures, 4th edition. Academic Press, New York, London; Akademie-Verlag, Berlin (1986). ISBN 0-12-394960-2 . An authoritative but rather difficult reference.
Jan Grandell, Point processes and random measures, Advances in Applied Probability 9 (1977) 502-526.  JSTOR A nice and clear introduction.
 Let X be a complete separable metric space and 
 
 
 
  the σ-algebra of its Borel sets. A Borel measure μ on X is boundedly finite if μ(A) M_X be the space of all boundedly finite measures on 
 
 
 
 . Let  be a probability space, then a random measure maps from this probability space to the measurable space .1A measure generally might be decomposed as:



Here 
 
 
 
  is a diffuse measure without atoms, while 
 
 
 
  is a purely atomic measure.
Random counting measure
A random measure of the form:



where 
 
 
 
  is the Dirac measure, and 
 
 
 
  are random variables, is called a point process23 or random counting measure. This random measure describes the set of N particles, whose locations are given by the (generally vector valued) random variables 
 
 
 
 . The diffuse component 
 
 
 
  is null for a counting measure.
In the formal notation of above a random counting measure is a map from a probability space to the measurable space  a measurable space. Here 
 
 
 
  is the space of all boundedly finite integer-valued measures 
 
 
 
  (called counting measures).
The definitions of expectation measure, Laplace functional, moment measures and stationarity for random measures follow those of point processes. Random measures are useful in the description and analysis of Monte Carlo methods, such as Monte Carlo numerical quadrature and particle filters.4
See also

Point process
Poisson random measure
Random element
Vector measure
Ensemble
Probability measure

References


"
Category:Measures (measure theory) Category:Stochastic processes






Crisan, D., Particle Filters: A Theoretical Perspective, in Sequential Monte Carlo in Practice, Doucet, A., de Freitas, N. and Gordon, N. (Eds), Springer, 2001, ISBN 0-387-95146-6




