


Admittance parameters




Admittance parameters
'''Admittance parameters''' or '''Y-parameters''' (the elements of an '''ad
 mittance matrix''' or Y-matrix) are properties used in electrical engineering, electronic engineering, and communication systems engineering describe the electrical behavior of linear electrical networks. They are also used to describe the small-signal (linearized) response of non-linear networks. They are members of a family of similar parameters used in electronic engineering, other examples being: S-parameters,1 Z-parameters,2 H-parameters, T-parameters or ABCD-parameters.34
The Y-parameter matrix
A Y-parameter matrix describes the behaviour of any linear electrical network that can be regarded as a black box with a number of ports. A port in this context is a pair of electrical terminals carrying equal and opposite currents into and out-of the network, and having a particular voltage between them. The Y-matrix gives no information about the behaviour of the network when the currents at any port are not balanced in this way (should this be possible), nor does it give any information about the voltage between terminals not belonging to the same port. Typically, it is intended that each external connection to the network is between the terminals of just one port, so that these limitations are appropriate.
For a generic multi-port network definition, it is assumed that each of the ports is allocated an integer n ranging from 1 to N, where N is the total number of ports. For port n, the associated Y-parameter definition is in terms of the port voltage and port current, 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  respectively.
For all ports the currents may be defined in terms of the Y-parameter matrix and the voltages by the following matrix equation:



where Y is an N × N matrix the elements of which can be indexed using conventional matrix notation. In general the elements of the Y-parameter matrix are complex numbers and functions of frequency. For a one-port network, the Y-matrix reduces to a single element, being the ordinary admittance measured between the two terminals.
Two-port networks
  The Y-parameter matrix for the two-port network is probably the most common. In this case the relationship between the port voltages, port currents and the Y-parameter matrix is given by:


 
 .
where






Admittance relations
The input admittance of a two-port network is given by:



where YL is the admittance of the load connected to port two.
Similarly, the output admittance is given by:



where YS is the admittance of the source connected to port one.
Relation to S-parameters
The Y-parameters of a network are related to its S-Parameters by5


 
 
  
and6


 
 
  
where 
 
 
 
  is the identity matrix, 
 
 
 
  is a diagonal matrix having the square root of the characteristic admittance (the reciprocal of the characteristic impedance) at each port as its non-zero elements,



and 
 
 
 
  is the corresponding diagonal matrix of square roots of characteristic impedances. In these expressions the matrices represented by the bracketed factors commute and so, as shown above, may be written in either order.78
Two port
In the special case of a two-port network, with the same characteristic admittance 
 
 
 
  at each port, the above expressions reduce to












Where



The above expressions will generally use complex numbers for 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Note that the value of 
 
 
 
  can become 0 for specific values of 
 
 
 
  so the division by 
 
 
 
  in the calculations of 
 
 
 
  may lead to a division by 0.
The two-port S-parameters may also be obtained from the equivalent two-port Y-parameters by means of the following expressions.9












where



and 
 
 
 
  is the characteristic impedance at each port (assumed the same for the two ports).
Relation to Z-parameters
Conversion from Z-parameters to Y-parameters is much simpler, as the Y-parameter matrix is just the inverse of the Z-parameter matrix. The following expressions show the applicable relations:












Where



In this case 
 
 
 
  is the determinant of the Z-parameter matrix.
Vice versa the Y-parameters can be used to determine the Z-parameters, essentially using the same expressions since



And



Notes


References


See also

Scattering parameters
Impedance parameters
Two-port network
Hybrid-pi model
Power gain

de:Zweitor#Zweitorgleichungen_und_Parameter"
Category:Two-port networks



Pozar, David M. (2005); Microwave Engineering, Third Edition (Intl. Ed.); John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; pp 170-174. ISBN 0-471-44878-8.↩
Pozar, David M. (2005) (op. cit); pp 170-174.↩
Pozar, David M. (2005) (op. cit); pp 183-186.↩
Morton, A. H. (1985); '' Advanced Electrical Engineering'';Pitman Publishing Ltd.; pp 33-72. ISBN 0-273-40172-6↩
↩


Any square matrix commutes with itself and with the identity matrix, and if two matrices A and B commute, then so do A and B−1 (since AB−1 = B−1BAB−1 = B−1ABB−1 = B−1A)↩
Simon Ramo, John R. Whinnery, Theodore Van Duzer, "Fields and Waves in Communication Electronics", Third Edition, John Wiley & Sons Inc.; 1993, pp. 537-541, ISBN 0-471-58551-3.↩




