


Sylvester equation




Sylvester equation

In mathematics, in the field of control theory, a Sylvester equation is a matrix equation of the form:1


 
  Then given matrices A,B, and C, the problem is to find the possible matrices X that obey this equation. All matrices are assumed to have coefficients in the complex numbers. For the equation to make sense, the matrices must have appropriate sizes, for example they could all be square matrices of the same size. But more generally, we could take A and B must be square matrices of sizes n and m respectively, and then X and C both have n rows and m columns.
A Sylvester equation has a unique solution for X exactly when there are no common eigenvalues of A and -B. More generally, the equation AX+XB=C has been considered as an equation of bounded operators on a (possibly infinite-dimensional) Banach space. In this case, the condition for the uniqueness of a solution X is almost the same: There exists a unique solution X exactly when the spectra of A and -B are disjoint.2
Existence and uniqueness of the solutions
Using the Kronecker product notation and the vectorization operator

 
 , we can rewrite Sylvester's equation in the form


 
  where 
 
 
 
  is the 
 
 
identity matrix. In this form, the equation can be seen as a linear system of dimension 
 
 
 
 .3
Proposition. Given complex 
 
 
 
  matrices 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 , Sylvester's equation has a unique solution 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  if and only if 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have no common eigenvalues.
Proof. Consider the linear transformation 
 
 
 
  given by 
 
 
 
 .
(i) Suppose that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have no common eigenvalues. Then their characteristic polynomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  have highest common factor 
 
 
 
 . Hence there exist complex polynomials 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 . By the Cayley–Hamilton theorem, 
 
 
 
 ; hence 
 
 
 
 . Let 
 
 
 
  be any solution of 
 
 
 
 ; so 
 
 
 
  and repeating this one sees that 
 
 
 
 . Hence by the rank plus nullity theorem 
 
 
 
  is invertible, so for all 
 
 
 
  there exists a unique solution 
 
 
 
 .
(ii) Conversely, suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a common eigenvalue of 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Note that 
 
 
 
  is also an eigenvalue of the transpose 
 
 
 
 . Then there exist non-zero vectors 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . Choose 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 , the vector whose entries are the complex conjugates of 
 
 
 
 . Then 
 
 
 
  has no solution 
 
 
 
 , as is clear from the complex bilinear pairing 
 
 
 
 ; the right-hand side is positive whereas the left is zero.
Roth's removal rule
Given two square complex matrices A and B, of size n and m, and a matrix C of size n by m, then one can ask when the following two square matrices of size n+m are similar to each other
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
 . The answer is that these two matrices are similar exactly when there exists a matrix X such that AX-XB=C. In other words, X is a solution to a Sylvester equation. This is known as Roth's removal rule.4
One easily checks one direction: If AX-XB=C then


 
  Roth's removal rule does not generalize to infinite-dimensional bounded operators on a Banach space.5
Numerical solutions
A classical algorithm for the numerical solution of the Sylvester equation is the Bartels–Stewart algorithm, which consists of transforming 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  into Schur form by a QR algorithm, and then solving the resulting triangular system via back-substitution. This algorithm, whose computational cost is O$(n^3)$ arithmetical operations, is used, among others, by LAPACK and the lyap function in GNU Octave. See also the syl function in that language.
See also

Lyapunov equation
Algebraic Riccati equation

Notes
References







External links

Online solver for arbitrary sized matrices.
Mathematica function to solve the Sylvester equation
MATLAB function to solve the Sylvester equation

"
Category:Matrices Category:Control theory



This equation is also commonly written in the equivalent form of AX-XB=C.↩
Bhatia and Rosenthal, 1997↩
However, rewriting the equation in this form is not advised for the numerical solution since this version is costly to solve and can be ill-conditioned.↩
↩
Bhatia and Rosenthal, p.3↩




