


Sturm separation theorem




Sturm separation theorem

 In mathematics, in the field of ordinary differential equations, Sturm separation theorem, named after Jacques Charles François Sturm, describes the location of roots of homogeneous second order linear differential equations. Basically the theorem states that given two linear independent solutions of such an equation the zeros of the two solutions are alternating.
Sturm separation theorem
Given a homogeneous second order linear differential equation and two continuous linear independent solutions u(x) and v(x) with x0 and x1 successive roots of u(x), then v(x) has exactly one root in the open interval ]x0, x1[. It is a special case of the Sturm-Picone comparison theorem.
Proof
Since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are linearly independent it follows that the Wronskian

 
  must satisfy 
 
 
 
  for all 
 
 
 
  where the differential equation is defined, say 
 
 
 
 . Without loss of generality, suppose that 
 
 
 
 . Then


 
  So at 
 
 



 
  and either 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both positive or both negative. Without loss of generality, suppose that they are both positive. Now, at 
 
 



 
  and since 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are successive zeros of 
 
 
 
  it causes 
 
 
 
 . Thus, to keep 
 
 
 
  we must have 
 
 
 
 . We see this by observing that if 
 
 
 
  then 
 
 
 
  would be increasing (away from the 
 
 
 
 -axis), which would never lead to a zero at 
 
 
 
 . So for a zero to occur at 
 
 
 
  at most 
 
 
 
  (i.e., 
 
 
 
  and it turns out, by our result from the Wronskian that 
 
 
 
 ). So somewhere in the interval 
 
 
 
  the sign of 
 
 
 
  changed. By the Intermediate Value Theorem there exists 
 
 
 
  such that 
 
 
 
 .
On the other hand, there can be only one zero in 
 
 
 
 , because otherwise v would have two zeros and there would be no zeros of u in between, and it was just proved that this is impossible.
References



"
Category:Ordinary differential equations Category:Theorems in analysis


