


Algebraic character




Algebraic character

Algebraic character is a formal expression attached to a module in representation theory of semisimple Lie algebras that generalizes the character of a finite-dimensional representation and is analogous to the Harish-Chandra character of the representations of semisimple Lie groups.
Definition
Let 
 
 
 
  be a semisimple Lie algebra with a fixed Cartan subalgebra

 
  and let the abelian group 
 
 
 
  consist of the (possibly infinite) formal integral linear combinations of 
 
 
 
 , where 
 
 
 
 , the (complex) vector space of weights. Suppose that 
 
 
 
  is a locally-finite weight module. Then the algebraic character of 
 
 
 
  is an element of 
 
 
 
  defined by the formula:


 
  where the sum is taken over all weight spaces of the module 
 
 

Example
The algebraic character of the Verma module

 
  with the highest weight 
 
 
 
  is given by the formula



with the product taken over the set of positive roots.
Properties
Algebraic characters are defined for locally-finite weight modules and are additive, i.e. the character of a direct sum of modules is the sum of their characters. On the other hand, although one can define multiplication of the formal exponents by the formula 
 
 
 
  and extend it to their finite linear combinations by linearity, this does not make 
 
 
 
  into a ring, because of the possibility of formal infinite sums. Thus the product of algebraic characters is well defined only in restricted situations; for example, for the case of a highest weight module, or a finite-dimensional module. In good situations, the algebraic character is multiplicative, i.e., the character of the tensor product of two weight modules is the product of their characters.
Generalization
Characters also can be defined almost verbatim for weight modules over a Kac–Moody or generalized Kac–Moody Lie algebra.
See also

Weyl-Kac character formula

References





"
Category:Lie algebras Category:Representation theory of Lie algebras


