


Stress majorization




Stress majorization

Stress majorization is an optimization strategy used in multidimensional scaling (MDS) where, for a set of n m-dimensional data items, a configuration X of n points in ''r(\sigma(X)
. Usually r is 2 or 3, i.e. the (r x n) matrix X lists points in 2- or 3-dimensional Euclidean space so that the result may be visualised (i.e. an MDS plot). The function 
 
 
 
  is a cost or loss function that measures the squared differences between ideal (
 
 
 
 -dimensional) distances and actual distances in r-dimensional space. It is defined as:


 
  is a weight for the measurement between a pair of points 
 
 
 
 , 
 
 
 
  is the euclidean distance between 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  is the ideal distance between the points (their separation) in the 
 
 
 
 -dimensional data space. Note that 
 
 
 
  can be used to specify a degree of confidence in the similarity between points (e.g. 0 can be specified if there is no information for a particular pair).
A configuration 
 
 
 
  which minimizes 
 
 
 
  gives a plot in which points that are close together correspond to points that are also close together in the original 
 
 
 
 -dimensional data space.
There are many ways that 
 
 
 
  could be minimized. For example, Kruskal1 recommended an iterative steepest descent approach. However, a significantly better (in terms of guarantees on, and rate of, convergence) method for minimizing stress was introduced by Jan de Leeuw.2 De Leeuw's iterative majorization method at each step minimizes a simple convex function which both bounds 
 
 
 
  from above and touches the surface of 
 
 
 
  at a point 
 
 
 
 , called the supporting point. In convex analysis such a function is called a majorizing function. This iterative majorization process is also referred to as the SMACOF algorithm ("Scaling by majorizing a convex function").
The SMACOF algorithm
The stress function 
 
 
 
  can be expanded as follows:


 
  and the second term is quadratic in X (i.e. for the Hessian matrix V the second term is equivalent to tr

 
 ) and therefore relatively easily solved. The third term is bounded by:


 
  has:


 
  for 
 
 

and 
 
 
 
  for 
 
 

and 
 
 
 
 .
Proof of this inequality is by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, see Borg3 (pp. 152–153).
Thus, we have a simple quadratic function 
 
 
 
  that majorizes stress:






The iterative minimization procedure is then:

at the kth step we set 
 
 




stop if 
 
 
 
  otherwise repeat.

This algorithm has been shown to decrease stress monotonically (see de Leeuw4).
Use in graph drawing
Stress majorization and algorithms similar to SMACOF also have application in the field of graph drawing.56 That is, one can find a reasonably aesthetically appealing layout for a network or graph by minimizing a stress function over the positions of the nodes in the graph. In this case, the 
 
 
 
  are usually set to the graph-theoretic distances between nodes i and j and the weights 
 
 
 
  are taken to be $\delta_{ij}^{-\alpha}$. Here, $\alpha$ is chosen as a trade-off between preserving long- or short-range ideal distances. Good results have been shown for $\alpha=2$.7
References
"
Category:Graph drawing Category:Multivariate statistics Category:Mathematical optimization Category:Mathematical analysis



.↩
.↩
.↩

.↩
.↩
.↩




