


Differentiation rules




Differentiation rules

This is a summary of differentiation rules, that is, rules for computing the derivative of a function in calculus.
Elementary rules of differentiation
Unless otherwise stated, all functions are functions of real numbers (R) that return real values; although more generally, the formulae below apply wherever they are well defined12—including complex numbers (C).3
Differentiation is linear
For any functions f and g and any real numbers a and b the derivative of the function  with respect to x is


 
  In Leibniz's notation this is written as:



Special cases include:

''The [[Constant factor rule in differentiation|constant factor

rule]]''




The sum rule





The subtraction rule




The product rule
For the functions f and g, the derivative of the function h(x) = f(x) g(x) with respect to x is


 
  In Leibniz's notation this is written



The chain rule
The derivative of the function of a function h(x) = f(g(x)) with respect to x is


 
  In Leibniz's notation this is written as:


 
  However, by relaxing the interpretation of h as a function, this is often simply written



The inverse function rule
If the function f has an inverse function g, meaning that  and , then



In Leibniz notation, this is written as



Power laws, polynomials, quotients, and reciprocals
The polynomial or elementary power rule
If 
 
 
 
 , for any integer n then



Special cases include:

Constant rule: if f is the constant function f(x) = c, for any number c, then for all x, f′(x) = 0.
if f(x) = x, then f′(x) = 1. This special case may be generalized to:
 
The derivative of an affine function is constant: if f(x) = ax + b, then f′(x) = a.
 


Combining this rule with the linearity of the derivative and the addition rule permits the computation of the derivative of any polynomial.
The reciprocal rule
The derivative of h(x) = 1/f(x) for any (nonvanishing) function f is:



In Leibniz's notation, this is written



The reciprocal rule can be derived from the chain rule and the power rule.
The quotient rule
If f and g are functions, then:


 
  wherever g is nonzero.
This can be derived from reciprocal rule and the product rule. Conversely (using the constant rule) the reciprocal rule may be derived from the special case f(x) = 1.
Generalized power rule
The elementary power rule generalizes considerably. The most general power rule is the functional power rule: for any functions f and g,


 
  wherever both sides are well defined.
Special cases:

If f(x) = xa, f′(x) = axa − 1 when a is any real number and x is positive.
The reciprocal rule may be derived as the special case where g(x) = −1.

Derivatives of exponential and logarithmic functions


 
  note that the equation above is true for all c, but the derivative for c  \frac{d}{dx}\left(e^{ax}\right) = ae^{ax}


 
  the equation above is also true for all c but yields a complex number if c \frac{d}{dx}\left( \ln x\right) = {1 \over x} ,\qquad x > 0






Logarithmic derivatives
The logarithmic derivative is another way of stating the rule for differentiating the logarithm of a function (using the chain rule):


 
  wherever f is positive.
Derivatives of trigonometric functions
































































It is common to additionally define an inverse tangent function with two arguments, 
 
 
 
 . Its value lies in the range 
 
 
 
  and reflects the quadrant of the point 
 
 
 
 . For the first and fourth quadrant (i.e. 
 
 
 
 ) one has 
 
 
 
 . Its partial derivatives are






 
 , and 
 
 




Derivatives of hyperbolic functions
































































Derivatives of special functions




Gamma function















Riemann Zeta function










Derivatives of integrals
Suppose that it is required to differentiate with respect to x the function



where the functions 
 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both continuous in both 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  in some region of the 
 
 
 
  plane, including 
 
 

 
 , and the functions 
 
 
 
  and 
 
 
 
  are both continuous and both have continuous derivatives for 
 
 
 
 . Then for 
 
 
 
 
 :



This formula is the general form of the Leibniz integral rule and can be derived using the fundamental theorem of calculus.
Derivatives to nth order
Some rules exist for computing the nth derivative of functions, where n is a positive integer. These include:
Faà di Bruno's formula
If f and g are n times differentiable, then



where 
 
 
 
  and the set 
 
 
 
  consists of all non-negative integer solutions of the Diophantine equation 
 
 
 
 
 .
General Leibniz rule
If f and g are n times differentiable, then



See also

Vector calculus identities
Differentiable function
Differential of a function
List of mathematical functions
Trigonometric functions
Inverse trigonometric functions
Hyperbolic functions
Inverse hyperbolic functions
Matrix calculus
Differentiation under the integral sign

References
Sources and further reading
These rules are given in many books, both on elementary and advanced calculus, in pure and applied mathematics. Those in this article (in addition to the above references) can be found in:

Mathematical Handbook of Formulas and Tables (3rd edition), S. Lipschutz, M.R. Spiegel, J. Liu, Schuam's Outline Series, 2009, ISBN 978-0-07-154855-7.
The Cambridge Handbook of Physics Formulas, G. Woan, Cambridge University Press, 2010, ISBN 978-0-521-57507-2.
Mathematical methods for physics and engineering, K.F. Riley, M.P. Hobson, S.J. Bence, Cambridge University Press, 2010, ISBN 978-0-521-86153-3
NIST Handbook of Mathematical Functions, F. W. J. Olver, D. W. Lozier, R. F. Boisvert, C. W. Clark, Cambridge University Press, 2010, ISBN 978-0-521-19225-5.

External links

Derivative calculator with formula simplification
A Table of Derivatives

ca:Taula de derivades es:Tabla de derivadas fr:Dérivées usuelles he:נגזרת pl:Pochodna_funkcji#Pochodne_funkcji_elementarnych sq:Tabela e derivateve"
* Category:Differentiation rules Derivatives Derivatives Category:Mathematical identities



Calculus (5th edition), F. Ayres, E. Mendelson, Schuam's Outline Series, 2009, ISBN 978-0-07-150861-2.
Advanced Calculus (3rd edition), R. Wrede, M.R. Spiegel, Schuam's Outline Series, 2010, ISBN 978-0-07-162366-7.
Complex Variables, M.R. Speigel, S. Lipschutz, J.J. Schiller, D. Spellman, Schaum's Outlines Series, McGraw Hill (USA), 2009, ISBN 978-0-07-161569-3




