   1766 in science      1766 in science   The year 1766 in science and technology involved some significant events.  Astronomy   Lagrange submits a paper on the movements of Jupiter 's satellites to the French Academy of Sciences .   Biology   Moses Harris publishes The Aurelian, or, Natural History of English Insects; Namely, Moths and Butterflies .   Chemistry   Henry Cavendish publishes his paper "On Factitious Airs". This is generally credited as showing the discovery of hydrogen , since it describes the density of 'inflammable air', which forms water on combustion.  Pierre Macquer publishes his Dictionnaire de chymie .   Exploration   November 15 – Louis Antoine de Bougainville leaves Nantes for a three-year circumnavigation of the world with the ships La Boudeuse and Étoile ; the botanist  Philibert Commerçon is on board.   Mathematics   Arima Yoriyuki finds a rational approximation of    π   π   \pi    , correct to 29 digits. 1     Euler gives up his post as director of mathematics at the Prussian Academy of Sciences and returns to Saint Petersburg . On the recommendation of Euler and d'Alembert , Lagrange succeeds him in Berlin , where he will stay for over twenty years.   Medicine   October – Addenbrooke's Hospital , Cambridge , England , completed.   Metallurgy   The Cranege brothers experiment with the use of the reverberatory furnace for the production of wrought iron from cast iron using coal fuel at the Coalbrookdale iron works under the sponsorship of Richard Reynolds in England.   Events   Joseph Wright of Derby paints A Philosopher Lecturing on the Orrery .   Awards   Copley Medal : William Brownrigg ; Edward Delaval ; Henry Cavendish   Births   July 6 – Alexander Wilson , Scottish -born ornithologist (died 1813 )  July 8 – Dominique Jean Larrey , French  surgeon , pioneer of battlefield medicine (died 1842 )  August 3 – Kurt Sprengel , German  botanist (died 1833 )  August 6 – William Hyde Wollaston , English  chemist (died 1828 )  September 6 – John Dalton , English chemist and physicist (died 1844 )  September 24 – John Farey, Sr. , English geologist (died 1826 )  December 26 – William Goforth , American physician and paleontologist (died 1817 )  December 29 – Charles Macintosh , Scottish inventor of a waterproof fabric (died 1843 )   Deaths   May 5 – Jean Astruc , French physician and scholar (born 1684 )  November 29 – John Wyatt , English inventor (born 1700 )   References  "  Category:1766 in science  Category:18th century in science  Category:1760s in science     ↩     